transmission route was constructed based on contact with malayan pangolins (manis javanica) by visitors of huanan seafood market in wuhan, china [10] . the linkage with huanan market was done due to few cases of pneumonia in the city of wuhan associated with the sars-cov-2 [11] . today, the involvement of the huanan market with covid19 origin seems controversial [12, 13] . however, molecular epidemiologic studies also confirmed animal handlers as the earliest infected with sars-cov in 2002-2003 outbreaks [7] . the presence of bats and bat products in food and traditional medicine markets occurs due persistent viral infection without clinical symptoms [14] . contact between bats and wild animals may occur because bats live among a large number of different animal species that is also commercialized in animal markets, giving opportunity to coronavirus transmission [7] . furthermore, other wild animals can be infected by coronavirus after eating partially digested fruits by bats that were spitted out and fall to the ground with residual bat saliva or part of insects discarded by infected bats [15] . these routes allow viral infection by a diverse set of animals, such as palm civets and malayan pangolins involved in sars-cov and sars-cov-2 origins, respectively [7, 10, 15] . in humans, sars-cov and sars-cov-2 are rapidly spread by respiratory droplets, airborne routes, or direct contact [16] . while cov related with cold is limited to upper respiratory tract infection, sars-cov invades pneumocytes in the lower respiratory tract (lungs) [17, 18] . the first viral interaction with host cells occurs when receptor-binding domains (rbds) from viral spike or surface (s) protein attach ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) host receptor [6] .expression of ace2 appears to be essential for sars-cov/ sars-cov-2 infection in airway epithelia [18, 19] . subsequently, sars-cov/sars-cov-2 employ tmprss2 (transmembrane protease serine 2) for cell host entry thanks to its cleavage activity [19] . tmprss2 is known to cleave and activate the s protein of sars-cov [20] and also plays a role in the spread and immunopathology of sars-cov and mers-cov in the airways [21] .receptor recognition for sars-cov is considered one of the main barriers between animal species and humans [22] . high variation in the sars-cov and sars-cov-2 s proteins seems to be essential to lead animal-to-human transmission to human-to-human transmission [23] . to investigate bats and pangolin as hosts in sars-cov-2 jump to human, we performed evolutionary analysis based on viral and host molecular phylogenies and also evolutionary divergent pairwise analysis. based on 87 amino acid sequences from cov s protein, we inferred a maximum likelihood phylogenetic analysis ( fig. 1 ), using phyml 3.3v software to phylogenetic tree inference and mega x to find the best substitution model (supplementary table 1 ). rooted by cold-related 229e cov, the phylogenetic tree formed three distinct clades. clade 1 includes two main clusters: clade 1a formed by sars-cov together with sars-like-cov isolated from bats and civets and clade 1b formed by sars-cov-2 together with sarslike-cov-2 isolated from bats and malayan pangolin. clade 2 encompasses mers-cov strains interspersed with camel-covs and also includes some bat cov strains related with mers-cov. pandemic sars-cov-2 strains clustered significantly close with ratg13 cov and pangolin cov strains (see clade 1b). according to the cov s protein analysis, the phylogenetic tree revealed that the distance between sars-cov-2 and ratg13 cov is shorter than that between sars-cov-2 and pangolin cov. then, pangolin cov s protein is closest to s protein from sars-cov-2 behind bat ratg13 cov. behind pangolin covs, bat cov strains isolated in china in 2015 and 2017 are noted, followed by a cluster with bat covs also identified in china during 2004-2014 (clade 1b). we reinforce the scenario that suggests that sars-cov-2 transmission chain began from bat and reached the human. the diverse set of covs infecting bats frequently associated with fast-evolving cov s protein propriety might have favored the epidemic from animal to human. the close position of sarslike-cov-2 isolated from pangolins indicates that this species has a potential role along the sars-cov-2 transmission chain (clade 1 b). pangolin cov strain isolated in march 2019 is very closer to ratg13 cov and to sars-cov-2 than sars-like-cov-2 from other pangolins isolated in 2017-2018. the occurrence of recombination between sars-like-covs from pangolin and bats, or even convergent evolution, must be considered as possible events for the sars-cov-2 origin. phylogenetic tree showed that bat covs are strongly related with sars-cov, sars-cov-2, and also with mers-cov. deep evolutionary and adaptation between bats and viruses contribute to asymptomatic state but spreading coronavirus to humans [25, 26] . although bats are considered as natural hosts and reservoirs for sars-cov and sars-cov-2, camels may be the natural host of mers-cov [27] . the close relation between camel cov with mers-cov (clade 2) indicates camel as a direct source of mers-cov. however, the mers-cov ancestor might have circulated among bat species due to mers-like-cov persistence in bat populations. mers-cov took a different evolutive way from sars-cov and sars-cov-2. in contrast to sars-cov and sars-cov-2, which use ace2 to invade the host, mers-cov uses cd26 expressed by host. mers-cov s protein likely only recognizes conserved cd26 sequences. furthermore, mers-cov s protein rbd sequence is considered more conserved comparing with sars-cov and sars-cov-2 s protein [8] . despite the fast-evolving s protein capacity, bat cov transmission to humans appears to be limited by a barrier. then, intermediary hosts might be necessary to overcome genetic barriers to favor the start of human coronavirus disease outbreaks.host molecular repertoire used by coronavirus cycle and invasion, including ace2 and tmprss2 proteins, could be a species-specific barrier to coronavirus [22] . ace2 appears to have slow evolutionary rates between vertebrates [28] . thus, to infer the host susceptibility, we perform a phylogenetic analysis based on 23 ace2 amino acid sequences ( fig. 2a) , including bats species, humans, primates, felids, canids, murine, and other ones. all amino acids sequences were obtained by ncbi protein database (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/). ace2 phylogenetic tree, inferred by bayesian method, was highly supported by posterior probability values (see fig. 2c ). we also constructed a heat map based on pairwise divergence matrix to complement phylogenetic analysis. best substitution models to perform phylogeny and pairwise divergence matrix were selected (see supplementary table 1 ). according to our results, the phylogenetic topology conserved homo sapiens closer to other primates in a monophyletic group, with low divergent amino acid sequences within this group, as expected. bat species also composed a monophyletic group. humans and bats are evolutionary divergent and phylogenetically distant, shown by ace2 pairwise divergence matrix and tree, malayan pangolin mt084071 sequence was translated from annotated coding region obtained from ncbi genbank database (www.ncbi.nlm. nih.gov/genbank/). accession codes were included in each taxon name. phylogenetic tree inference was based in maximum likelihood method with whelan and goldman model [23] . the tree with the optimal log likelihood (26256.243) is shown. bootstrap values calculated for 100 replications are shown next to the nodes of cladogram (b). initial tree(s) for the heuristic search were obtained automatically by applying neighbor-join and bionj algorithms. a discrete gamma distribution was used to model evolutionary rate differences among sites (4 categories [+ g, parameter = 0.7168]). the tree is drawn to scale, with branch lengths measured in the number of substitutions per site. there were a total of 1494 positions in the final dataset. phylogenetic analyses were conducted in phyml v3.3 [24] and the trees were formatted with the figtree v1.3.1 software (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/). respectively. phylogenetic tree presented bats closer to a clade that includes pangolin and civet than humans are. despite the phylogenetic position, humans have lower evolutionary divergence in comparison with pangolin and civet than these animals have with bats. we display the evolutionary divergence values in table 1 . comparing humans with pangolin/civet, we found lower evolutionary divergence values with pangolin than with civet. thus, considering ace2 interaction as a host barrier that protects humans from zoonotic pathogens, sars-cov-2 in bats may require some intermediate mammalian hosts to jump to humans to start the outbreak, like civet was required for intermediary host to favor sars-cov origin. we further inferred a bayesian phylogenetic tree based on tmprss2 amino acid sequences (fig. 2b) , supported with high posterior probabilities values (see fig. 2d ). this tree presented pangolin close to bats. tmprss2 phylogeny and evolutionary divergences sequences indicated distance between homo sapiens and bats/pangolin. among all of the bat species, rhinolophus ferrumequinum presented the highest similarity of tmprss2 amino acid sequence compared with human and pangolin. r. ferrumequinum is susceptible for both sars-like-cov and sars-like-cov-2 infection [10, 14] .bayesian phylogenetic trees associated with evolutionary divergence matrix heat maps. the heat map color gradient represents the evolutionary divergence based on the number of amino acid substitutions/site from pairwise comparison between sequences, from low (red) to high (blue). a ace2-based phylogeny and heat map matrix (n = 23) show a cluster with primates presented low evolutionary divergences. malayan pangolin (manis javanica) and civet (paguma larvata) clustered with felids, canids, and others ones besides the clade composed by bat species. pangolin and civet are phylogenetically close from bats than with humans. on the other hand, ace2 heat map shows that both pangolin and civet are more divergent from bats than with humans. b tmprss2 evolutionary analysis presents close relationship between pangolin and civet with bats, while primates remained distant. c and d represent more detailed bayesian consensus phylogenetic trees based on ace2 and tmprss2 with supported values described. analysis involved 23 amino acid sequences from ace2 protein and 21 amino acid sequences from tmprss2 protein. all sequences were obtained from ncbi protein database (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/). r. sinicus asm188883v1 sequence was translated based on genome assembly obtained from ncbi genome database (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ genome/). (r. macrotis and p. larvata tmprss2 sequences were not available at the time of this analysis). accession codes were included in each taxon name. phylogenies were based on bayesian analysis using jtt + g model (jones-taylor-thornton model with a gamma distribution for among-site rate variation) conducted by mr. bayes 3.2v [29] . trees were searched for one million generations with sampling every 100 generations until the standard deviation from split frequencies were under 0.01. scale bar indicates the number of substitutions/site for the trees. the parameters and the trees were summarized by wasting 25% of the samples obtained (burn-in). phylogenetic trees were formatted with the figtree v1.3.1 software (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/). evolutionary divergence between ace2 and tmprss2 sequences were based on the number of amino acid substitutions per site from between sequences. analyses were conducted using the jtt matrixbased model by mega x software [30] , and heat maps were performed by microsoft excel tm software molecular similarity of tmprss2 from sars-cov and sars-cov-2 susceptible hosts is suggestive that the molecule seems not to be an important barrier to emerging human coronaviruses. probably, the sars-cov-2 entry into host cells, interaction with ace2 receptor, appears to be the main challenge. while most of sars-cov-2 phylogenetic studies are focusing in viral phylogenies, we contributed with host analysis based on ace2 and tmprss2. in summary, we report and conclude that sars-like-cov-2 strains infected pangolin and bats and are phylogenetically close to sars-cov-2. thus, our phylogenetic analysis based on sars-cov-2 s protein supports the hypothesis of sars-cov-2 transmission chain began from bat, had malayan pangolin as intermediary host, and infected humans. considering cov s protein as the key to invade host cell through host ace2, we explore this host molecule as base of analysis to understand the role of the hosts in the origin of sars-cov-2. ace2 sequence from pangolin has low evolutionary divergence compared with humans but is more divergent from bats. taken together, combined viral and host evolutive analysis corroborated the hypothesis of malayan pangolin as intermediary host in sars-cov-2 origin. looking back through coronavirus outbreak histories, wild animal chains appear to be necessary. frequent jumps of bats virus produce potential infections or short transmission chains that resolve, with no adaptation to sustained transmission [33] .therefore, repeated opportunities may promote zoonotic events resulting in coronavirus outbreaks. for sars-cov, there were broad evidences suggesting civet as the main intermediary host [7, 34, 35] . our results also indicated civet as an important player in sars-cov origin. civet might be infected by sars-like-cov and has intermediary ace2 divergence between humans and bats. comparing sars-cov with sars-cov-2 origins, pangolin ace2 amino acid sequence has yet lower evolutionary divergence with humans, while civet ace2 sequence is more divergent compared with humans. thus, pangolin has become an opportune host to intermediates bat-to-human sars-cov-2 jump and entry. differently from bats, which are able to suppress viral replication, pangolin is an amplifying host which allows the increase of viral load and probably favored sars-cov-2 jump to human host and human-to-human transmission subsequently. the recurrent emergence of zoonotic disease outbreaks caused by coronavirus alerts once more for the implementation of strict rules to decrease or eliminate consumption and domestication or even the ban on wildlife markets.authors' contributions lrl made the conception of the work with gmc contribution. lrl obtained and curated the data. gmc, lrl, and pbp made the inferences and results analysis. lrl wrote the draft paper with input from gmc. writing reviews were done by gmc, lrl and pbp.availability of data and material all the data obtained from ncbi protein and ncbi genbank databases included in this research study presented accession code/numbers for research or reanalysis.conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.ethics approval this research study was conducted retrospectively involving secondary biological data from ncbi protein and ncbi genbank databases with no possibility of individual identification. we consulted unifesp research ethics committee who determined that our study did not need ethical approval. the numbers of amino acid substitutions per site between sequences are shown. divergence values involving civet and/or pangolin (possible intermediary hosts) with human and/or bats were presented in bold. pangolin and civet have lower evolutionary distance from humans than from bats. evolutionary analyses were made using the jtt matrix-based model [31] , conducted in mega x software [30] . the rate variation among sites was modeled with a gamma distribution (shape parameter = 0.46). this analysis involved 11 amino acid sequences aligned by muscle [32] . all ambiguous positions were removed for each sequence pair (pairwise deletion option). there were a total of 829 positions in the final datasetcase involved a taiwanese businessman who had visited guangdong province during 5-21 february of that year. after he returned to taiwan, he transmitted the disease to his wife, his son (sars-cov strain tw1), and the doctor who treated his son (sars-cov strain tw3).on 15 march, 7 employees of a taiwanese construction company flew from hong kong to beijing; 4 of them developed sars symptoms on 26 march, several days after returning to taiwan [9] . also on 26 march, a man residing at the amoy gardens housing complex in hong kong flew to taiwan; the following day, he took a train from taipei to taichung city to visit his younger brother. the visitor returned to his hong kong home on 28 march after having experienced fever during the preceding evening. his younger brother (patient twc), who developed symptoms on 31 march, became taiwan's first sars-related fatality.on 6 april, a taiwanese woman (patient tw-hp1) suffering from fever and coughing that continued for several days visited the emergency room (er) at mu- nicipal hospital hp; she was transferred to another hospital on 9 april. seven hp employees, including a laundry worker who was identified as the index case, eventually developed sars, resulting, on 24 april, in a shutdown of all operations of hospital hp [7] . in all, 137 probable sars cases and 26 hp-related fatalities resulted from this single nosocomial infection. patient tw-hp1 had not traveled outside taiwan during the preceding 12 months, but, on 27 march, she and the visitor from hong kong had taken the same train; their seats were in separate cars (numbers 3 and 5), yet the train ride constitutes their only possible point of contact.on 28 april, the government of taiwan imposed mandatory quarantines on all air travelers from china, hong kong, singapore, macau, and toronto; however, nosocomial sars infections continued to be reported in many hospitals islandwide [5] . the hospitals that experienced the most-severe outbreaks are listed in figure 1 ; in the present study, they are referred to by initials-"hp," "jc," "kc," "gd," and "ym." according to taiwan's center for disease control (cdc), 346 of the 664 probable sars cases that have been reported to the world health organization (who) were confirmed by reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) and/or neutralizing-antibody tests [10] . previously, yeh et al. had studied the molecular epidemiology of sars infection in taiwan and had concluded that the origin of the taiwanese sars epidemic was mainly either hong kong or guangdong, rather than beijing [11] ; in addition, they found that the sars-cov isolated from the younger brother (i.e., patient twc) of the visitor from hong kong was not clustered with other isolates from hospital hp [11, 12] . because a complete genome sequence from the nasopharyngeal aspirate from patient twc (strain tc1) was available, we decided to reexamine both (1) the source of infection at hospital hp and (2) the paths of dissemination of sars among hospitals in taiwan.on the evening of 10 december 2003, a medical researcher who regularly worked in a biosafety level-4 laboratory started to feel feverish [13] . although he had recently spent 4 days (7-10 december) in singapore, an epidemiological investigation indicated that he had contracted sars from a laboratory-contamination accident on 6 december. according to his description, the sars-cov isolates that he had handled in the laboratory included strain hku-39849 [14] and other clinical isolates that have not been well characterized. the nasopharyngeal aspirate from this medical researcher was included in the present study.the size of the sars-cov genome has been measured as 29.7 kb [15, 16] . a comparative analysis of 14 sars-cov isolates has identified 2 distinct genotypes, which can be differentiated on the basis of 4 single-nucleotide variations (snvs)-c:c:g:c versus t:t:t:t-in the variable regions of the sars-cov genome [17] . furthermore, the genotype with the t:t:t:t snvs has been associated with infections originating in hotel m in hong kong [8, 17] . currently, phylogenetic analyses of sars-cov require complete genome sequences [5, 11, 17] ; however, because of the 10 december laboratory-contamination accident limited number of specimens available for complete genome sequencing, some researchers have used the sars-cov spike gene for this purpose; but most results have been less than satisfactory [18, 19] . therefore, the objectives of the present study were (1) to use 20 complete sars-cov sequences to combine several variable regions of a sars-cov for phylogenetic analysis, in order to develop a simpler tool; (2) to use a different set of sequences from 80 sars-cov isolates to validate the method, by 3 different phylogenetic analytical methods; and (3) to apply this proposed tool to elucidate the origin and paths of dissemination of sars-cov infections, on the basis of samples collected from hospitals in taiwan.patients. serum, sputum, or throat-swab specimens from 19 patients with sars associated with 5 nosocomial infections and 1 laboratory-contamination incident were collected for the present study. for each patient, data on the date at onset of the disease and on possible sources of infection were gathered by trained interviewers (table 1) . we also downloaded, for our phylogenetic-tree analyses, 20 complete taiwanese sars-cov sequences from genbank; for 10 of these, sars-cov strains have been described elsewhere [11] . epidemiological investigation. to track the origins of sars cases in taiwan, we used sars-treatment reports written by physicians and submitted by their respective hospitals to taiwan's cdc. we also sent trained interviewers to all hospitals that reported nosocomial infections, to gather additional assessment data. we based our investigation on the who definition of sars [20] .complete nucleotide sequences from 20 sars-cov isolates available from genbank were aligned by the bioedit program [21] ; the sequence variations were analyzed by the simplot program (http: //sray.med.som.jhmi.edu/raysoft/simplot). genomic sequences from civet-cat sars-cov strains sz-3 and sz-16 were used as standards for comparison [19] . sequence-variation-distance plots were generated by use of an 800-bp window, a 200-bp step, and a jukes-cantor correction. initially, 4 variable regions (sc18, sc22-23, sc27, and sc28), which contain snvs of different sars-cov genotypes [17] , were combined for phylogenetic analysis. because the resultant phylogenetic tree was not satisfactory, we added another 2 variable regions (sc10 and sc20) based on the sequence-variation plot (figure 2).comparison of conventional and proposed strategies for phylogenetic analysis. three methods-neighbor joining (nj), fitch and wagner parsimony (pars), and maximum likelihood (ml)-were used for comparison of the conventional (i.e., complete genome) and proposed strategies. the proposed strategy for phylogenetic analysis entailed the deletion of conserved domains and the combination of minimal variable regions. the mega2 and phylip3.6 software packages were used to construct the phylogeny [22] [23] [24] ; and 80 sars-cov sequences down- loaded from the genbank database were used for the comparison. a bootstrap analysis of 100 replicates was used to compare the robustness of the nj and pars trees generated by the conventional strategy versus that of the nj and pars trees generated by the proposed strategy [25] . for the ml method, the p value for branch length was calculated by use of the hidden markov model, before the conventional and proposed strategies were compared [26] .rt-pcr and sequencing. rna was extracted from serum, sputum, or throat-swab specimens by qiaamp viral-rna minikits (qiagen). rt-pcr primer pairs for the 6 sars-cov variable regions are listed in table 2. rt-pcr was performed in a single-tube reaction (qiagen) using primers from each region. the pcr thermocycler program consisted of predenaturing for 4 min at 95њc; 35 cycles of denaturing for 30 s at 95њc, annealing for 30 s at 52њc, and initial extension at 68њc for 3 min; and final extension at 68њc for 10 min. the pcr product was gel-purified for dna sequencing by use of an abi prism 3700 dna analyzer (applied biosystems). for the laboratorycontamination case, multiple primers [17] were used for complete genome sequencing. superscript iii rt (invitrogen) was used for production of cdna, and a race kit (roche) was used to amplify the 5 and 3 ends of cdna. both strands of the pcr product were analyzed, and the resultant sequences were assembled by use of the seqman ii software package (version 5.0; lasergene).to perform the analysis of nucleotide-signature patterns, representative sars-cov strains with complete sequences were chosen from each wave of epidemic sars infection in taiwan. in addition, cases that were of unclear origin were also included in the analysis. the nucleotide sequence of sars-cov strain urbani [16] was used as a prototype for the comparison.pairwise comparisons were used to analyze sequence variations among 20 sars-cov isolates. the results show that the 3 region of the viral genome had the highest sequence variation, especially near the junction of replicase 1b and the spike genes (figure 2). six variable regions-sc10, sc18, sc20, sc22-sc23, sc27, and sc28-were chosen for testing the proposed strategy for phylogenetic-tree analysis; the total length of the sequences in these 6 regions was 5287 nt. using 3 phylogenetic analytical methods, we compared, for 80 sars-cov isolates, the topology and robustness of the phylogenetic tree at 3 nodes are circled: node a, between civet-cat sars-cov and human sars-cov; node b, between sars-cov subgroups a1 (early phase) and a2 (middle phase); and node c, between sars-cov subgroups a and b (late phase) [5] . the scale bar indicates the genetic distance, estimated on the basis of kimura's 2-parameter substitution model [24] . generated by the proposed strategy, which uses only these 6 regions, versus the topology and robustness of the tree generated by the conventional strategy, which uses the complete genome sequences. as shown in figure 3 , the topology of the nj tree generated by use of the complete genome sequence was almost identical to that of the nj tree generated by use of a combination of the 6 variable regions; similar results were obtained for the pars trees and the ml trees (data not shown).to compare the robustness of trees generated by the proposed method versus that of trees generated by the conventional method, we focused on the bootstrap values for 3 bifurcation nodes between sars-cov clusters: node "a," between civetcat sars-cov and human sars-cov; node "b," between sars-cov subgroups a1 and a2; and node "c," between sars-cov subgroups a and b. in the nj trees, the bootstrap values for nodes a, b, and c were, respectively, 100%, 100%, and 63% for the conventional method versus 96%, 83%, and 66% for the proposed method (figure 3); similar results were obtained for the pars trees generated by these 2 methods (table 3) . for the ml tree generated by the proposed method, all p values for bifurcation nodes between different clusters were !.01; for the ml trees generated by the conventional method, the only node with a p value !.01 occurred at the bifurcation node between civet-cat sars-cov and human sars-cov (table 3) .the proposed method is useful for study of the molecular epidemiology of sars-cov strains, both because of its compatibility and because it can obtain results by using fewer specimens; in addition, it is more economical and less time-consuming. we applied this tool to better understand the entire complement of taiwanese sars-cov isolates, including the 20 that had been published previously and the additional 19 identified in the present study. epidemiological information, nasopharyngeal aspirates, and serum samples were collected from 18 patients with sars who were treated at 6 taiwanese hospitals (table 1). the sars-cov from a laboratory worker (patient scvj) who contracted sars during december 2003 was sequenced and analyzed. an nj tree was constructed, and the results showed that all 39 taiwanese sars-cov isolates be-longed to subgroup b and could be divided into 3 clusters-b1, b2, and b3.integration of the results of the phylogenetic analyses and the epidemiological information (figure 4) indicated that there were 5 waves of epidemic sars-cov infection in taiwan during 2003. the first wave, during early march, was composed of 1 imported case, 2 cases of transmission between family members (strain tw1), and 1 nosocomial infection (strain tw3); in cluster b1, both sars-cov strain tw1 and sars-cov strain tw3 were clustered with other sars-cov strains linked to hotel m in hong kong [8, 17] . the second wave (strain tw5) consisted of 4 taiwanese individuals who contracted the disease as they flew from hong kong to beijing [9] and who then carried it back to taiwan during mid-march. the third wave, which began in late march, consisted of an infection that occurred on a train (patient tw-hp1), a case of transmission between family members (strain tc1), and multiple nosocomial infections (all "tw-hp" patients and patients tw-gd1, tw-gd-3, and tw-gd4). in cluster b2, all the sars-cov isolates mentioned above clustered with the sars-cov isolates from amoy gardens (strains cuhk-ag01, cuhk-ag02, and cuhk-ag03) [27] , with a bootstrap value of 71%. the fourth wave, which started during late april and ended in mid-june, contained sars-cov isolates not only from hospitals jc, kc, ph, gd (patients tw-gd2 and tw-gd5), and ym but also from sporadic community outbreaks (strains tw10 and tw11), and all of these sars-cov isolates belonged to cluster b3, with a bootstrap value of 71%. the fifth wave occurred during early december and began with a laboratory-contamination case, patient scvj. it clustered with both hku-39849, a sars-cov strain used in the laboratory [14] , and twc, another strain from taiwan [12] . sequence-variation rates for the strain from patient scvj versus strain twc and for the strain from patient scvj versus strain hku-39849 were, respectively, 0.01% (3/29,756) and 0.04% (12/29,756) . in addition, a 24-nt deletion occurred at nucleotide position 26132-26155, resulting in both a frameshift of open reading frame 4 and a deletion of 8 aa residues within the small-envelope glycoprotein.as shown in figure 5 , there were 27 snvs and 1 dinucleotide when, for phylogenetic analysis, we combined sequences from different variable regions of the sars-cov genome, we assumed that no dual infection or recombination between the sars-cov subgroups had occurred. because sars is an acute infectious disease, the odds that it will be contracted from 2 subgroups are very low. furthermore, the strategy of combining different genomic regions for phylogenetic analysis has been used in molecular epidemiological investigations of the origins of hiv-2. in those studies, the evolutionary history of a simian immunodeficiency virus/hiv-2 lineage was reconstructed by use of a combination of partial gag and env sequences; the method increased the accuracy of the phylogenetic analysis [28] . it is noteworthy that the simplot analysis demonstrated that the 3 region of the viral genome, especially near the junction of replicase 1b and the spike genes (encoding protein s), had the greatest sequence variation (figure 2). the s protein is considered to be the most important target for the humoral and cellular immune responses to sars-cov [15, 16] .the 3 algorithms most commonly used in molecular phylogenetic analyses are the nj, ml, and pars methods; we used all 3 to obtain tree topologies. in terms of robustness, a bootstrap value of 70% is often cited as a cutoff for a reliable cluster [25] . although the bootstrap values for nodes a and b in the nj and pars trees generated by the conventional method were higher than those in the nj and pars trees generated by the proposed method, the difference was not statistically significant. in contrast, the bootstrap values for node c in the pars trees generated by the conventional and proposed methods were 56% and 67%, respectively, and the corrresponding bootstrap values in the nj trees were 63% and 66%. this finding was confirmed by the ml trees: the p value for node c in the tree generated by the conventional method was not statistically significant, and that for node c in the tree generated by the proposed method was !.01. accordingly, the tree generated by the proposed method was more reliable; also, because the proposed method requires only 7 rt-pcr reactions to perform the analysis, it is less time-consuming and more efficient than the conventional method. to facilitate other laboratories' future molecular epidemiological studies of outbreaks of sars, we have made the nucleotide-sequence-alignment file of 80 sars-cov reference strains available on our center's web site (http://www .ym.edu.tw/aids/molepi/).in the present study, we used 39 taiwanese sars-cov isolates, including 20 downloaded from the genbank database, to trace the origin and the path of dissemination of sars-cov infections that occurred in taiwan during 2003. phylogenetic analyses demonstrated that the taiwanese sars-cov strains were distributed in 3 clusters-b1, b2, and b3-which differ from clusters 1-3 reported by yeh et al. [11] ; the latter clusters were not defined on the basis of a bootstrap value, whereas we used a bootstrap value of 70% as the cutoff to define our clusters b1-b3. therefore, our cluster b1 contains both cluster 1 and cluster 2 of yeh et al., and their cluster 3 was divided into 2 clusters-b2 and b3-in our study.on the basis of the epidemiological data for the patients with sars who were considered in the present study, it is clear that taiwan experienced 5 waves of epidemic sars infection during 2003. the first and second waves were in different phylogenetic clusters, suggesting that they had different origins. although both the second and the third waves were in the b2 cluster, the sars-cov isolates in the third wave had their own nucleotide-signature pattern (figure 5). neither the first wave nor the second wave led to serious outbreaks, but the third waveoriginating with a resident of amoy gardens who visited tai- wan-led to 1 transmission on a train (strain twc3), 1 case of transmission between family members (strain tc1), and nosocomial infections in at least 2 hospitals (hp and gd) in northern taiwan. only 1 nucleotide difference between strains tc1 and twc3 was noted ( figure 5 ). in addition, strain twc3 and an amoy gardens strain, cuhk-ag01, shared an identical sequence, even though the woman who was the source of the isolate of strain twc3 never left taiwan at any time during the epidemic. an epidemiological investigation showed that the visitor from amoy gardens and this woman sat in different cars during the train ride. because this is the first documented case in which there is molecular proof of transmission on a train, it raises the question of why only 1 passenger contracted the infection. because it has been reported that sars appears to be most infectious at 6-11 days after onset of illness and not during the first day of symptoms [29] , we assumed that the visitor from amoy gardens was not highly infectious during the train ride, even though he developed symptoms during the same evening that he traveled from taipei to taichung.it is important to note that twc, the sars-cov strain isolated from patient twc, clustered with whu, an isolate from wuhan city, china, in cluster 1 but did not cluster with either strain tc1 (direct sequencing of a sample from patient twc) or strain twc3 (direct sequencing of a sample from patient tw-hp1) (figures 3 and 4). in addition, there was a 7-nt difference between twc and tc1 ( figure 5 ). if we assume that strain cuhk-ag01 represents the first-generation sars-cov in the transmission link, then both strain tc1 and strain twc3 were the second-generation, and twh was the thirdgeneration. according to the snv-based analysis (figure 5), the number of nucleotide changes in the sars-cov genome per number of intermediate hosts was extremely low (!1 nt change/host). because it has also been shown that no or very limited nucleotide changes occur in sars-cov sequences from either cultures or primary clinical specimens [11, 30] , we can tentatively conclude that strain twc is a laboratory contaminant and did not originate from patient tc1.the origin of the fourth wave (cluster b3) is still unknown.the molecular epidemiological data suggest that it originated at hospital jc (patient tw-jc2) and then spread to hospitals kc, ph, gd, and ym, as well as to others. the epidemiological investigations also support this hypothesis: tw-ph1, a patient with sars who was treated at hospital jc went to kaohsiung city and received treatment at hospital kc, and, after being treated at hospital kc (table 1) , went back to penghu island and was hospitalized in hospital ph, where he transmitted the disease to other health-care workers. as shown in figure 6 , after combining the epidemiological data with the results of our phylogenetic-tree analysis, we conclude that the fourth wave of epidemic sars infection progressed in 2 dissemination paths: the first path was from hospital jc to hospital kc in kaohsiung and then to hospital ph on penghu island; the second path was from hospital jc to hospital gd and then to hospital ym. two cases associated with community outbreaks in taipei (strains tw10 and tw11) also belong to this cluster. with regard to the laboratory contamination, the laboratory researcher said that he had used sars-cov strain hku-39849 for his experiment; however, our results indicate that the sequence in patient scvj is more closely related to that of strain twc (figure 5). because the researcher claimed that he had not obtained strain twc from taiwan's cdc and that he had used many clinical sars-cov strains besides hku-39849, we are continuing our investigation to confirm both (1) whether the virus that he had obtained from taiwan's cdc was in fact strain hku-39849 or strain twc and (2) which sars-cov strain that he handled was the source of the laboratory contamination. because 130 imported sars cases have been reported by taiwan's cdc but have not yet been analyzed, we plan to use the proposed tool to conduct further analyses, in an attempt to identify their origins. these contact histories will provide valuable information for the control of future sars infections.the sars-cov nucleotide sequences (6 sequences for each of 18 strains) identified during this research have been deposited in genbank (accession numbers ay451856-ay451963). the reference sequences (accession numbers) used in our sequencevariation analysis were from the following 20 strains: urbanicoronavirus disease 2019 , caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), continues to spread rapidly across the globe (wu et al, 2020; zhu et al., 2020) . sars-cov-2 is a +ssrna virus that belongs to the genus betacoronavirus within the coronaviridae family, which also includes sars-cov and mers-cov. as of may 2020, at the time of writing, there have been over 5 million confirmed cases globally. over one third of the global cases are in the united states of america with the u. s. death toll exceeding 95,000.since the emergence of widely available genomic sequencing, rigorous genomic surveillance and contact tracing (gire et al., 2014) , coupled with extensive testing have come to play critical roles in understanding disease transmission routes, inferring outbreak points, and taking informed measures in containing infections.the department of pathology and laboratory medicine at children's hospital los angeles (chla) launched the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) rt-pcr assay for sars-cov-2 on march 13 th , a sars-cov-2 whole-genome sequencing research assay on march 26, and an anti-sars-cov-2 antibody igg test on april 10 th , 2020. testing was conducted on a broad population including patients at chla and other institutions within the los angeles metropolitan area. to better understand the spread of the covid-19 pandemic globally, nationally, and locally, we sought to develop the necessary bioinformatics tools and resources to help guide effective infection control and prevention strategies at our hospital and across los angeles county.there are multiple sars-cov-2 data repositories. gisaid (https://www.gisaid.org/; elbe and buckland-merrett, 2017; shu et al., 2017) is the major repository for rapid sharing of covid-19 data across the globe. gisaid stores sars-cov-2 genome sequences and associated clinical, geographical, and epidemiological data. the ncbi virus (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/virus/vssi/#/) and the china national center for bioinformation 2019 ncov resource (https://bigd.big.ac.cn/ncov/; zhao et al., 2020) are other major resources. across these repositories, however, meta-data and naming conventions are not standardized nor are the data consolidated. to overcome this limitation, the chla center for personalized medicine (cpm) created the covid-19 analysis research database (card), and has been continuously collecting, consolidating and curating full-length sars-cov-2 data from across the world.while there is a significant lack of covid-19/sars-cov-2 genomic resources and bioinformatics tools in general, nextstrain is an outstanding exception (https://nextstrain.org/ncov; hadfield j et al 2018) . it serves as a great resource for understanding how the covid-19 pandemic has been spreading globally. nexstrain tools are visually appealing and highly interactive.however, despite its critical role in the epidemiological studies of covid-19, it lacks the functionality for analyzing user-supplied data nor does it allow for sophisticated interactive tree manipulation required by scientists for in-depth interrogation of likely infection patterns. therefore, to complement nextstrain and to serve the advanced needs of scientists, we developed a highly interactive phylogenetic analysis platform. the platform allows for flexible tree operations, interactive displays of much larger trees stratified by various types of metadata, and importantly, provides for interrogation of likely origins of user submitted genome sequences, which are useful in genomic surveillance.the key to rapid genomic surveillance of a particular genome sequence is to precisely place it within the geographically complete and temporally up-to-date phylogenetic contexts. combined with accurate clinical records and patient contact history, this would aid in identifying the likely source of infection. for this reason, and assuming the viral sequence can be reliably determined using a next-generation sequencing method of choice by the users, we focused on genome comparison, variant calling, variant annotation, and variant profiling against the global virus isolate collection in order to identify the identical, more ancestral, or likely descendent isolates in order to reveal the potential route of transmission. chla card can provide such an analysis, taking only a few seconds per genome, to generate and return results dynamically embedded in global, usa, and local phylogenetic trees that can be visualized and manipulated through the web interface.system design and modules. our ultimate goal is to develop a centralized genomic resource to provide sars-cov-2 full-length viral sequencing data analysis and reporting functions for both internal and external needs. to accomplish these goals, we needed to a) assemble a comprehensive genomic database of full-length sars-cov-2 genome sequences collected from covid-19 samples worldwide; b) pre-compute baseline phylogenetic trees of published highquality sars-cov-2 sequences globally, nationally, and locally; c) build a web portal for interactive querying of sars-cov-2 sequences and associated meta-data; d) implement online bioinformatics tools for interactive phylogenetic analysis and visualization; e) develop a suite of bioinformatics tools for sars-cov-2 genome comparison, variant calling and functional annotation; f) devise phylogenetic analysis tools to infer transmission patterns and to determine the origins of infections; and g) establish an application programming interface (api) that allows programmatic access to results in json format, such that this resource can be integrated into other sars-cov-2 analytical pipelines seamlessly. these represent components of our overall system design goal and constitute the modules of chla card.the chla internal sars-cov-2 sequencing data were generated using the sars-cov-2 whole genome sequencing research assay, established by the chla center for personalized medicine and the virology laboratory (pandey et al., in preparation) . the major external resources of sars-cov-2 strains, genome sequences, and variants were gisaid, genbank, cncb, and nextstrain. data were downloaded in various formats depending on the exact implementations of these external resources. the retrieved data were post-processed, merged, reformatted, and loaded into a mysql database. within this database, a master table is created to store merged and normalized viral meta-data from these resources based upon a template that is compatible with nextstrain's meta-data table. this master table is continuously updated to ensure chla card provides the most up-to-date and comprehensive sars-cov-2 data to end users. the viral genome sequences and metadata are cross-examined to identify and to remove duplicate entries present in multiple resources. variant calls were generated either internally based on the genome sequences or downloaded directly from china national center or bioinformation (cncb), and were formatted by incorporating standard conventions, functional annotations, and virus information.thus, the compiled reference database consists of a comprehensive set of full-length sars-cov-2 genome sequences, their variants relative to the sars-cov-2 reference sequence (nc_045512.2), strains, and associated meta-data. currently (as of 05/20/2020), chla card contains data from 30,000 sars-cov-2 strains, over 30,000 complete genome sequences, and more than 7,000 variants.statistical and categorical analyses of these reported isolates and variants reveal some notable differences between the united states (usa) and non-usa isolates across genes, and for different annotation classes (figure 1 , table s1 ). for missense variants, the number is highest in orf1ab polyprotein, 1,191 variants were seen at least three times in 21,535 non-usa isolates and 589 variants in 5,915 usa isolates. this is expected because this is a large gene (21,290 base pairs or 71.1% of the virus genome) (figure 1) . the shorter surface glycoprotein s gene which is only 3,822 base pairs in length, contains about 1/5 of the missense variants or 252 for non-us and 106 for usa isolates, at a similar variant density as orf1ab. it is noteworthy that envelope protein gene orf3a's in-frame deletions and frameshift deletions are only identified in isolates from usa (12), australia (6), uk (5), china (5) and spain (2) but not in other countries. there are recurrent deletions around base positions 26157-26161, including 7 frameshift deletions and 4 disruptive and 5 conservative inframe deletions; from both usa and non-usa isolates. the mutation and haplotype analysis using chla card revealed multiple interesting observations already. the missense mutation frequencies are significantly higher than that of synonymous mutations in the same genes. for example, the numbers are 178 vs 81 (2.2x) in n gene, and 252 vs 144 (1.75x) in s gene for the non-usa isolates (figure 1) . comprehensive haplotype profiling identified wide-spread country-and state-specific haplotypes which together involved about 29.2% of us isolates, which points to the effectiveness of existing travel restriction policies and public health measures in controlling the transmission of sars-cov-2 (shen et al., in submission). phylogenetic analysis and reference phylogenetic trees. viral genome sequences are quality benchmarked by counting the missing bases, the length deviation from the reference sequence (nc_045512.2), and the quality scores (if available). when constructing different subsets of global or country-specific fasta datasets, the demographic meta-data is used as an inclusion filter for the proper sequences. the reference sequence (nc_045512.2) is always included, and mn996532 (bat/yunnan/ratg13/2013) coronavirus sequence is included to serve as the outgroup to root the phylogenetic tree. multiple sequence alignment (msa) was conducted with mafft version 7.460 (katoh et al, 2002; katoh and toh, 2008) using speed-oriented method fft-ns-i (iterative refinement method, two cycles) optimized for large datasets. the resulting msa files were visually examined. all alignments with gaps over 3 bases, or smaller gaps that resulted from inserted "n" (missing) bases, are removed. the 5'-and 3'-end bases are trimmed because they are often of lower quality. the evolutionary history was inferred by using the maximum likelihood method and general time reversible model (nei and kumar, 2000) in mega x (kumar et al., 2018) . initial trees for the heuristic search were obtained automatically by applying neighbor-joining and bionj algorithms to a matrix of pairwise distances estimated using the maximum composite likelihood (mcl) approach, and then selecting the topology with superior log likelihood value. all positions with over 2% alignment gaps, missing data, and ambiguous bases were excluded. the trees with maximum likelihood were kept as the reference trees for visualization at the web portal. these trees are periodically updated as new genome sequence data are acquired.collection. the chla card virus genome tracker provides: 1) quick comparison of fasta sequences from complete or partial viral genomes to the reference nc_045512.2 genome for assessing coverage, detecting potential large-scale genome rearrangement, and calling variants; 2) annotation of functional consequence and allele frequency of global virus isolates in order to identify novel and recurrent variants, as well potential candidate variants of 6 ot ity ce of on nd he ith od ng at ed he in lly ed gy nd ce e us of .2 nd us of clinical significance; 3) identification of strains of identical or similar variant profiles (haplotype) across the country or world, or strains with additional private variant(s) thus likely descendants in the evolutionary tree, or strains with fewer variants but similar haplotype thus likely ancestral in the evolutionary tree. these findings, along with the geographic location, the collection date, and the patient contact history may aid in the tracing of transmission route. the employed strategy is genome comparison followed by snp profiling, where the query can be the viral sequence in fasta format, variants in vcf format, or just a free-style list.the global sars-cov-2 isolate collection is matched by shared variant profile of input data. the matched isolates are ranked and classified into 3 match levels: 1) level 1 matches have identical (match ratio =1.0), or minimal private variants (match ratio <1.0) compared with the input isolate and thus could be identical haplotype, 2) level 2 matches have more additional private variants than level 1 thus maybe the descendants, and 3) level 3 matches have fewer variants, and thus may be more ancestral. the level 1 and 2 top-match isolates are visualized and automatically highlighted on the pre-built reference phylogenetic trees of either global or usa-specific isolates. angeles. the chla cpm sequenced 31 viral isolates with its sars-cov-2 whole genome sequencing research assay (pandey et al., in preparation) . we analyzed the complete genomes of these isolates by two strategies: 1) virus genome tracker which placed these 31 genomes into the global isolate context in a few minutes, and 2) a refining strategy that merged them onto the reference usa phylogenetic tree, see figure 2 . the virus genome tracker strategy using the consensus sequences correctly picked similar external isolates for refined phylogenetic analysis: identical-variant/level 1 matches (epi_isl_415543 & epi_isl_415544; figure 2) , and descendent/level 2 match (epi_isl_424890 & mt325610). merging these results onto the reference usa phylogenetic tree we could demonstrate that there is a branching point where 13 of 31 cases center around and make up 9 out of 13 branches from this point. this point is in the middle of the transmission route, inferred from traversing the phylogenetic tree, below a large number of washington state samples. among these cases were three members from the same household. this provides a real case example as to how the virus genome tracker and the chla card facilitated the identification of similar isolates, which can serve as the proxy to query isolates and to place them onto the prebuilt phylogenetic trees in just a few minutes. customized urls to the reference trees are automatically generated by virus genome tracker for visualization and exploration. chla card is an integral part of the effort made by the chla department of pathology and laboratory medicine to assemble and to make widely available our strategy and tools for clinical testing, genomic assays, and bioinformatics expertise to address the covid-19 pandemic. this genomic resource enables and empowers genomic epidemiology studies to understand the origin and spread of sars-cov-2 globally, nationally and locally. it also provides in-depth understanding of how the viral genome evolves as the disease spreads across the globe.the virus genome tracker utilizes mummer for super-fast genome alignment and comparison which, combined with the mysql database backend, can return results within a few seconds (~5 sec) from a search against over 30,000 virus isolates. it supports both whole genome and partial genome sequences, and is thus suitable for handling the consensus sequence data derived from various sequencing strategies. furthermore, we integrated the genomic variants with gene annotations and population-level data using the smooth scrolling and zooming capability of jbrowse genome browsing for user-friendly browsing and exploration. to our knowledge, there are no published online tools suitable for rapid typing of new sars-cov-2 virus isolates, that provide similar functionalities as chla card, which is empowered by rich viral sequences, isolates, geographic information and phylogenetic data. the genome detective coronavirus typing tool (cleemput et al., 2020) is capable of online sequence but not variant analysis, and has very limited sars-cov-2 data with no interactive phylogenetic analysis and visualization.together, this genomic resource provides users access to the covid-19 bioinformatics tools and a comprehensive database of viral genome sequences, including multiple sequence alignments, variants with functional annotations and population frequencies, and precomputed phylogenetic trees, all accessible through the website and the sars-cov-2 viral genome browser. our pilot study using internal cases demonstrates our capability for generating the genomic epidemiology data required to aid in the development of clinical policies and decision making such as devising quarantine and containment strategies.modifications to the algorithm and visualization tools employed for virus transmission inference and tracing are in progress to incorporate spatial-temporal-travel data. a mobile version of the web portal is on the roadmap for interactive exploration of data on-the-go. api and beacon capabilities are being implemented to facilitate computational biologists with accessing our standardized viral data.national center for bioinformation (cncb), nextstrain and other sources. we gratefully acknowledge the originating and submitting laboratories for making the sars-cov-2 sequences and associated metadata available via these public resources. for a full list of such contributors, please see from "virus isolate" tool on chla card (https://covid19.cpmbiodev.net/) the full lists of "originating labs", "submitting labs" and "authors". figure 2) 2.1. the genomic data search tool is coupled with a fast jbrowse-based genome browser. the reference rna sequences, genes, and the variants from global virus collection are shown as tracks by default. the reference rna sequence is translated in all reading frames for the amino acid being coded. click on any gene or variant entry to display the full description about the entry in pop-up windows. 2.2. use mouse to drag-and-move the genomic regions under view by clicking and dragging in the track area or by pressing the left and right arrow keys. move the mouse to the top of genome browser until a "+" icon appears, then press the mouse to begin dragging to the left or the right to select regions to zoom-in. users can select smaller region to zoom-in to it up to the base level. 2.3. changing the variant "genome_position" or "gene_and_region" drop-down list, the genome browser will automatically jump to the specific regions defined by the selected position or gene to display the reference genome and global virus variant reference. 2.4. in addition, all genes and non-coding genomic features are linked above the genome browser. mousing over these links will switch the visualized region to the gene or "all" link for the whole genome view. 3.2. click on any of the "major classifications" dropdown. the number of records per category are shown and automatically applied as the filter to limit reportable records as returned by the "2. keyword quick filter". 3.3. alternatively, click the "precise search" button. the search results will contain only those records that match to all of the selected categories from only the drop-down lists in the last step. 3.4. in addition, records can be filtered further by manually typing one or more keywords from the other columns in the search box at "2. keyword quick filter". keywords can be partial, or can be a combination of keywords from multiple columns. add "!" after a word to enable whole word search for it. note that the keywords can match on any columns shown in the table. click on "export selected" button to save the filtered records as csv file to be opened with microsoft excel or similar tools. figure 4) click on strain names to view the full report and genome sequences. 4.8. the matched isolates are ranked and classified into 3 match levels: 1) level 1 matches have identical (match ratio =1.0), or minimal private variants (match ratio <1.0) than the input isolate thus could be identical haplotype; 2) level 2 matches have more additional private variants than level 1 thus may belong to the descendants; and 3) level 3 matches have fewer variants, thus may be located at the more ancestral branches. 4.9. visualize top match virus isolates on the pre-built backbone reference phylogenetic trees for either global or usa-specific isolates. click on the links then in the new windows, and follow the pop-up instruction to examine the trees. level 1 and 2 will be prehighlighted on the trees by clicking in new page's tree panel. more details can be found in section "phylogenetic tree visualization".supplemental figure 4 . virus genome tracker. figure 5 ) 5.1. the tool provides 3 types of phylogenetic trees by default: the regular-mode usa and global trees which are usa-specific isolates, and the global collection. each of them also has a time series animation mode version. 5.2. select one of the tree types from the top menu "phylogenetic tree" or from the home page, then wait till the tree is fully loaded which could take 30 seconds depending on the network speed, the server usage load, and user's device performance.supplemental figure 5 . online phylogenetic tree visualization & manipulation. the dropdown menus at the top can be used to select and to define two filters for highlighting the tree in different colors simultaneously. the left control panel defines tree manipulation and download options. further node and subtree manipulation options pop up and become available upon clicking in the tree or on a node.december 2019 in the chinese city of wuhan, causes a respiratory illness called covid-19, which can spread from person to person. 1 cases and 858 deaths in 27 countries during the 2012 mers outbreak. 7, 8 coronaviruses are known to circulate in mammals and birds. previous studies revealed that both sars-cov and mers-cov are zoonotic in origin, originally coming from bats, [9] [10] [11] [12] with sars-cov spreading from bats to palm civets to humans, [13] [14] [15] and mers-cov spreading from bats to camels to humans. 16, 17 recent research has also reported that the sars-cov-2 virus likely originated in bats, a proposal based on the similarity of its genetic sequence to that of other known coronaviruses. 18 however, like sars-cov, mers-cov, and many other coronaviruses, the sars-cov-2 virus may have been transmitted to humans by an intermediate animal host. 19 therefore, the identity of the animal source of sars-cov-2 remains a key and urgent question. furthermore, to stem future outbreaks of this type and preventing the transmission of zoonotic diseases to humans should be a top research priority.the existence of an intermediate animal host of sars-cov-2 between a probable bat reservoir and humans is still under investigation.the discovery of a virus closely related to the newly emerged sars-cov-2 in a data set from pangolins sampled more than a year ago illustrates that the sampling of other mammals handled or consumed by humans could uncover even more closely related viruses. 20 during a press conference on 7 february 2020, two researchers (shen yongyi and xiao lihua) from the south china agricultural university in guangzhou identified the pangolin as a potential source of the sars-cov-2 virus based on genetic comparison of coronaviruses taken from pangolins and from humans infected during the recent outbreak. by analyzing more than 1 000 metagenomic samples and using molecular biology testing, they found that the positive rate of β coronavirus in pangolins was 70% and that the genome sequence of an isolated virus strain was 99% similar to that of the sars-cov-2 virus.thus, whether pangolins acted as a direct intermediate animal host of the sars-cov-2 virus is worth further investigation.in the present study, we performed analyses of the transmission dynamics and evolutionary history of the virus based on 70 genomes of sars-cov-2 strains sampled from australia (n = 4), belgium (n = 1), china (hubei province, n = 19; guangdong province, n = 16; zhejiang province, n = 4; taiwan, n = 1), finland (n = 1), france (n = 4), germany (n = 1), japan (n = 1), korea (n = 1), singapore (n = 3), thailand (n = 2), united kingdom (n = 2), and united states (n = 10) with sampling dates between 24 december 2019 and 3 february 2020. we reanalyzed two of the 21 pangolin metagenome samples from previously published data 20 (table s1 ).to investigate the potential intermediate hosts of sars-cov-2 (between originating animal and human hosts), two samples (srr10168377 and srr10168378) obtained from previously reported malayan pangolin (manis javanica) viral metagenomic sequencing data (bio project prjna573298) were downloaded from the ncbi sra public database. 20 after assembly, the srr10168377 and srr10168378 genomes were 16 999 and 6 392 bp in length, respectively. we defined another data set ("dataset_6") composed of six genome sequences of coronavirus strains. betacov/wuhan-hu-1/2019 (epi_isl_402125) was grouped as "clade a," one (betacov/bat/yunnan/ratg13/2013; epi_isl_402131) and two (bat-sl-covzc45; mg772933 and bat-sl-covzxc21; mg772934) sars-related coronaviruses were grouped as "clade b" and "clade d," respectively. the two assembled genomes from srr10168377 and srr10168377 were grouped into "clade c." the two data sets ("dataset_70" and "dataset_6") were aligned using mafft v7.222 22 and then manually curated using bioedit v7.2.5. 23 to assess the recombination of "dataset_70," we employed the pairwise homoplasy index (phi) to measure the similarity between closely linked sites using splitstree v4.15.1. 24 the best-fit nucleotide substitution models for the two data sets were identified according to the bayesian information criterion (bic) method with 3 (24 candidate models) or 11 (88 candidate models) substitution schemes in jmodeltest v2.1.10. 25 to evaluate the phylogenetic signals of "dataset_70" and "dataset_6," we performed likelihood-mapping analysis 26 using tree-puzzle v5.3, 27 with 25 000 to 175 000 randomly chosen quartets for the two data sets. for "dataset_70," split network analysis was performed using kishino-yano-85 distance transformation with the neighbornet method, which can be loosely thought of as a "hybrid" between the neighbor-joining (nj) and split decomposition methods, implemented in tree-puzzle v5.3. for "dataset_70," nj 28 phylogenetic trees were constructed using the kimura 2-parameter method 29 implemented in mega v7.0.26. 30 for "dataset_6," nj 28 phylogenetic trees were constructed using the maximum composite likelihood (mcl) method, 31 tempest v1.5. 35 we also estimated the evolutionary rate and time to the most recent common ancestor (tmrca) for "dataset_70" using ml dating in the treetime package. 36 the hiv transmission cluster engine (hiv-trace; www.hivtrace.org) 44 was employed to infer transmission network clusters for sars-cov-2 "dataset_70." all pairwise distances were calculated and the putative linkages between each pair of genomes were considered whenever their divergence was ≤0.0001 (0.01%) or ≤0.00001 (0.001%) substitutions/site (tn93 substitution model). multiple linkages were then combined into putative transmission clusters. clusters that comprised of only two linked nodes were identified as dyads. this approach detects transmission clusters in which the clustering strains are genetically similar, implying a direct or indirect epidemiological connection.to investigate the putative parents of sars-cov-2, we performed similarity plot analysis based on the kimura two-parameter method 29 with a window size of 200 bp and step size of 20 bp using simplot v.3.5.14. 45 we divided "dataset_6" into four clades (ie, clade a, clade b, clade c, and clade d), with clade a designated as the query group. for "dataset_70" and "dataset_6," hky and gtr + g were the models of best-fit, respectively, across the two different substitution schemes (ie, 24 and 88 candidate models) according to the bic method, and were thus used in subsequent likelihood-mapping and phylogenetic analyses for the two data sets. the phi tests of "dataset_70" did not find statistically significant evidence of recombination (p = 1.0).likelihood-mapping analysis of "dataset_70" revealed that 69.7% of li et al. | 3 the quartets were distributed in the center of the triangle, indicating a strong star-like topology signal reflecting a novel virus, which may be due to exponential epidemic spread ( figure 1a) . likewise, 25.9% of the quartets from "dataset_6" were distributed in the center of the triangle, indicating a strong phylogenetic signal ( figure 1b) . the split network generated for "dataset_70" using the neighbornet method was highly unresolved, and the phylogenetic relationship of "data-set_70" was probably best represented by a network rather than a tree ( figure 1c ). the existence of polytomies indicated-in contrast to that expected in a strictly bifurcating tree-an explosive, star-like evolution of sars-cov-2. both the nj and ml phylogenetic analyses of sars-cov-2 "dataset_70" also showed star-like topologies, in accordance with the likelihood-mapping results (figures 2 and s1 ). the ml phylogenetic tree showed greater star-like topology than the nj phylogenetic tree, indicating that the ml method was more reasonable for "dataset_70." root-to-tip regression analyses between genetic divergence and sampling date using the best-fitting root showed that (table 1) . furthermore, based on bayesian time-scaled phylogenetic analysis using the tip-dating method, the estimated tmrca dates and evolutionary rates from "dataset_70" ranged from (table 1) . thus, the estimated tmrca dates and evolutionary rates for sars-cov-2 from "dataset_70" were consistent among the different clock models (strict and relaxed) but were distinct among the different dating methods (constrained-dating and tip-dating). the estimated tmrca dates and evolutionary rates for sars-cov-2 from "data-set_70" using the tip-dating method exhibited much narrower 95%bcis than the constrained-dating method. in addition, the estimated tmrca dates and evolutionary rates for sars-cov-2 from "data-set_70" were consistent between the different coalescent tree models (ie, constant and exponential) when using the tip-dating method but were distinct when using the constrained-dating method. for each f i g u r e 1 likelihood-mapping and split network analyses of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). likelihoods of three tree topologies for each possible quartet (or for a random sample of quartets) are denoted by data points in an equilateral triangle. distribution of points in seven areas of the triangle reflects tree-likeness of data. specifically, three corners represent fully resolved tree topologies; center represents an unresolved (star) phylogeny; and sides represent support for conflicting tree topologies. results of likelihoodmapping analyses of two data sets ("dataset_70," a; and "dataset_6," b) and split network analyses of "dataset_70" (c) are shown we considered individuals as genetically linked when the genetic distance between sars-cov-2 strains was <0.01% substitutions/site.based on this, we identified one large transmission cluster that included 66 of 70 (94.29%) genomes, thus suggesting low genetic divergence for "dataset_70" (figure s3 ). we also considered individuals as genetically linked when the genetic distance between sars-cov-2 strains was <0.001% substitutions/site. based on this, we identified 6 transmission clusters that included 37 of 70 (52.86%) genomes for "dataset_70" (figure 5 ). clusters ranged in size from 2 to 23 genomes.the nj and ml phylogenetic topologies of "dataset_6" were consistent with each other (figure s4 ), indicating that the use of a small number of sequences could show similar topological results. homology plot analysis of "dataset_6" also revealed that betacov/bat/yunnan/ ratg13/2013 was more similar to the sars-cov-2 virus than the coronavirus obtained from the two pangolin samples (srr10168377 and srr10168378), consistent with phylogenetic analysis ( figure s5 ).of note, "clade d" (bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21) had higher similarity to the sars-cov-2 virus in the first 12 000 bp region of the full alignment than to the pangolin coronavirus ( figure s5 ). we also found that a unique peptide (prra) insertion region in the spike protein at the junction of s1 and s2 junction in the human sars-cov-2 virus ("clade a") induced a furin cleavage motif (rrar), which could be a predicted polybasic cleavage site, and thus a unique feature of sars-cov-2, in comparison with the other three clades ("clade b," "clade c," and "clade d") ( figure s6 ).on the basis of "dataset_70," our likelihood-mapping analysis confirmed additional tree-like signals over time compared with our previous results. 46, 47 this result implies increasing genetic divergence of sars-cov-2 in human hosts ( figure 1a) , consistent with the findings of our earlier studies. 46, 47 split network analysis for sars-cov-2 "dataset_70" human-to-human transmission ( figure 1c ). these results are consistent with the ml phylogenetic analyses, which showed polytomy topology from "dataset_70" (figure 2 ). however, nj phylogenetic analyses showed a more bifurcating tree topology compared with the ml phylogenetic analyses ( figure s1 ). this is a good example showing the differences between nj and ml phylogenetic construction methods. "dataset_70" had a minor strong positive temporal signal based on root-to-tip regression and ml dating analyses (figures 3 and s2) , with the estimated tmrca dates and evolutionary rates for sars-cov-2 found to be nearly identical using both analyses ( table 1 ). the estimated tmrca dates and evolutionary rates for sars-cov-2 were very similar across different clock models and coalescent tree priors using the tip-dating method. the estimated tmrca dates and evolutionary rates for sars-cov-2 were also very similar across different clock models using the constraineddating method, but highly distinct across the different coalescent tree priors ( table 1 ). the tmrca estimated by the tip-dating method was relatively narrower than that determined by the constrained-dating method, consistent with our previous studies. 46, 47 bayesian analyses with the tip-dating method using a strict clock as well as constant size coalescent tree prior indicated that sars-cov-2 is evolving at a rate of 1.24 × 10 −3 substitutions per site per year (table 1 ), in accordance with our prior research 46, 47 and similar to that found for other human f i g u r e 4 estimated maximum-clade-credibility tree of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) using tip-dating method. colors indicate different sampling locations. nodes are labeled with posterior probability values. estimated maximum-clade credibility (mcc) tree of "dataset_70" are shown f i g u r e 5 transmission clusters of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). structure of inferred sars-cov-2 transmission clusters from "dataset_70" using genetic distances of <0.001% substitutions/site is shown. nodes (circles) represent connected individuals in overall network, and putative transmission linkages are represented by edges (lines). nodes are color-coded by sampling locations coronaviruses. 41 our results also suggest that the virus originated on 24november 2019, which is in further agreement with our earlier studies. 46, 47 we identified eight phylogenetic clusters (number of sequences 2 to 7) with posterior probabilities between 0.99 and 1.0 using bayesian inference ( figure 4) . we also identified six transmission clusters (number of sequences 2 to 23) when the genetic distance between the sars-cov-2 strains was <0.001% substitutions/site ( figure 5) . however, our conclusions should be considered preliminary and explained with caution due to the limited number of sars-cov-2 genome sequences presented in this study. as more genome sequences become available, there may be stronger among-lineage rate variation over time as to warrant using a relaxed clock model, but we anticipate that the evolutionary rates and tmrca dates will be broadly similar to those estimated here. as the number of substitutions is still small, it is tempting to speculate that sequencing errors could have a considerable impact on the evolutionary rate and tmrca date estimates. we removed three sars-cov-2 genome sequences (ie, betacov/wuhan/ipbcams-wh-02/2019, epi_isl_403931; betacov/shenzhen/szth-001/2020, epi_isl_406592;betacov/shenzhen/szth-004/2020, epi_isl_406595) with potential sequencing errors, but these may have less impact on the above estimates when more substitutions of sars-cov-2 are accumulated over time. we also expect that as more sars-cov-2 genome sequences become available, the estimated 95% bcis of the evolutionary rates and tmrca dates will be narrower.we found that the pangolin-cov virus from the two pangolin samples was clustered with the sars-cov-2 virus with 100% bootstrap support; however, betacov/bat/yunnan/ratg13/2013 was more similar to the sars-cov-2 virus than to the pangolin coronavirus and the human sars-cov-2 virus ("clade a") showed a unique peptide (prra) insertion not found in the other three clades ("clade b," "clade c," "clade d"). this insertion constitutes an rrar motif in the spike protein at the junction of s1 and s2 junction in the human sars-cov-2 virus, after considering the next amino acid (r) of the unique peptide (prra) ( figure s6 ). of note, the highly favored motifs for furin cleavage are arg-x-(arg/lys)-arg (rxrr or rxkr), and the minimal motifs for furin cleavage can be rxxr. 48 we also note that some of the other coronaviruses have a furin motif in almost the same location in their spike proteins. 49, 50 lentiviruses have an rkxr (r, arginine; k, lysine; x, any amino acid) site between gp120 and gp41, cleaved by furin to convert gp160 into subunits. [51] [52] [53] [54] therefore, it is tempting to speculate that cleavage or lack of cleavage of the spike protein at this site could significantly impact host range and transmissibility. taken together, the pangolin coronavirus samples (srr10168377 and srr10168378) were less similar to the sars-cov-2 virus than to the betacov/bat/yunnan/ ratg13/2013 virus and did not have the rrar motif. therefore, we concluded that the human sars-cov-2 virus, which is responsible for the current outbreak of covid-19, did not come directly from pangolins. however, due to the limited viral metagenomic data obtained from pangolins, we cannot exclude that other pangolins from china may contain coronaviruses that exhibit greater similarity to the sars-cov-2 virus.in conclusion, our results emphasize the importance of further epidemiological investigations, genomic data surveillance, and experimental studies of the role of the unique furin cleavage motif (rrar) of sars-cov-2 in the spike protein at the junctions of s1 and s2. such work could positively impact public health in terms of guiding prevention efforts to reduce sars-cov-2 transmission in real time, and to stem future outbreaks of zoonotic diseases.this study was supported by a grant from the national natural science foundation of china (no. 31470268) to prof. yi li. this study was sponsored by the k.c. wong magna fund in ningbo university.we gratefully acknowledge the authors and originating and submitting laboratories for their sequences and meta-data shared through gisaid, 21 on which this study is based.departments of 1 veterinary pathobiology and 2 wildlife and fisheries sciences and 3 faculty of genetics program, texas a&m university, college station although primary genomic analysis has revealed that severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars cov) is a new type of coronavirus, the different protein trees published in previous reports have provided no conclusive evidence indicating the phylogenetic position of sars cov. to clarify the phylogenetic relationship between sars cov and other coronaviruses, we compiled a large data set composed of 7 concatenated protein sequences and performed comprehensive analyses, using the maximum-likelihood, bayesian-inference, and maximum-parsimony methods. all resulting phylogenetic trees displayed an identical topology and supported the hypothesis that the relationship between sars cov and group 2 covs is monophyletic. relationships among all major groups were well resolved and were supported by all statistical analyses.in the short amount of time since a novel coronavirus was identified as being the cause of the ongoing outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) around the world [1] , several sars coronavirus (cov) isolates have been cloned, and several complete genomic sequences have been determined [2] [3] [4] . preliminary sequence analyses have indicated that sars cov is a new type of coronavirus that does not belong to any group of coronaviruses yet characterized [2, 3] . however, the phylogenetic position and origin of sars cov remain elusive. most reported phylogenetic analyses have been based on either individual proteins [2, 3, 5] , short nucleotide sequences [1] , or whole-genome similarity [6] . although these analyses have not yielded conflicting results, the phylogenetic relationship between sars cov and its relatives remained inconclusive. whereas most reported phylogenetic trees have placed sars cov between group 2 covs and group 3 covs, a few trees have indicated that there is a relationship between sars cov and group 3 covs [1] [2] [3] 5] .it is notable that both sars cov and infectious bronchitis virus (ibv), a group 3 cov, form long branches in all reported phylogenetic trees, because it implies that there might have been a problem associated with a long-branch attraction (lba) artifact during the tree reconstructions [7] . an lba artifact might be caused by limited taxa, a small number of amino acid or nucleotide positions, or highly variable regions of nucleotide sequences, any of which could generate misleading phylogenetic information during the tree-reconstruction process. to further define the phylogenetic relationship between sars cov and other coronaviruses, we took advantage of recently published sars cov genome sequences and constructed a single, large data set composed of 3364 well-aligned amino acid positions. because the 7 proteins used to construct the data set appeared to have different long branches [1] [2] [3] 5] , the effect of an lba artifact in tree reconstruction should be minimized. the aim of the present study was to apply reliable analytical methods to the construction of a robust hypothesis about the phylogeny of sars cov in relation to other coronaviruses.materials and methods. we retrieved the following protein sequences (accession numbers) from genbank: sars cov (nc_004718), human cov 229e (af304460), porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (af353511), transmissible gastroenteritis virus (aj271965), bovine cov (af220295), murine hepatitis virus (af201929), and ibv (m95169). the amino acid sequences of the 3cl pro , pol, hel, s, e, m, and n proteins were individually aligned by the clustral x program (version 1.83). gaps and unambiguous alignments were excluded from each alignment. after a parsimony-based partition-homogeneity test revealed no significant incongruence between trees derived from different proteins, 7 protein alignments were concatenated to form a large data set of 3364 aa positions for subsequent phylogenetic analysis. the parsimony-based partition-homogeneity test was performed by the paup* program [8] . the homogeneity of the structural proteins (s, e, m, and n) and of the enzymatic (3cl pro , pol, and hel) proteins, as well as the homogeneity of the 2 protein categories (structural vs. enzymatic), were tested using a heuristic search algorithm with 100 replicates; it showed no statistically significant incongruence (among enzymatic proteins, ; among structural proteins, ; p p 1 p p .26 between enzymatic proteins and structural proteins, ). p p 1 for phylogenetic analysis, first the tree-puzzle program (ver- sion 5.0) was used to generate approximate quartet-likelihood trees, with 1000 puzzling steps [9] . parameters were estimated on the basis of the topology of a neighbor-joining tree, and the amino acid frequencies were estimated on the basis of the concatenated protein data set, by use of a jones-taylor-thornton (jtt) model of amino acid substitution, a model that included the consideration of rate heterogeneity (i.e., the fraction of invariance and 4-rate gamma distributions [ ]). jtt + f + g inv parameters that had been established on the basis of the puz-zling analysis were then applied to a true maximum-likelihood (ml) analysis by the proml program included in the phylip package [10] , with the sequence input order randomized and with global rearrangements enabled during the tree search. in addition, phylogenetic trees were also reconstructed using the aforementioned jtt model of amino acid substitution, by a bayesian-inference (bi) method and the mrbayes program (version 3.0) [11] . a total of 100,000 generations of searches were performed, with 4 chains running simultaneously. stable ml values were quickly reached before 1000 generations of searches, indicating that the markov chain monte carlo analysis had been allowed to run for sufficient generations. posterior probabilities at tree nodes were obtained by calculating the consensus tree from the best 901 bi trees, by the 50% majority ruling method. the bootstrapping test was performed, with 1000 replicates, using the maximum-parsimony (mp) method, by the paup* program [8] ; the input order of each search was randomized, in 100 replicates. a full heuristic algorithm was used to search for the best trees, and tree-bisection reconnection was applied for branch swapping. the statistical significance for the difference between each resulting best tree and all alternative trees were tested by both the kishino-hasegawa (kh) method [12] and the shimodaira-hasegawa (sh) method [13] .results. the data set was composed of 7 concatenated protein sequences (i.e., 3cl pro , pol, hel, s, e, m, and n) obtained from 7 coronavirus isolates, and a partition-homogeneity test [14] revealed no significant incongruence between phylogenetic trees derived from different proteins. the best trees were inferred from the data set by the ml, bi, and mp methods [8] [9] [10] [11] , all of which yielded the same tree topology and supported the hypothesis that the relationship between sars cov and group 2 covs is monophyletic ( figure 1 ). the statistical supporting values at all nodes were 100%, by ml quartet-puzzling, bi posterior-probability, and mp bootstrapping analyses. pairwise comparison of protein distances, corrected by the ml method, also showed that the intergroup distance between sars cov and group 2 covs was the shortest, compared with those between sars cov and other coronaviruses (table 1) . the sars cov + group 2 covs clade was subsequently joined by ibv, a group 3 cov. the separation of sars cov and ibv was more evident in the trees resulting from the present study than in previously reported protein trees, in which sars cov and ibv were either minimally separated by very short branches or artificially joined at deep branches [1] [2] [3] . the hypothesis that the relationship between sars cov and group 2 covs is monophyletic was fully supported by the kh test, in which the ml values of all the other 944 possible trees were shown to be significantly worse than that of the present best tree. when a more conservative sh test was employed, only 19 suboptimal trees did not show significant differences in their ml values, compared with the tree shown in figure 1. among these 19 trees, 13 supported the hypothesis that the relationship between sars cov and group 2 covs is monophyletic, and only 6 either placed sars cov at the base of group 2 covs/group 3 covs or identified it as a sister to group 3 covs. therefore, the sh test did not reject the best tree but, rather, implied that there are strong links between sars cov, group 2 covs, and group 3 covs. in addition, the hypothesis that the relationship between sars cov and group 2 covs is monophyletic is supported by a recently reported phylogenetic analysis using the replicase gene [15] .discussion. despite the evidence supporting a monophyletic relationship between sars cov and group 2 covs, the data currently available still support the preliminary conclusion that sars cov might be a new type of coronavirus (i.e., group 4). the problem of the origin of sars cov cannot be resolved here-it may require the identification and sequencing of additional, closely related coronaviruses from humans and/or animals. nonetheless, the establishment of a solid phylogenetic relationship between sars cov and other coronaviruses may provide us with valuable information to use in the development of vaccines and therapeutics and may, in the near future, help shed light on the true origin of sars cov.in december 2019, a novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), was identified in wuhan, china, as the etiologic agent of coronavirus disease (covid-19); as of may 2020, this virus had spread to more than 187 countries [1,2]. common symptoms of infection include fever, cough, and shortness of breath, while severe cases are characterized by advanced respiratory distress and pneumonia, often resulting in death [3]. it is still unknown how many infected people who present mild or no symptoms can spread the virus; however, a recent study showed that in wuhan, roughly 60% of all infections were spread by asymptomatic people [4]. this characteristic significantly thwarts the work of public health officials who are attempting to detect transmission clusters, such as the ones identified in china [5,6] and singapore [7], through epidemiological contact tracing.soon after the first epidemiological and genetic sequence data of sars-cov-2 were made available, a glut of phylogeny-based analyses began to circulate, in scientific papers as well as on social media, discussing the origin and variants of the virus as well as the countries that may have fueled its spread [8-10]. the implications of misunderstanding the real dynamics of the covid-19 pandemic are extremely dangerous. ethnic or social discrimination resulting from unsupported assumptions on viral contagion—which are often amplified by irresponsible, uncontrollable communications—can be highly damaging for people and countries. although social media platforms are often vehicles for “fake news” and hype, tremendous efforts are being made by the scientific community to provide free, up-to-date information on ongoing studies as well as critical evaluations. in particular, the us-based nextstrain [11] team has been posting real-time updates on the tracing of the epidemic by molecular analyses. several discussions and evidence-based debates on controversial hypotheses on the epidemic have ensued (eg, the number of untraced infections in the us, the putative introduction of the virus to italy through germany [12], and the alleged lineage diversification in china [13], which was later criticized [14]). another example is a recent study that identified three geographically separated variants of sars-cov-2 based on a phylogenetic network inferred from 160 full genomes available on march 3, 2020 [10]. this work was widely covered by the news media [15]; however, it was also highly criticized by experts in the field for its inaccurate use of phylogenetic methods, incorrect rooting of the phylogeny, and significant sampling bias [16-18]. an editorial published in science [19] also highlighted how unsupported or misleading claims circulating in forums, social media, and even peer-reviewed articles have resulted from substantial overinterpretation of the available data. hence, there is an urgent need to reframe the current debate in more rigorous scientific terms and quantitatively evaluate whether sufficient information for reliable phylogenetic and phylogeographic studies currently exists or whether gaps need to be addressed. here, we present an in-depth longitudinal analysis of the phylogenetic information on sars-cov-2 genomes that became available between march and april 2020 to assess their reliability for molecular epidemiology studies.the gisaid (global initiative on sharing all influenza data) database [20] was accessed on march 18, march 25, march 30, and april 24, 2020 (table s1 in multimedia appendix 1 and table s2 in multimedia appendix 2). our main analyses compared the march 30 data set with the april 24 data set. after quality control of sequences that were not full genomes or contained extensive stretches of unknown nucleotides, separate sequence alignments were generated using mafft alignment software [21]. each sequence alignment included all sequences collected on a given date: march 18, 794 genome sequences from 35 countries; march 25, 1662 genome sequences from 42 countries; march 30, 2608 genome sequences from 55 countries; and april 24, 8992 genome sequences from 63 countries.before carrying out any phylogeny-based analysis of virus evolution and spatiotemporal spread, it is crucial to test the quality of the sequence data, since uneven sampling, the presence of phylogenetic noise, and the absence of a temporal signal can affect the reliability of the results (eg, ancestral state reconstructions, molecular clock calibrations) [22]. sars-cov-2 full genome alignments generated from sequences in gisaid [23] at different time points were analyzed as follows. transition/transversions vs genetic distance plots were generated using dambe6 [24]. the presence of phylogenetic signals satisfying resolved phylogenetic relationships among sequences was evaluated by likelihood mapping analysis [25] using iq-tree and allowing the software to search for all possible quartets using the best-fitting nucleotide substitution model [25]. likelihood mapping analysis estimates the likelihood of each of possible tree topology for any group of four sequences (quartet), randomly chosen from an alignment, and reports them inside an equilateral triangle (the likelihood map) where the corners represent distinct tree topologies and the center represents star-like trees. quartets are considered to be resolved when the three likelihoods are significantly different (ie, a phylogenetic signal and most dots equally distributed in the corners indicate that the data are suitable for robust phylogeny inference). quartets are considered to be unresolved or partially resolved when two or all three of the likelihood values are not significantly different (ie, phylogenetic noise and most dots distributed in the side or center areas indicate that the data may not be sufficient for robust phylogeny inference). extensive simulation studies have shown that for sequences to be considered robust in terms of the phylogenetic signal, the side/center areas of the likelihood mapping must include <40% of the unresolved quartets [26]. maximum likelihood tree reconstruction was performed in iq-tree based on the best-fit model chosen according to the bayesian information criterion [27,28]. exploration of the temporal structure (ie, the presence of a molecular clock in the data) was assessed by regression of divergence (root-to-tip genetic distance) vs sampling time using tempest [29]. in this case, the absence of a linear trend indicates that the data do not contain a temporal signal and that the data are not appropriate for phylogenetic inference using molecular clock models. the recently developed transphylo software package was employed to estimate how many intermediates in the putative transmission chain connected each pair of viral sequences from two infected individuals using a transmission matrix [30]. the transphylo r package was used to infer the transmission matrices of sars-cov-2 [30].as of march 30, 2020, we compared the number of full genomes sampled per country with the number of confirmed cases at the time of sampling, as well as with the country’s total population (figure 1). we obtained 2608 full genomes from 55 countries. during the pandemic, the number of full genomes with high coverage has been steeply increasing. by considering countries with at least 25,000 confirmed cases or 3 or more genomes in our set, we found the spearman (rank) correlations between confirmed cases (a proxy for sampling homogeneity) and genomes per country to be fairly weak: 0.47 on march 30 and 0.52 on april 24. however, correlation could only be investigated with confirmed cases, since not all affected countries have publicly reported the total number of coronavirus tests performed. as of march 30, within the same country, sequenced genomes were usually sampled from a few hotspots; thus, these data are not necessarily representative of the whole epidemic in that country. sars-cov-2 full genome sequences available from patients in the united states, the country with the highest number of confirmed cases, were mainly sampled in washington state (66%) during the early epidemic, while less than one-third (32%) available from the epicenter of the us epidemic, the state of new york. italy, the country with the second highest number of confirmed cases, uploaded 26 genomes, 1 of which came from the marche region, 4 from friuli venezia giulia, 7 from abruzzo, 9 from lazio, and only 5 from lombardy, which is the epicenter of the italian epidemic [31] (table s1). as of march 30, 2020, the top 10 contributors per number of genomes were the united states (n=612), iceland (n=343), uk (n=321), china (n=300), the netherlands (n=190), france (n=119), japan (n=83), canada (n=80), australia (n=64), spain (n=40), and belgium (n=46). notably, some countries uploaded a high number of genomes despite having a relatively low number of cases (eg, georgia, iceland, senegal, and the democractic republic of the congo). as of april 24, 2020, the top 10 contributors per number of genomes were the united states (n=2413), the united kingdom (n=1779), australia (n=891), iceland (n=533), the netherlands (n=514), china (n=449), belgium (n=329), denmark (n=250), france (n=217), and spain (n=159; table s2 in multimedia appendix 2).lack of resolution and uncertainty in the sars-cov-2 phylogenetic tree is to be expected, considering that relatively little genetic diversity can be accumulated during the first 3 months of an epidemic, even for an exponentially spreading and rapidly evolving rna virus. overall, the phylogenetic signal of the current data has been increasing with the number of genomes released. the percentages of unresolved quartets detected in the sars-cov-2 full genome alignments on march 3 and march 10 were still too high to allow reliable inferences (figure s1 in multimedia appendix 3). in other words, this lack of phylogenetic signal likely resulted in overall unreliable topologies of any sars-cov-2 trees obtained using these data, and even clades with high bootstrap values should be interpreted with extreme caution. a preliminary maximum likelihood tree, inferred from the full genome viral sequences available on march 3, 2020, showed a well-supported cluster of european and asian sequences (reported in figure s2 in multimedia appendix 3), which contained a subclade (subclade a, figure 2a) including a sequence isolated in germany that appeared to be paraphyletic (with strong bootstrap support) to an italian sequence clustering in turn with sequences from finland, mexico, germany, and switzerland. based on this observation (which is available on nextstrain), a heated discussion circulated on social media about a transmission event from germany to italy followed by further spread from italy to other countries. however, in a new tree inferred just one week later, when more than 135 new full genome sequences were made available on gisaid [23], the direct link between germany and italy in subclade a disappeared due to additional clustering of previously unsampled sequences from portugal, brazil, wales, and the netherlands (figure 2b). in addition, the likelihood that alternative tree topologies generated arbitrarily switching branches in the tree (arrows in figure 2b), implying different dissemination scenarios, was not significantly different (shimodaira-hasegawa test, table 1) than the likelihood of the tree inferred from the real data. in other words, it is not possible with the present data to decide which branching pattern (and, therefore, which phylogeographic reconstruction) most likely represents actual dissemination routes among european countries.as the number of available genome sequences is rapidly growing, sars-cov-2 full genome data sets are steadily showing less than 40% unresolved quartets in the center: 38.6% on march 18 (figure s1c in multimedia appendix 3), 32.3% on march 25 (figure s1d in multimedia appendix 3), 28.9% on march 30th (figure s1e in multimedia appendix 3), and 27.6% on april 24 (figure s1f in multimedia appendix 3). this indicates that the amount of phylogenetic information can now potentially be used to define phylogenetic relationships among strains. by plotting the mean genetic distance of each sequence from the root of a phylogeny versus the sequence sampling time, we can test for a significant linear correlation, which is necessary to calibrate a reliable molecular clock [29] (figure s3 in multimedia appendix 3). as expected in genomes obtained over a very short period of time (approximately 3 months) since the beginning of the outbreak, the correlation in the current data is fairly weak (table 1). reconstructing the phylogenetic relationships of the same european sub-clade a discussed above with the sequences available on march 18, 2020 showed a much more complex snapshot of the spread of sars-cov-2 (figure s4 in multimedia appendix 3). a closer look at subclade a reveals that even with more genomes available, inference is biased by oversampling of some countries and undersampling of others (figure s4 in multimedia appendix 3). moreover, when estimating the number of intermediates in the putative transmission chain, we found that numerous links among samples were still missing (figure s5 in multimedia appendix 3). in such a scenario, it is not advisable to extrapolate conclusions on the origin and dissemination of strains.the phylogenetic signal is increasing in the global alignment; however, likelihood mapping per country using data from countries reporting the highest numbers of cases (united states, italy, spain, germany, and france) indicates that some local data sets lacked sufficient signals up to march 30, 2020 (figure s6 in multimedia appendix 3). in particular, a lack of signal was found in sequence sets from italy (26 genomes, 45 variant sites, 0.2% of total sites in the genome, 11 parsimony informative), the united states (612 genomes, 675 variant sites, 2.3% of total sites in the genome, 158 parsimony informative) and china (300 genomes, 742 variant sites, 2.5% of total sites in the genome, 98 parsimony informative). the top 5 contributing states in the united states are washington (405/612, 66.2%), california (45/612, 7.4%), minnesota (33/612, 5.4%), wisconsin (29/612, 4.7%), and utah (22/612, 3.6%); 42 genomes (6.9%) are not labeled with a state or city. the united states data set comprised mostly sequences collected in washington state (423/612 genomes, 69.1%). the top 5 contributing provinces in china are shanghai (96/300, 32.0%), guangdong (80/300, 26.7%), hong kong (30/300, 10.0%), hubei (31/300, 10.3%), hangzhou (9/300, 3.0%), and shandong (9/300, 3.0%); 20 genomes (6.7%) are not labeled with a province or city. neither china nor the united states showed a phylogenetic signal despite the high number of genome sequences available (figure s6 in multimedia appendix 3). contrastingly, and unexpectedly, countries with low numbers of genome sequences (germany, spain, and france) did show a phylogenetic signal (figure s6 in multimedia appendix 3). the presence of a phylogenetic signal (<40% unresolved quartets in the center) was detected only for germany (27 genomes, 34 variant sites, 0.2% of total sites in the genome, 15 parsimony informative), with düsseldorf and north rhine westphalia being the highest contributing regions (12 and 11 genomes, respectively); spain (40 genomes, 60 variant sites, 0.2% of total sites in the genome, 23 parsimony informative), with madrid and comunidad valenciana being the highest contributing regions (18 and 10 genomes, respectively); and france (119 genomes, 155 variant sites, 0.5% of total sites in the genome, 44 parsimony informative), with auvergne-rhône-alpes, hauts de france, and bretagne being the highest contributing regions (42, 30, and 13 genomes, respectively). despite the presence of a phylogenetic signal in these countries, only the genomes from france also showed a temporal signal that would allow the calibration of a molecular clock and reframing of the phylogenetic and phylogeographic inferences in the spatiotemporal dimension (figure s7 in multimedia appendix 3). on the other hand, the transmission matrix for france indicates that considerable links are still missing due to unsampled infected individuals, limiting the reliability of transmission cluster studies based on the sequence data (figure s8 in multimedia appendix 3). when we looked almost a month later at the phylogenetic signals for the countries that reported the highest numbers of confirmed cases as of april 24, 2020, we found that these countries showed sufficient phylogenetic signals (figure s9 in multimedia appendix 3). however, while france and germany also displayed sufficient temporal signals to allow in-depth molecular epidemiology studies, at least in principle, data sets from the united states (3.9-fold increase on april 24 with respect to march 30), the united kingdom (5.5-fold increase), and spain (3.9-fold increase), still showed weak or no temporal signals (figure s10 in multimedia appendix 3) despite the substantial increases in the number of available sequences.characterization of transmission events is fundamental to understand the dynamics of any infectious disease. from a public health standpoint, it is crucial to be able to trace transmissions at the local level. within-country identification of active transmission clusters would open the way to more effective public health interventions. the most optimal inference of transmission events would contain a combination of genetic and epidemiological data for a joint analysis. indeed, transmission investigations that have been performed to date have been based on contact-tracing, epidemiological, and clinical data [33,34]. bayesian analysis [35], which infers phylogenetic and phylogeographic patterns from a posterior distribution of trees, can facilitate comparisons of different evolutionary scenarios, aid retrieval of the correct topology, and estimate an accurate evolutionary rate using relaxed clock methods [36]. more genome sequences, sampled at different time points and from diverse geographic areas, are becoming available daily; therefore, in-depth bayesian phylodynamic and phylogeographic analyses of the covid-19 pandemic will soon be a viable option. however, it is important to consider the dramatic effects of inhomogeneous sampling, lack of phylogenetic signal, and missing data on phylogeographic reconstructions [37].published scientific data and media are currently easily accessible to a worldwide audience; proper weighing of the information being shared is more important than ever. in the first months of the epidemic, many researchers rushed to study local dynamics and to publish their findings without assessing the bias in sampling or the presence of a phylogenetic or temporal signal. as shown by our analysis, as of march 2020, the united states and italy, the two countries with the highest numbers of confirmed cases, did not show sufficiently large or representative sampling. this finding is extremely worrisome and raises questions regarding the generalizability of the results of studies investigating the origin of the introduction of sars-cov-2 in italy [8,12] or of the circulation of sars-cov-2 in the state of washington in early march 2020 [9]. rushed studies [10,13] that are acclaimed by news media despite being criticized in the literature [16-18] and on social media [14] may do more harm than good. to recapitulate the importance of examining phylogenetic information in available data before performing phylogenetic inferences that may lead to erroneous or unreliable conclusions, we propose the use of a well-established phylogenetic checkpoint pipeline (figure s11 in multimedia appendix 3) [22]. the first step that researchers must take before they complete their phylogenetic studies is determining whether the data set is biased in terms of the number of genomes per given location, host, source, etc. in the specific case of sars-cov-2, it would be advisable to calculate the correlations between the confirmed cases and genomes per country. if this first step is completed, the second step is to build a proper codon-based alignment while ensuring that the alignment is in frame; this is extremely important when researchers study selective pressures. the third step consists of assessing the presence of a sufficient phylogenetic signal and the absence of nucleotide substitution saturation, which decreases the phylogenetic information contained in the sequences [38]. the analysis can proceed to the fourth step, determining the presence or absence of recombination, only if the previous criteria are met. recombination can impair the phylogenetic signal [39,40] and this is another important checkpoint before inferring a phylogeny. in this study, we did not test for recombination for the sars-cov-2 data set, as absence of recombination in the human lineage has previously been shown [41]; however, because coronaviruses are prone to recombination events, this step should be performed as more sequences become available. detecting the presence of a temporal signal is an additional step that must be performed before the inference of a phylogeny scaled in time. without a correlation between genetic divergence and time, it is not possible to calibrate a molecular clock and therefore to obtain a phylogeny scaled in time, regardless of whether the method employed to date the phylogeny is bayesian [35], maximum likelihood [42], or least-squares dating [43]. only when all these checkpoints have been considered and given proper weight should subsequent analyses be considered by choosing adequate phylogeny inference methods.the genomic data set available on gisaid is rapidly growing; thus, a limitation of our study is that we can only provide a snapshot of the past, and this may not reflect the most current situation. we have already shown an increase in phylogenetic and temporal signals that may allow researchers to attempt to estimate the origin and spatiotemporal dissemination of sars-cov-2 as long as sampling bias is properly taken into account. however, it is important to reiterate that during the month of march 2020, we deem that the molecular epidemiology data and studies were not sufficiently solid to provide a scientifically sound analysis of sars-cov-2 spread. thus, we suggest that any conclusions drawn about existing lineages and the direction of viral spread that were based on the sequence data available up to march 30, 2020 should be considered preliminary and hypothesis-generating at best. the evolutionary dynamics of sars-cov-2 spread is revealing an unprecedented amount of information, which is essential to make policy decisions. the whole of humanity is threatened by the current pandemic, and policymakers must adjust their mitigation measures while the pandemic itself is developing. some of the urgent answers required lie in the timely availability of abundant, high-quality genetic data not only from countries experiencing a high number of reported cases but also from countries that appear to be experiencing, at least currently, a lower number of infections.we are currently faced with a potential global epidemic of a new coronavirus that has infected thousands of people in china and is spreading rapidly around the world. in the end of january 2020, the who has declared it a global emergency (who, 2020) . the novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2), first isolated in wuhan china, has already caused more infections than the previous severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak of 2002 and 2003. the virus is a sars related coronavirus (sarsr-cov), and it is genetically associated with sarsr-cov strains that infect bats in china . it causes severe respiratory illness, which the who recently named covid-19 disease. it has high fatality rate , can be transmitted from person to person, has infected over 70,000 individuals and has spread to over 30 countries in less than two months (who, 2020) .© the author(s) 2020. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution non-commercial license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com this coronavirus outbreak has been unprecedented; so too is the way that the scientific community has responded to it. they have openly and rapidly shared genomic and clinical data as never seen before allowing research results to be released almost instantaneously. this has helped the understanding of the transmission dynamics, the development of rapid diagnostic and has informed public health response. here, we present a new contribution that can speed up this communal effort. the genome detective coronavirus typing tool is a free-of-charge web-based bioinformatics pipeline that can accurately and quickly identify, assemble and classify coronaviruses genomes. the tool also identifies changes at nucleotides, coding regions and proteins using a novel dynamic aligner to allow tracking new viral mutations (figure 1 ). figure 1 : genome detective coronavirus typing tool assembles genomes from next generation sequencing (ngs) in fastaq format or assembled genomes in fasta format. a user can submit up to 1gb of ngs data or 2,000 assembled genomic sequences. for each assembled genomic sequence, the tool identifies the virus species, constructs a phylogenetic tree and identifies phylogenetic clusters, which includes the novel coronavirus identified in wuhan china in 2019 (sars-cov-2). the tool identifies changes at nucleotides, coding regions and proteins using a novel dynamic aligner and display all of the mutations in detailed tables and reports. . to this reference dataset, we added 47 whole genomes of the current coronavirus 2019 (sars-cov-2) outbreak that originated in wuhan, china, in december 2019. the sars-cov-2 sequences were downloaded from the gisaid database (https://www.gisaid.org) together with annotation of its original location, collection date and originating and submitting laboratory. the sars-cov-2 data generators are properly acknowledged in the acknowledgements section of this paper and detailed information is provided in supplementary table 1. the 431 reference wgs were aligned with muscle (edgar 2004) . the alignment was manually edited until a codon alignment was attained in all coding sequences (cds). a maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree, 1000 bootstrap replicates was constructed in phyml (guidon & gascuel 2003; lemoine et al., 2018 ) and a bayesian tree using mrbayes (ronquist & huelsenbeck 2003) were constructed. the trees were visualized in figtree (rambaut 2018). we selected 25 reference sequences that represent the diversity of each well-defined phylogenetic cluster (with bootstrap support of 100% and posterior probability of 1). we identified five well supported phylogenetic clusters with more than two sequences of sarsr-cov and used them to set up our automated phylogenetic classification tool. cluster 1 included sars strains from the 2002 and 2003 asian outbreaks. in our tool, we named this cluster sars-cov outbreak 2000s but may rename it as sars-a if a new proposed naming system for sarsr-cov is adopted in the near future (rambaut 2020). cluster 2 (provisionally named as sars related cov) includes 7 sequences from bats which did not cause large human outbreaks. cluster 3 (named as bat sars-cov hku3) includes three wgs sampled from rhinolophus sinicus (i.e. chinese rufous horseshoe bats). cluster 4 (bat sars-cov zxc21/zc45) includes two sarsr-cov sampled from rhinolophus sinicus bats in zhoushan, china. cluster 5 (virus named sars-cov-2 by the ictv committee and disease named covid-19 by the who) includes three public sequences from the outbreak. we identified this cluster with many sequences from gisaid but kept only three ones as these were the first genbank sequences. the first whole genome of sars-cov-2 was kindly shared by prof. yong-zhen zhang and colleagues in the virological.org website. detailed information about the phylogenetic reference datasets are available in supplementary table 2. the phylogenetic reference dataset was used to create an automated coronavirus typing tool using the genome detective framework (vilsker et al., 2019 , fonseca et al., 2019 . to determine the accuracy of this tool, each of the 431 test wgs was considered for evaluation (i.e. 384 reference sequences from vipr and 47 public sars-cov-2 sequences). the sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of our method was calculated for both species assignment and phylogenetic clustering of classifying query sequences in an automated fashion involves two steps. the first step enables virus species assignments and the second, which is restricted to sarsr-cov, includes phylogenetic analysis. the first classification analysis subjects a query sequence to blast and aga analysi. aga is a novel alignment method for nucleic acid sequences against annotated genomes from ncbi refseq virus database. aga (deforche 2017 ) expands the optimal alignment algorithms of smith-waterman (smith & waterman 1981) and gotoh (gotoh 1982 ) based on an induction state with additional parameters. the result is a more accurate aligner, as it takes into account both nucleotide and protein scores and identifies all of the polymorphisms at nucleotide and amino acid levels. in the second step, a query sequence is aligned against the phylogenetic reference dataset using -add alignment option in the mafft software (katoh & standley 2013) . in addition, a neighbor joining phylogenetic tree is constructed using the hky distance metric with gamma among-site rate variation with 1,000 bootstrap replicates using paup* (swofford) . the query sequence is assigned to a particular phylogenetic cluster if it clusters monophyletically with that clade or a subset of it with bootstrap support >70%. if the bootstrap support is <70%, the genotype is reported to be unassigned.the result of the phylogenetic and mutational analysis performed by aga is available in a detailed report. this report contains an interactive phylogenetic tree and genome mapper (supplementary figure 1) . it also presents the virus species and cluster assignments and a detailed table 4a ). interestingly there were four amino acid insertions at position 237 (a237_f238inshrsy, genome nt position 22202_22203inscatagaagttat)), which is just upstream from a cleavage site. there is also a four amino acid insertion prra at the spike protein at positions 681 to 684.this is at the junction of s1 and s2 and creates a new polybase cleavage site. our tool also allows us to compare mutations with other related sequences, such as the pangolin, bat ratg13, the bat sars-cov and sars sin940 (picture 2 and supplementary table 2). the most diverse coding regions were the cds sars8a and sars8b. in these two regions, only 30% of the amino acids were identical. sars8b protein was truncated early and its cds had four stop codons (supplementary table 4sa ). our coronavirus typing tool also allows a query sequence to be analysed against a sequence in the phylogenetic reference dataset. for example, the wh_human1_china_2019dec (genbank: mn908947) the identity was 87.5% to the bat sequence bat_sl_covzxc21 (genbank: mg772934). this was one of the bat-cov sequences that were most related to n2019-cov we developed and released the genome detective coronavirus typing tool as a free-of-charge resource in the third week of january 2020 in order to help the rapid characterization of covid-19 infections. this tool allows the analysis of whole or partial viral genomes within minutes. it accepts assembled genomes in fasta format or raw ngs data in fastq format from illumina, ion torrent, pacbio or oxford nanopore technologies (ont) can be submitted to the genome detective virus tool (vilsker et al., 2019) to automatically assemble the consensus genome prior to executing the coronavirus typing tool. user effort is minimal, and a user can submit multiple fasta sequences at once.the tool uses a novel and dynamic aligner, aga, to allow submitted sequences to be queried against reference genomes, using both nucleotide and amino acid similarity scores. this allows accurate identification of other coronavirus species and the tracking of new viral mutations as the outbreak expands globally. it also performs detailed analysis of the coding regions and proteins. moreover, it can easily be updated to add new phylogenetic clusters if new outbreaks arise or if the classification nomenclature changes. the tool has been able to correctly classify all the recently released sars-cov-2 genomes, as well as all the 2002-2003 sars outbreak sequencesin conclusion, the genome detective coronavirus typing tool is a webbased and user-friendly software application that allows the identification and characterization of novel coronavirus genomes.we are currently faced with a potential global epidemic of a new coronavirus that has infected thousands of people in china and is spreading rapidly around the world. in the end of january 2020, the who has declared it a global emergency (who, 2020) . the novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2), first isolated in wuhan, china, has already caused more infections than the previous severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak of 2002 and 2003. the virus is a sars-related coronavirus (sarsr-cov), and it is genetically associated with sarsr-cov strains that infect bats in china (lu et al., 2020; zhu et al., 2020) . it causes severe respiratory illness, which the who recently named covid-19 disease. it has high fatality rate (huang et al., 2020) , can be transmitted from person to person, has infected over 70 000 individuals and has spread to over 30 countries in less than 2 months (who, 2020) .this coronavirus outbreak has been unprecedented; so too is the way that the scientific community has responded to it. they have openly and rapidly shared genomic and clinical data as never seen v c the author(s) 2020. published by oxford university press.this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution non-commercial license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com before allowing research results to be released almost instantaneously. this has helped the understanding of the transmission dynamics, the development of rapid diagnostic and has informed public health response. here, we present a new contribution that can speed up this communal effort. the genome detective coronavirus typing tool is a free-of-charge web-based bioinformatics pipeline that can accurately and quickly identify, assemble and classify coronaviruses genomes. the tool also identifies changes at nucleotides, coding regions and proteins using a novel dynamic aligner to allow tracking new viral mutations (fig. 1 ). outbreak that originated in wuhan, china, in december 2019. the sars-cov-2 sequences were downloaded from the gisaid database (https://www.gisaid.org) together with annotation of its original location, collection date and originating and submitting laboratory. the sars-cov-2 data generators are properly acknowledged in the acknowledgements section of this article and detailed information is provided in supplementary table s1 .the 431 reference wgs were aligned with muscle (edgar, 2004) . the alignment was manually edited until a codon alignment was attained in all coding sequences (cds). a maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree, 1000 bootstrap replicates were constructed in phyml (guindon and gascuel, 2003; lemoine et al., 2018 ) and a bayesian tree using mrbayes (ronquist and huelsenbeck, 2003) were constructed. the trees were visualized in figtree (rambaut, 2018) . we selected 25 reference sequences that represent the diversity of each well-defined phylogenetic cluster (with bootstrap support of 100% and posterior probability of 1). we identified five well-supported phylogenetic clusters with more than two sequences of sarsr-cov and used them to set up our automated phylogenetic classification tool. cluster 1 included sars strains from the 2002 and 2003 asian outbreaks. in our tool, we named this cluster sars-cov outbreak 2000s but may rename it as sars-cov-1 if a new proposed naming system for sarsr-cov is adopted in the near future. cluster 2 (provisionally named as sars related cov) includes seven sequences from bats which did not cause large human outbreaks. cluster 3 (named as bat sars-cov hku3) includes three wgs sampled from rhinolophus sinicus (i.e. chinese rufous horseshoe bats). cluster 4 (bat sars-cov zxc21/zc45) includes two sarsr-cov sampled from rhinolophus sinicus bats in zhoushan, china. cluster 5 (virus named sars-cov-2 by the ictv committee and disease named covid-19 by the who) includes three public sequences from the outbreak. we identified this cluster with many sequences from gisaid but kept only three ones as these were the first genbank sequences. the first whole genome of sars-cov-2 was kindly shared by prof. yong-zhen zhang and colleagues in the virological.org website. detailed information about the phylogenetic reference datasets is available in supplementary table s2 .the phylogenetic reference dataset was used to create an automated coronavirus typing tool using the genome detective framework (fonseca et al., 2019; vilsker et al., 2019) . to determine the accuracy of this tool, each of the 431 test wgs was considered for evaluation (i.e. 384 reference sequences from vipr and 47 public sars-cov-2 sequences). the sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of our method were calculated for both species assignment and phylogenetic clustering of sarsr-cov. sensitivity was computed by the formula tp tpþfn , specificity by tn tnþfp and accuracy by classifying query sequences in an automated fashion involves two steps. the first step enables virus species assignments and the second, which is restricted to sarsr-cov, includes phylogenetic analysis. the first classification analysis subjects a query sequence to blast and aga analysis. aga is a novel alignment method for nucleic acid sequences against annotated genomes from ncbi refseq virus database. aga (deforche, 2017) expands the optimal alignment algorithms of smith and waterman (1981) and gotoh (1982) based on an induction state with additional parameters. the result is a more accurate aligner, as it takes into account both nucleotide and protein scores and identifies all of the polymorphisms at nucleotide and amino acid levels. in the second step, a query sequence is aligned against the phylogenetic reference dataset using -add alignment option in the mafft software (katoh and standley, 2013) . in addition, a neighbor-joining phylogenetic tree is constructed using the hky distance metric with gamma among-site rate variation with 1000 bootstrap replicates using paup* (swofford, 2003) . the query sequence is assigned to a particular phylogenetic cluster if it clusters monophyletically with that clade or a subset of it with bootstrap support >70%. if the bootstrap support is <70%, the genotype is reported to be unassigned.the result of the phylogenetic and mutational analysis performed by aga is available in a detailed report. this report fig. 1 . genome detective coronavirus typing tool assembles genomes from nextgeneration sequencing (ngs) in fastaq format or assembled genomes in fasta format. a user can submit up to 1 gb of ngs data or 2000 assembled genomic sequences. for each assembled genomic sequence, the tool identifies the virus species, constructs a phylogenetic tree and identifies phylogenetic clusters, which includes the novel coronavirus identified in wuhan, china in 2019 (sars-cov-2). the tool identifies changes at nucleotides, coding regions and proteins using a novel dynamic aligner and display all of the mutations in detailed tables and reports amino acid (aa) alignment is compared with four-related coronaviruses. the tool also calculates the percentage aa identities with reference to sars-cov-2 as shown here for the complete (1274 aa) spike protein contains an interactive phylogenetic tree and genome mapper ( supplementary fig. s1 ). it also presents the virus species and cluster assignments and a detailed table that provides information about open reading frames (orfs), cds and proteins. this table can be expanded to show nucleotide and amino acid mutations that differentiate a query sequence from their species refseq or from a sequence in the phylogenetic reference dataset. all results can be exported to a variety of file formats (xml, csv, excel, nexus or fasta).the genome detective coronavirus typing tool correctly classified all of the 175 sarsr-cov sequences at species level, i.e. specificity, sensitivity and accuracy of 100%. furthermore, all of the 47 sars-cov-2 wgs that were isolated in china (n ¼ 36), usa (n ¼ 5), france (n ¼ 2), thailand (n ¼ 2), japan (n ¼ 1) and taiwan (n ¼ 1) were correctly classified at phylogenetic cluster level as sars-cov-2, which may be renamed as sars-b. in addition, we classified with very high specificity, sensitivity and accuracy (i.e. 100%) all of the 112 sars outbreak wgs of 2002 and 2003. we also achieved perfect classification (i.e. specificity, sensitivity and accuracy of 100%) for all of beta coronavirus, human_coronavirus_ hku1, mers-cov, rousettus bat coronavirus hku9 and tylonycteris_bat_coronavirus_hku4 at species level. for a detailed overview of assignment performance, please refer to the supplementary table s3 .our tool also allows detailed analysis of coding regions and proteins for each of the coronavirus species. for example, the analysis of the first released sars-cov-2 sequence, the wh_human1_china_2019dec (genbank: mn908947) demonstrated at genome level, the nucleotide (nt) identity was 79.0% to the reference strain of sarsr-cov (accession: nc_004718.3) and that the envelop small membrane protein (protein e) is the most similar protein. in total, 94.8% (73/77) of the amino acids were identical; the four amino acid differences were located at positions 55 (t55s), 56 (v56f), 69 (69deletion) and 70 (g70r). the spike protein (protein s), which can be associated with virulence, was 76.2% identical to the reference strain of sarsr-cov (supplementary table s4a ). interestingly, there were four amino acid insertions at position 237 (a237_f238inshrsy, genome nt position 22202_22203inscatagaagttat), which is just upstream from a cleavage site. there is also a four amino acid insertion prra at the spike protein at positions 681 to 684. this is at the junction of s1 and s2 and creates a new polybase cleavage site. our tool also allows us to compare mutations with other-related sequences, such as the pangolin, bat ratg13, the bat sars-cov and sars sin940 (figure 2 and supplementary table s2 ). the most diverse coding regions were the cds sars8a and sars8b. in these two regions, only 30% of the amino acids were identical. sars8b protein was truncated early and its cds had four stop codons (supplementary table s4a ).our coronavirus typing tool also allows a query sequence to be analyzed against a sequence in the phylogenetic reference dataset. for example, the wh_human1_china_2019dec (genbank: mn908947) the identity was 87.5% to the bat sequence bat_sl_ covzxc21 (genbank: mg772934). this was one of the bat-cov sequences that were most related to n2019-cov (lu et al., 2020) . the envelop small membrane protein (protein e) was 100% identical (supplementary table s4b ). when the sars-cov-2 isolated from france (betacov/france/idf0373/2020) was analyzed with our tool and compared with the sars-cov-2 wh_human1_ china_2019dec strain (accession: mn908947), this sequence was 99.9% identical and had only two nt mutations (supplementary  table s4c ). these two differences were located on positions: 22551g>t and 26016g>t, which caused three amino acid mutations (e2 glycoprotein protein mutation: v354f (22551g>t), sars3a protein mutations: g250v (26016g>t) and sars3b protein mutations: v110f (26016g>t) (detailed in supplementary table   s4c -ii). the analysis of a wgs in fasta format takes approximately 60 s.we developed and released the genome detective coronavirus typing tool as a free-of-charge resource in the third week of january 2020 in order to help the rapid characterization of covid-19 infections. this tool allows the analysis of whole or partial viral genomes within minutes. it accepts assembled genomes in fasta format or raw next-generation sequencing data in fastq format from illumina, ion torrent, pacbio or oxford nanopore technologies (ont) can be submitted to the genome detective virus tool (vilsker et al., 2019) to automatically assemble the consensus genome prior to executing the coronavirus typing tool. user effort is minimal, and a user can submit multiple fasta sequences at once.the tool uses a novel and dynamic aligner, aga, to allow submitted sequences to be queried against reference genomes, using both nucleotide and amino acid similarity scores. this allows accurate identification of other coronavirus species and the tracking of new viral mutations as the outbreak expands globally. it also performs detailed analysis of the coding regions and proteins. moreover, it can easily be updated to add new phylogenetic clusters if new outbreaks arise or if the classification nomenclature changes. the tool has been able to correctly classify all the recently released sars-cov-2 genomes, as well as all the 2002-2003 sars outbreak sequences.in conclusion, the genome detective coronavirus typing tool is a web-based and user-friendly software application that allows the identification and characterization of novel coronavirus genomes.coronaviruses (covs) are members of the subfamily coronavirinae in the family coronaviridae and the order nidovirales. they can cause respiratory and intestinal infections in animals and humans [1], and are considered to be highly pathogenic to humans since the outbreak of sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) in guangzhou, china in 2003 [2]. another highly pathogenic coronavirus, middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), emerged ten years after sars and caused hundreds of fatalities. four other types of coronaviruses which can infect humans but only cause mild symptoms are hcov-229e, hcov-hku1, hcov-nl63, and hcov-oc43 [1]. coronaviruses are divided into alpha-coronaviruses and beta-coronaviruses which may infect mammals, gamma-coronaviruses, and delta-coronaviruses which primarily infect birds. among the six human coronaviruses, hcov-229e and hcov-nl63 are alpha-coronaviruses, while the other four hcovs are beta-coronaviruses. the viruses were initially sorted into these genera based on serology but are now taxonomically classified by genomic phylogeny [2,3].in december 2019, a severe respiratory disease was reported in wuhan, china, and spread in many provinces radiating outwards. now it has become a global pandemic, which has already caused over 3 million confirmed cases and 235,290 deaths in the globe. chinese health authorities were the first to report the complete genome of sars-cov-2 in genbank (nc_045512) and annotated 11 open reading frames (orfs) [4]. the genomic structure of coronavirus sars-cov-2 is shown in figure 1, which is similar to other beta-coronaviruses. the 5’-terminal two-thirds of the genome encodes replicase polyprotein 1ab (pp1ab) with a length of 21,290 nt and contains 16 predicted non-structural proteins. the 3’ terminus encodes four structural proteins and other non-structural proteins, including spike glycoprotein (s), orf3a, envelope small membrane protein (e), membrane protein (m), orf6, orf7a, orf7b, orf8, nucleocapsid protein (n) and orf10 in order. especially, the spike s protein with the receptor-binding domain (rbd) is the primary determinant of viral tropism and is responsible for host receptor binding and membrane fusion [5,6]. during the sars-cov infection, s protein first binds to the cellular receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), and the ace2–virus complex is then translocated to endosomes, where the s protein is cleaved by the endosomal acid proteases (cathepsin l) to activate its fusion activity [7]. therefore, sars-cov-2 s protein may be the target of new sars-cov-2 vaccines [7].considering the epidemic nature sars-cov-2 in the covid-19 outbreak, identifying the intermediate and original host of sars-cov-2 is crucial for preventing new large-scale infection and transmission of viruses. coronaviruses can spread with direct or intermediate hosts such as avians, bats, bovines, camels, canines, civets, felines, murines, and porcines [2]. pangolins are recently identified as possible hosts for coronaviruses [8]. it is well acknowledged that controlling first-generation infection cases has more significant effects than later person-to-person transmission stage. a series of policies such as locking down wuhan had been established by the chinese government with significant effects. it is therefore of great importance to identify the correct host and to cut off the transmission from animals to humans as soon as possible. bats were suggested as the natural reservoir hosts for sars-cov and most coronaviruses [9,10,11], and subsequently, the discovery of sars-related coronaviruses globally supports the connection between bats and coronaviruses. among the intermediate hosts, masked palm civets were first considered as the host of sars-cov [12], while later research revealed that the coronavirus strains found in civets were transmitted from other animals [13]. on the other hand, dromedary camels were considered highly related in the case of mers-cov [14].genomic phylogenetics provides insights on the evolution and classification of viruses, and is especially important for tracking the origin of sars-cov-2 [15,16,17]. based on alignment approaches, current research only associated the sars-cov-2 strains with sars-covs. therefore, in this study, we first apply an alignment-free approach named natural vector to compare 791 complete genomes of human coronaviruses and 95 sars-cov-2 strains collected since the outbreak in wuhan to construct phylogenetic analysis. the analysis of protein sequences and structures of the viruses infers the relationship among coronaviruses as well. the mutations in genomes can be an indicator of the further change in protein sequences, while proteins serve as the functional units to proceed infection on animals or humans. thus using both genome and protein information in the study could validate each other and provide us with a comprehensive understanding of the sars-cov-2 strains. on the one hand, the genomes include all the necessary information that a species/virus inherits and selecting a partial region would lead to a loss of information. on the other hand, proteins perform a variety of functions in almost the whole process of infection. therefore, in our work, the phylogenetic study was based on the genomes data, and the identification of host relies on both the results from genomes and proteins.further, our main study is to infer the intermediate host of sars-cov-2 based on the coronaviruses found in various animal hosts. by calculating the distance between sars-cov-2 and coronavirus genomes found in animals, we may elucidate the infection chain among animal hosts and finally to humans. notably, we also utilized the spike proteins data in the coronaviruses of various hosts.theoretically, it has been proved that the natural vector gives a true distance among dna or protein sequences. other similar researches have also utilized the spike protein sequence to identify the host of sars-cov-2, previous studies suggested snakes being hosts depending on condo usages [18]. however, in a later work [19], this conclusion was refuted by showing that codon usage does not determine the hosts. our work here considers each host source as a group and applies the hausdorff distance in mathematics to compare the coronaviruses from different hosts. the transmission path we found here was another proof of pangolins as intermediate hosts firstly proposed by [8].the phylogeny study of coronavirus was based on the comparison between sars-cov-2 strains and known human coronaviruses. the sars-cov-2 strains were downloaded from gisaid (https://platform.gisaid.org/epi3/frontend) on 23 february, 2020, which were collected from patients at the early stage of the outbreak in wuhan, china. 731 known human coronavirus complete genomes were downloaded from ncbi directly, which consist of 29 hcov-229e strains, 52 hcov-nl63 strains, 34 hcov-hku1 strains, 153 hcov-oc43 strains, 214 sars-covs and 249 mers-covs. the genomes from non-human hosts were filtered and excluded. all sequences used in this research consisted of only four nucleotides, a, c, g, t, without ambiguous ‘n’ resulted from low sequencing accuracy. we also selected 38 coronavirus genomes from recent and previous research to construct another phylogenetic tree, with the accession numbers listed in the tree as well.the host identification was also based on these 95 complete sars-cov-2 records from gisaid. in addition, we downloaded the animal coronaviruses from ncbi genbank. our analysis covered the ten common animal hosts: avian, bat, bovine, camel, canine, civet, feline, porcine, and pangolin. the coronaviruses in three hosts (bat, camel, and murine) can be either alpha or beta types. though coronaviruses found in canines were also claimed to contain both alpha and beta types, we didn’t find the reliable beta coronaviruses genomes from canines on ncbi genbank. therefore, we considered the covs in three hosts (bat, camel and murine) as different groups, giving 13 host sources as shown in the following sections. two samples from pangolin were sequenced in guangxi province, china in 2017, while the third was sequenced in guangdong province in 2019. these pangolin samples were smuggled into southern china according to a source [8]. pangolin is a popular wild animal in the chinese market. the covid-19 outbreak in wuhan this time was firstly located at a so-called seafood market, but actually it was a live animal market because a variety of animals were for sale in this seafood market for a long time. we collected 823 coronaviruses with other animal hosts on ncbi and 3 pangolin-covs from gisaid and compared these 826 records with the 95 sars-cov-2 strains.for the research based on protein data, the corresponding spike protein sequences of these 826 host-covs and 95 sars-cov-2 strains were downloaded from ncbi. polyproteins of a coronavirus were processed by viral proteinases to yield mature proteins. among them, 3cl proteinase performs at least eleven proteolytic cleavages within the polyprotein 1ab (pp1ab), which was considered to be the drug target [20]. the spike protein, which is critical for sars-cov-2 infection and differs cov types, is responsible for ace2 receptor binding and membrane fusion. the spike protein sequence of betacov/pangolin/guangxi/p2v/2017 was obtained in [8]. five protein structures of human coronavirus 3cl proteinase and five structures of spike protein were downloaded from rcsb (https://www.rcsb.org/). all the accession numbers of the datasets are shown in supplementary files s1, s2 and s3.many alignment-free methods have been proposed in recent years, such as feature frequency profiles (ffp) [21], fourier-based method [22,23,24]. one important alignment-free method, named natural vector (nv) [25], describes a nucleotide sequence by a 12-dimensional numerical vector based on the distribution of nucleotides. the natural vector method has been successfully applied in the molecular evolution of bacteria and viruses [26,27,28]. given an arbitrary dna/rna sequence, its natural vector can be calculated instantaneously with little computational cost, and the correspondence between the natural vector and the sequence is one-to-one. this indicates that the key information hidden in the sequence can be extracted by the natural vector method. here the “key information” refers to the information that can reflect the real evolutionary pattern and therefore the corresponding distances can represent the true phylogenetic relationship. so we apply the natural vector approach to study the genetic relationships of coronaviruses on both genome data and protein data for a comprehensive understanding of sars-cov-2 strains.let s=(s1,s2,…,sn) be a dna sequence of length n, where si∈{a,c,g,t}. let s[k][i] be the location of the i-th occurrence of nucleotide k. the distribution of a specific nucleotide k within a dna sequence can be described by three quantities:nk: the number of occurrences of nucleotide k within the sequence.μk: the mean distance of nucleotide k from the first position. μk=∑i=1nks[k][i]nkd2k: the second normalized central moment of the distribution of nucleotide k. d2k=∑i=1nk(s[k][i]−μk)2n×nktherefore, the 12-dim natural vector (nv) of dna sequence can be defined as: (na,nc,ng,nt,μa,μc,μg,μt,d2a,d2c,d2g,d2t). by replacing four types of nucleotides to 20 amino acids: si∈{a,r,n,d,c,e,q,g,h,i,l,k,m,f,p,s,t,w,y,v}, natural vector can be also applied to protein sequences. then each dna or protein sequence is converted to a numerical unit. thus, using the nv representation, we can efficiently perform mathematical analysis on dna sequences and further infer the relationship of the sequences through the corresponding natural vectors.the biological distance between two sequences can be expressed as the euclidean distance between the two corresponding natural vectors in 12-dim space, as applied on many datasets [25]. therefore, for a dataset of n sequences, the relationship is here described as a n×n pairwise distance matrix. the pairwise distance matrix is a symmetric distance with all positive non-diagonal elements, where element (i,j) represents the distance from ith sequence to the jth. diagonal elements are all zero because diagonal (i,i) represents the distance from i to itself. by defining the distance between two vectors, we gave a reliable measurement of the similarity/dissimilarity between two dna sequences based on the correspondence between a dna sequence and its nv.in the host identification, the distance between the coronaviruses from two hosts was measured by mathematical techniques as well. here we first applied hausdorff distance to calculate the distance between two groups of coronaviruses with different hosts [29]. in mathematics, the hausdorff distance, named after felix hausdorff [30], measures how far two subsets of a metric space are from each other. it turns the set of all non-empty compact subsets of a metric space to form a metric space in its right. let x and y be two non-empty subsets and the hausdorff distance d(x,y) is defined as follows:d(x,y)=max{supx∈xinfy∈yd(x,y),supy∈yinfx∈xd(x,y)}the matlab code of calculating hausdorff distance can be downloaded from mathworks (https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/26738-hausdorff-distance). hausdorff distance satisfies the three requirements of a real distance from the mathematical perspective:the distance between two sets is always non-negative. the distance is zero if and only if the two sets are exactly the same.the direction doesn’t change the distance value, i.e., d(x,y)=d(y,x).the distance satisfies the triangular inequality, i.e., d(x,y)≤d(x,z)+d(z,y), for any x, y, and z.another way to measure the distance between two sets is proposed here named center distance based on convex hulls. after the transformation from sequences to vectors in euclidean space. let a={nv1,nv2,…,nvn} represent a point set of nvs of n protein sequences. then the convex hull of a is defined as c(a)={p|p=∑i=1nαinvi,∑i=1nαi=1,αi≥0,1≤i≤n}based on the definition above, we can know that a convex hull is the smallest convex set containing the given point set. for two sets of vectors, each set can be depicted by its convex hull, and the barycenter of each hull is considered as the representative of the hull. therefore, the euclidean distance between the two barycenters represents the average distance between two sets as well.it is crucial to define a correct distance when studying the similarity between two groups of sequences. we showed above that hausdorff distance is a mathematical distance, which can reflect the biological distance among the sequences with different hosts.after obtaining the pairwise distance matrix between sequences, phylogenetic analysis was constructed firstly by constructing the evolutionary tree. fastme is a distance-based phylogeny reconstruction program that works on distance matrices [31]. fastme provides distance algorithms to infer phylogeny based on balanced minimum evolution, which is the very principle of neighbor-joining (nj) algorithm. it improves over nj by performing topological moves using fast, sophisticated algorithms [32,33,34]. we applied bionj, an improved version of nj based on a simple model of sequence data [35], to construct the tree and then adjusted the tree using figtree software (https://beast.community/figtree). the phylogenetic study visualized the distance matrix results by clustering the similar units together in the evolutionary tree.we drew the natural graph of sars-cov-2 strains and coronaviruses groups with different animal hosts as well. natural graph was first proposed in 2015 [27]. for a dataset of n units, we first find the neighbor of each unit by searching for the smallest distance from each unit to any other units. during this step, we usually draw a blue arrow connecting each unit with its neighbor. this gives the result of the first-level natural graph, which also shows the closest relationships among all units. several groups will be formed after this step, and then we find the neighbor of each group by the smallest distance between groups. the distance between group a and group b is defined as the smallest distance among all distances from any unit in group a to any unit in group b. therefore, by finding the closest neighbor of all units in several layers (in most cases, two layers are enough), natural graph successfully classifies units into several groups in the first layer and also reveals the relationships between groups in further steps. combining the results from phylogenetic study, one can easily understand the relationship among units and also among groups of units.all calculation in this project was performed using matlab r2018b on a computer with intel(r) core (rm) u7-5500u cpu @2.40ghz.the phylogenetic tree based on the sars-cov-2 strains and 731 complete genomes of human coronaviruses (hcovs) is shown in figure 2, in which different colors represent different virus types. we also selected 38 coronavirus genomes of interest to construct the phylogenetic tree in figure 3. both the results in figure 2 and figure 3 show that the sars-cov and mers-cov are under the same branch, as the sister clade of this new sars-cov-2. the phylogeny indicates the close relationship between sars-cov and sars-cov-2. the branch of hcov-hku1, hcov-oc43, sars-cov-2, sars-cov and mers-cov is for beta-coronavirus, while hcov-229e and hcov-nl63 are both alpha-coronaviruses.protein analysis was also applied to these human coronaviruses. we downloaded five crystal structures of 3cl proteinase and five crystal structures of spike protein from pdb bank. then pairwise root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) of the structures and pairwise nv-distances of the corresponding protein sequences were calculated. the results are shown in table 1. all the rmsd and nv-distance of 3cl proteinase and spike protein between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov are the smallest, which concurs with the classification by the complete genomes. although current sars-cov-2 is in a distinct clade to sars-cov, previous drug study on sars-cov may have helpful implications for antiviral research.the detailed phylogenetic tree of 95 records of sars-cov-2 strains is shown in figure 4. most of the confirmed cases had been identified in hubei province, china, and still most of the confirmed cases had been to hubei or related to someone in hubei. guangdong province, china, on the other hand, was the location of the outbreak of sars in 2003, and the fact that both provinces have a booming market for wild animals might contribute to the outbreak. during this outbreak starting from december 2019, guangdong also has a high number of confirmed cases at the early stage of the pandemic, though it is not geographically close to hubei. hence, we labeled the units in several colors in figure 4 based on the country of each patient. from the results in figure 4, some sars-cov-2 strains from the same city or province are clustered together, which indicates that the spread of sars-cov-2 was rapid compared to its variation speed. therefore, the current branches are mainly formed based on the movement of populations, rather than the genome mutations. this should be emphasized in the further determination of the geographical origin of sars-cov-2. these 95 records were all collected at a relatively early stage, and data from afterward patients would reflect the spread of sars-cov-2 rather than the origin of sars-cov-2 strains.variants within the same country tend to be clustered together in figure 4, such as all samples from japan. this can be explained by the limited number of movement of populations between the corresponding country and china, especially wuhan, because of the long distance and also further policies of travel restrictions. however, within china, mainly because of the tradition of returning home at the chinese spring festival in the first few days when the outbreak happened, transportation was even more often than common days. patients from the same province might be genetically distant from each other if they have different sources of infection. patients possibly became infected during their stay in wuhan, but showed no obvious symptoms during the incubation, and after returning to home city/province, had fever or dry cough that further confirmed to be covid-19. in this assumption, the distance will mostly rely on their infection source in wuhan, rather than the distance between their current locations where they were confirmed.our main work is to identify the animal hosts of sars-cov-2. the host identification is of essential importance to the control of virus spread and to prevent another round of emergence outbreak. the correct identification of host, source or intermediate, could lead to the effective policy to isolate humans and hosts, therefore eliminating the risk of human exposure to new viruses and limiting further transmission. during the sars epidemic in 2003, many patients were found to have had animal exposure, especially during the early stage of the outbreak. sars-cov and anti-sars-cov antibodies were found in masked palm civets and the animal handlers in a market place, but civets are not commonly considered as the origin of sars-cov. several independent groups have shown that bats are the most likely natural hosts for sars-cov, or found more sarsr-covs in bats from china, european, african and southeast asian countries [13,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,48]. other animal origins of human coronaviruses include avian, bovine, camel, canine, feline, murine, porcine and pangolin [2].we collected the coronaviruses found in these animal hosts and compared them with sars-cov-2 strains to detect the similarity between the genome sequences. bats, camels and murines contain both alpha and beta coronaviruses, thus they were considered as two different host groups. all together, there were 13 groups of coronaviruses found in animal hosts, and each group was then compared to the sars-cov-2 group, which included 95 sars-cov-2 strains. the corresponding phylogenetic tree based on hausdorff distance is shown in figure 5. both the hausdorff distance and center distance between sars-cov-2 strains and host-cov groups are shown in table 2. both results show that the beta coronaviruses found in pangolins and civets are closely related to the sars-cov-2 group based on the genome divergences. though both civets and camels were considered to be intermediate hosts for other coronaviruses, the coronaviruses found in them are more distinct than the pangolin-covs group in table 2.based on the genome data, only the coronaviruses found in four animal hosts (pangolin, civet, canine, and feline) show closer relationship to sars-cov-2 than bat does. the coronaviruses found in pangolins and civets are beta-coronaviruses, while the other two are alpha-coronaviruses. thus, these four animals are possible intermediate hosts of sars-cov-2 but the analysis of the s protein can lead to more accurate results.then we analyzed the spike proteins of sars-cov-2 and known coronaviruses found in these animal hosts. receptor-binding domain (rbd) is located on the s protein and thus s protein is essential for infectivity. the protein id of spike protein of sars-cov-2 is yp_009724390.1. the center distances between the spike protein of sars-cov-2 and the spike protein group of the coronaviruses of each host are shown in table 2, which clearly indicates the significant similarity between sars-cov-2 and pangolin-cov as well. this result coincides with the genome analysis.the results agreed with each other and we further constructed the natural graph in figure 6 using the hausdorff distance based on the coronaviruses genomes. the blue arrows represent the first-level arrow. after the first-level grouping, all alpha-coronaviruses are clustered together, and the beta coronaviruses form two clusters. the green values are the corresponding hausdorff distance between the two groups. the arrow from virus a to b means that among all viruses here, b has the smallest distance from a. the red thick arrows represent the second-level arrow, presenting the relationship among clusters that were forms from the first-level natural graph. in this case, all units are connected together after two levels. the natural graph shows that the most likely host is pangolin with the corresponding distance as 333.89. assuming that bats are the natural reservoir of coronaviruses, pangolin should be the intermediate host of sars-cov-2.besides, in figure 6, the coronaviruses found on many other hosts, such as civets, canines, and felines, have a relatively smaller distance to sars-cov-2 compared with the distance from bat-covs to sars-cov-2. further protein analysis excludes the similarity between sars-cov-2 and coronaviruses found in civets, canines, and felines, according to the last column in table 2. therefore, combined with our results based on genomes and proteins, the natural graph indicates that the most possible path of transmission should be from bats to pangolins to humans. this transmission path is predicted from mathematical analysis, rather than biological experiments, and the determination of the natural reservoir and any intermediate host of sars-cov-2 requires further study and analysis.sars-cov-2 has been spreading rapidly by human-to-human transmission, and phylogenetic analysis of sars-cov-2 strengthens our understanding of its origin and transmission paths. genetic relationship between sars-cov-2 and known coronaviruses provides insights into the host identification, and protein analysis reveals the similarity more directly because proteins are the basic functional elements in the transmission and infection process. from the phylogenetic analysis performed in this study, we confirm that sars-cov-2 is most similar to sars-cov from a range of coronavirus sequences examined, but also forms a distinct separate cluster. thus, sars-cov-2 should be classified as a new member of coronaviruses, the seventh cov member that infects humans.the host identification found the most possible transmission chain is: from bats to pangolins to humans. regarding this chain, we should also pay attention to civets because the distance between civet-cov group and sars-cov-2 is also relatively small from genome comparison, but a little larger than bat-covs though protein analysis. the sequencing results from the current technology sometimes include many ambiguous letters, such as ‘n’, which would lead to inaccurate results in the transformation from dna sequences to a numerical vector. though we have filtered out these sequences, it also decreases the size of dataset. it is possible that laboratories can get more sequences without these ambiguous letters and therefore the distances need to be modified, which might bring back civets into our consideration. besides, although canine-cov is not in the same group with sars-cov-2 on the first level (blue arrows shown in figure 6), the distance is within a comparable distance as 893.11. feline-covs are listed 4th closest neighbor to sars-cov-2 group, closer to canine-cov. both canine-cov and feline-cov are alpha coronaviruses, and the recombination between alpha and beta coronaviruses are also possible in the evolution of sars-cov-2. if so, the close relationship between feline-cov and sars-cov-2 strains might be due to the second possible chain from felines to canines to humans. this might be also another missing transmission path, but more evidence from biology is required to reach this conclusion.in general, the limited number of the coronaviruses found in hosts, especially for pangolins, might be an issue. the calculation of natural vector is of high computational efficiency, thus once more sequencing experiments are performed and uploaded online by biological labs, we can add them into the current dataset and the results would be even more persuasive.meanwhile, currently available protein data of sars-cov-2 are mainly the primary sequences which consist of 20 amino acids, and if the structure of 11 proteins can be experimentally determined, it is possible to use the yau-hausdorff distance to study the relationship between protein structures [49]. moreover, protein structures could be a powerful tool to detect protein-to-protein interaction and enhance our knowledge about the mechanics of sars-cov-2, therefore making it possible to develop medicines and vaccines for treating sars-cov-2 pathogens.since the outbreak of sars-cov-2 globally, more and more researchers have published their phylogenetic analysis using various techniques. in [50], the author collected 86 complete or near-complete genomes of sars-cov-2 strains on gisaid, and performed pair-wise nucleotide sequence alignment by clustalx2. the analysis revealed 93 mutations over the entire genomes of sars-cov-2, located on either coding or non-coding regions, in contrast to our analysis of extracting the key information in the whole genome. on the other hand, liu et al. and anderson et al. have done research on the alignment of protein sequences from different sources [19,51], and they concluded that other than pangolins, snakes and turtles may also act as the potential intermediate hosts transmitting sars-cov-2 to humans. the host identification would always be updated based on new findings on experimental data, and we are also working on similar projects. the most significant difference between this work and other research is that we consider the coronaviruses found in each animal host as a single group and study the relationship between groups using mathematical techniques.the result in [52] coincided with our results that pangolins are the probable zoonotic origin of sars-cov-2 outbreak. despite the similar conclusion, their statement of the similarity between pangolin-cov and sars-cov-2 is 91.02% is based on alignment. in [53], the alignments of the spike surface glycoprotein receptor binding domain revealed four times more variations in the bat coronavirus ratg13 than in pangolin-cov compared with sars-cov-2, suggesting the pangolin as a missing link in the transmission of sars-cov-2 from bats to human. our approach provides a well-defined measurement of the distance between two groups of sequences, and both genomic and protein data suggested that pangolins are the most likely intermediate host of sars-cov-2. some other research [5,6] focused on the phylogenetic analysis of spike protein data as well, which also provided insight into the study of the interaction with antiviral drugs.it has been estimated that coronaviruses [human coronaviruses 229e (hcov-229e) and oc43 (hcov-oc43)] cause about 5-30% of respiratory tract infections. in late 2002 and 2003, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), caused by sars coronavirus (sars-cov), has resulted in more than 750 deaths [12, 15, 16, 17, [22] [23] [24] . in early 2004, a novel coronavirus associated with respiratory tract infections, human coronavirus nl63 (hcov-nl63), was discovered [3, 20] . as a result of a unique mechanism of viral replication, coronaviruses have a high frequency of recombination [9, 10, 13, 14] . coronaviruses were divided into three groups, with hcov-229e and hcov-nl63 being group 1 coronaviruses and hcov-oc43 a group 2 coronavirus respectively [11] . for sars-cov, it was initially proposed that sars-cov constituted a distinct group of coronavirus [15, 17] . however, after more extensive phylogenetic analysis, it was discovered that sars-cov probably represents a distant relative of group 2 coronaviruses [2, 18] . further in silico analysis also predicted that sars-cov could be a product of recombination between mammalian and avian coronaviruses [19] .recently, we have described the discovery of a novel coronavirus associated with pneumonia, coronavirus hku1 (cov-hku1) [21] . based on analysis of the putative chymotrypsin-like protease (3cl pro ), rna-dependent rna polymerase (pol), helicase, hemagglutinin-esterase (he), spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m) and nucleocapsid (n), cov-hku1 is a member of group 2 coronaviruses. however, the origin of cov-hku1 is still unknown. in this study, we performed a detailed phylogenetic analysis of cov-hku1. possible recombination events were predicted and the origin of cov-hku1 discussed.the predicted amino acid (a.a.) sequences of p65, conserved portions of nsp1 [papain-like protease 1 (pl1 pro ), appr-1-p processing enzyme family (a1pp), papain-like protease 2 (pl2 pro ), hydrophobic domain 1 (hd1), and hydrophobic domain 2 (hd2)], nsp2-7, nsp9-13, he, s, e, m and n were extracted from the cov-hku1 genome sequence (genbank accession no. ay597011) [21] . the corresponding a.a. sequences of murine hepatitis virus (mhv), hcov-oc43, bovine coronavirus (bcov), porcine hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus (phev), rat sialodacryoadenitis coronavirus (sdav) and puffinosis virus (pv) were extracted from complete genome sequences of mhv (genbank accession no.af201929), hcov-oc43 (genbank accession no. ay585229) and bcov (genbank accession no. nc 003045), and sequences of phev, sdav and pv available in genbank. the a.a. sequence of he of mhv was extracted from mhv strain jhm (genbank accession no. baa00661) because the he gene in mhv (genbank accession no. af201929) stopped prematurely after the 97th a.a. phylogenetic tree construction was performed using neighbour joining method with clustalx 1.83. the corresponding a.a. sequences of hcov-229e were used as outgroups, except for p65 and he because these were not available in the genome of hcov-229e. for p65 and he, the corresponding a.a. sequences in sars-cov and influenza c virus were used as the outgroups respectively. phylogenetic trees were not constructed for p28 and the predicted hypothetical protein of orf4 and orf8 in cov-hku1 because no a.a. sequences that can be used as the appropriate outgroups can be found.the amino-terminal 800 a.a. residues of the s proteins in various group 1 coronaviruses [porcine transmissible gastroenteritis virus (tgev), hcov-nl63 and hcov-229e], various group 2 coronaviruses (phev, sdav, mhv, hcov-oc43 and bcov), infectious bronchitis virus (ibv) (a group 3 coronavirus), sars-cov and cov-hku1 were aligned using clustalx 1.83. the presence and positions of conserved cysteine residues in the various peptides were compared.correspondence analysis was used to compare the codon usage pattern variation in the different genes among group 2 coronaviruses in a multidimensional space [5] . all available sequences of orf 1ab, he, s, m and n of mhv, hcov-oc43, bcov, phev, sdav, pv and sars-cov were downloaded from the genbank ( table 1) . analysis of codon usage in these sequences and the corresponding ones in cov-hku1 was performed using codonw (http://www.molbiol.ox.ac.uk/cu/), with each gene represented as a 59 dimensional vector, representing the 59 possible sense codons. aug, the only codon for methionine, ugg, the only codon for tryptophan, and the three stop codons were excluded. the orf for e was excluded because the length of the gene was too short.to delineate the importance of recombination on the evolution of cov-hku1, split decomposition analysis was performed. deduced a.a. sequences of group 1, 2 and 3 coronaviruses and sars-cov available in genbank, that were homologous to 3cl pro , pol, helicase, he, s, orf4, e, m and n in cov-hku1 [21] , were retrieved. split decomposition analysis was performed with splitstree version 3.2 [7] using hamming correction and is presented with the same edge length.the genome organizations of cov-hku1 and other group 2 coronaviruses were shown in fig. 1a . phylogenetic trees using predicted a.a. sequences of putative proteins and polypeptides of cov-hku1 and other group 2 coronaviruses were constructed (fig. 1b) . the putative proteins and polypeptides included p65, conserved portions of nsp1 (pl1 pro , a1pp, pl2 pro , hd1 and hd2), nsp2-7, nsp9-13, he, s, e, m and n. all trees revealed that cov-hku1 formed a distinct branch among group 2 coronaviruses. interestingly, of the 14 trees of p65 to nsp10, nine (64%) (p65, hd1, hd2, nsp3, nsp4, nsp6, nsp7, nsp9 and nsp10) showed that cov-hku1 was clustered with mhv (fig. 1b) . however, for the eight trees of nsp11 to n, seven (88%) showed that the cov-hku1 branch appeared as the first branch among group 2 coronaviruses (fig. 1b) .comparison of the cysteine residues in the n-terminal 800 a.a. residues of s in cov-hku1 and those in the different groups of coronaviruses revealed that almost all the conserved cysteine residues in group 2 coronaviruses were present in cov-hku1 (fig. 2a) , supporting that cov-hku1 is a member of group 2 coronaviruses.the number of orf 1ab, he, s, m and n sequences in the group 2 coronaviruses used for correspondence analysis is shown in table 1 . the results of the for orf 1ab, he, s and m, the scores on axis 1 in group 2 coronaviruses other than cov-hku1 were clustered between −0.16 and 0.28 and those in cov-hku1 were clustered between −0.40 and −0.24 (fig. 2b) . for n, the scores on axis 1 in group 2 coronaviruses other than cov-hku1 were clustered between 0.48 and 0.57 and that in cov-hku1 was at 0.11 (fig. 2b) . these indicated that the codon usage patterns in the genes in cov-hku1 differed significantly from those in other group 2 coronaviruses. split decomposition analysis revealed that recombination events had occurred between cov-hku1 and other group 2 coronaviruses in 3cl pro , pol, helicase, he, s, orf4, e and m (fig. 3) . no evidence of recombination was shown between the n of cov-hku1 and those of other group 2 coronaviruses.cov-hku1 is a distinct member of group 2 coronaviruses. it was confirmed by both phylogenetic analysis of 22 protein coding regions (fig. 1b) and analysis of the conserved cysteine residues in the amino-terminal of the s proteins (fig. 2a) that cov-hku1 is a group 2 coronavirus. furthermore, phylogenetic analysis of the 22 protein coding regions revealed that there were 10-54% a.a. differences between a particular protein coding region in cov-hku1 and the corresponding region in the most closely related sequence, indicating that cov-hku1 is distinct from the other group 2 coronaviruses. this fact was further supported by results of correspondence analysis of codon usage (fig. 2b) .recombination events were common among cov-hku1 and other group 2 coronaviruses. coronaviruses have high frequency of homologous rna recombination, which has been observed in both tissue culture [10, 14] and experimentally infected animals [8] . in split tree analysis, recombination events would result in reticulations instead of simple branching structures. as shown in fig. 3 , recombination was particularly frequent in cov-hku1 and mhv as compared to other group 2 coronaviruses such as bcov and hcov-oc43. the particular high recombination frequency in mhv [1] is in line with evidence of a lot of interstrain recombination, as shown by the high number of reticulations in various orfs of the different mhv strains (fig. 3) . complete genome sequencing of additional cov-hku1 and further split tree analysis would shed light on whether cov-hku1 behaves more like mhv or bcov and hcov-oc43. cov-hku1 may have originated from a major recombination event and numerous minor recombination events among group 2 coronaviruses. in feline coronavirus, the site of recombination has been pinpointed to a region of about 50 nucleotides in the m gene by multiple alignment [6] .as for recombination between different strains of mhv, in vitro studies have shown both variable sites and rates of recombination, with the s gene have a frequency three fold that of the polymerase gene [4, 14] . in cov-hku1, nine of the 14 phylogenetic trees constructed using deduced a.a. sequences of p65 to nsp10 showed that cov-hku1 was clustered with mhv (fig. 1b) . interestingly, the topologies of the phylogenetic trees changed dramatically from nsp11. for the eight trees from nsp11 to n, seven revealed that the cov-hku1 branch appeared as the first branch among the group 2 coronaviruses (fig. 1b) (p < 0.01 by chi-square test). a logical explanation was that a major recombination event has taken place in the region between nsp10 and nsp11 when cov-hku1 first appeared. however, this recombination event was not evident in multiple alignment performed at the junction between nsp10 and nsp11 (data not shown). this is because although cov-hku1 is more clustered with mhv from p65 to nsp10, the difference in phylogenetic distances between cov-hku1 and mhv and those between cov-hku1 and bcov/hcov-oc43 is not marked (fig. 1b) , in contrast to what was observed in feline coronavirus [6] . furthermore, bootscanning analysis in the whole genome did not reveal any putative recombination break point (data not shown). we speculate that this could be due to numerous minor recombination events between p65 and nsp10, such as between p65 and nsp1-pl1 pro , between nsp1-pl2 pro and nsp1-hd1, between nsp4 and nsp5, and between nsp5 and nsp6. this has resulted in cov-hku1 being clustered with mhv in only nine of the 14 phylogenetic trees constructed using deduced a.a. from p65 to nsp10, but four of the 14 trees with the cov-hku1 branch being the first branch among the group 2 coronaviruses.the outbreak of atypical pneumonia, referred to as severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) was first identified in guangdong province, china, and spread to several countries later ksiazek et al., 2003; lee et al., 2003; peiris et al., 2003; poutanen et al., 2003; tsang et al., 2003) . a novel coronavirus was isolated and found to be the cause of sars. although sars has been under control, some scattering cases infected by sars-covs were reported. no effective drugs are currently available to cure this disease. gaining insight into the phylogenetic relationships among coronaviruses would be helpful to discover drugs and develop vaccines against the virus.the sars-coronavirus is a new member of the order nidovirales, family coronaviridae, and genus coronavirus. they consist of a diverse group of large, enveloped, positive-stranded rna viruses that cause respiratory and enteric diseases in humans and other animals . excluding sars-covs, coronaviruses can be divided into three groups according to serotypes. group i and group ii contain mammalian viruses, while group ii coronaviruses contain a hemagglutinin esterase gene homologous to that of influenza c virus (lai and holmes, 2001) . group iii contains only avian viruses. previous work showed that sars-covs are not closely related to any of the previously characterized coronaviruses and form a distinct group (group iv) within the genus coronavirus (marra et al., 2003; rota et al., 2003) .an intuitive method is proposed to infer the phylogenetic relationships of coronaviruses in this article. historically, cork et al. proposed a three-dimensional representation of genomic sequences, called the wcurve (wu et al., 1993) . since then, the w-curve has been used to analyze genomic sequences and study the phylogeny of bacteria (cork, 2003; cork and toguem, 2002) . instead of the sequence alignment, we adopt a geometric method based on the z-curve of the whole genome. the z-curve is a three-dimensional space curve constituting the unique representation of a given dna sequence in the sense that each can be reconstructed given the other zhang, 1991, 1994) . based on the z-curve method, a coronavirus-specific gene-finding system zcurve_ cov has been developed , and the software is especially suitable for gene recognition in sars-cov genomes. the system is further improved by taking the prediction of cleavage sites of viral proteinases in polyproteins into consideration (gao et al., 2003) . here we use the differences between the three-dimensional space curves as the foundation to derive the phylogeny of coronaviruses. the key problems are what parameters should be used to describe a curve and how to determine evolutionary distances among organisms based on a group of curves. in this paper, we use a series of parameters, such as the geometric center and the covariance matrix to reflect the center position and the distribution pattern of a curve, respectively. the result shows that sars-covs form an independent group, which is consistent with previous analyses.the 24 complete coronavirus genomes used in this paper were downloaded from genbank, of which 12 are sars-covs and 12 are from other groups of coronaviruses. the name, accession number, abbreviation, and genome length for the 24 genomes are listed in table 1 . according to the existing taxonomic groups, sequences 1-3 belong to group i, and sequences 4-11 are members of group ii, while sequence 12 is the only representative of group iii. refer to table 1 for details.the z-curve is a three-dimensional curve that constitutes a unique representation of a given dna sequence in the sense that each can be uniquely reconstructed given the other zhang, 1991, 1994) . the resulting curve has a zigzag shape, hence the name zcurve. the z-curve is briefly presented as follows. consider a dna sequence read from the 5 0 to the 3 0 -end with n bases. beginning from the first base, inspect the sequence one base at a time. in the nth step, where n = 1,2, . . . , n, count the cumulative numbers of the bases a, c, g, and t, occurring in the subsequence from the first base to the nth base in the dna sequence inspected, and denote them by a n , c n , g n , and t n respec- tively. the z-curve consists of a series of nodes p n , where n = 1,2, . . . , n, whose coordinates are uniquely determined by the z-transform of dna sequences zhang, 1991, 1994) x n ¼ ða n þ g n þ à ðc n þ t n þ r n à y n ; y n ¼ ða n þ c n þ à ðg n þ t n þ m n à k n ; z n ¼ ða n þ t n þ à ðc n þ g n þ w n à s n ; n ¼ 0; 1; . . . ; n ; x n ; y n ; z n 2 ½àn ; n ;where a 0 = c 0 = g 0 = t 0 = 0 and x 0 = y 0 = z 0 = 0. here r, y, m, k, w, and s represent the bases of purine, pyrimidine, amino, keto, weak hydrogen bonds, and strong hydrogen bonds, respectively, according to the recommendation 1984 by the nc-iub (cornish-bowden, 1985) . the line that connects the nodes p 0 (p 0 = 0), p 1 , p 2 , . . ., until p n one by one sequentially is called the z-curve for the dna sequences inspected. the z-curve defined above is a three-dimensional space curve, having three independent components, i.e., x n , y n , and z n , which display the distributions of bases of r/y, m/k, and w/s types, respectively, along the sequence. by viewing the z-curve, some global and local features of the sequence can be detected in a perceivable way. for almost all genome or chromosome sequences, the curves of z n $ n are roughly straight lines (zhang et al., 2001) . for convenience, the curve of z n $ n is fitted by a straight line using the least square techniquewhere (z, n) is the coordinate of a point on the fitted straight line and k is its slope. instead of using the curve of z n $ n, we will use the z 0 n $ n curve hereafter, where z 0 n ¼ z n à kn. ð3þin this paper, we propose a new way to infer evolutionary distances between organisms from the whole genome sequences. as the z-curve is a unique representation of a genome, it can be used to reflect a genomeõs characteristics (fig. 1) . for convenience, we use the coordinates (x, y, z 0 ) rather than (x, y, z). the differences among the z-curves of these genomes form the basis for constructing the phylogenetic tree. to study the phylogenetic relationships, the process can be separated into three stages. first, the z-curve of each genome is described by a set of parameters; second, the distance matrix is generated based on the parameters obtained in the first stage; and finally, the phylogenetic tree can be constructed based on the distance matrix. fig. 1 . the three-dimensional z-curves (x, y, z 0 ) for three complete coronavirus genomes. (a-c) the z-curves of bj01, tor2, and bcov, respectively. it can be clearly seen that the z-curves of bj01 and tor2 are very similar, while the z-curve of bcov is significantly different from the former two. this forms the basis of the present method. (d) a sketch of the three eigenvectors for a certain genome (tor2), which illustrates the relationship between the three eigenvectors and the z-curve. table 2 the geometric center and three eigenvectors of the z-curve for each of the 24 coronavirus genomes a i abbreviation (i) the parameters of the z-curve for each genome. based on the z-curve, any genome can be represented by a three-dimensional space curve composed of n nodes corresponding to every base position denoted by x n , y n , z 0 n where n = 1,2, . . . , n (figs. 1a-c). to describe its characteristics, we calculate the following parameters. the first is the geometric center of all the n nodesconsequently, we can obtain ð x; y; z 0 þ for each genome. refer to table 2 for details.then, the covariance matrix which describes the global distribution pattern of the three-dimensional space curve is calculated as follows:wherewhere p, q = x, y, z 0 . obviously, the matrix is a real symmetric 3 · 3 one. using a 3 · 3 matrix to represent a three-dimensional z-curve is a very rough approximation, resulting in information loss considerably. however, the advantage is that this approximation makes it possible to compare genomes with different lengths. it is seen that a 3 · 3 covariance matrix is uniquely derived based on eq. (6) for each given genome regardless of its length. from a geometrical point of view, the distribution pattern can be reduced to a three-dimensional ellipsoid approximately. each direction of the main axis of the ellipsoid can be denoted by an eigenvector and its length should be proportional to the square root of its associated eigenvalue. the eigenvectors and their associated eigenvalues are defined as follows:corresponding to each eigenvalue k k , thereõs an eigenvector c k . corresponding to k 1 < k 2 < k 3 , the three eigenvectors are denoted by c 1 , c 2 , c 3 , respectively. itõs easy to obtain the eigenvalues and associated normalized eigenvectors using the jacobi algorithm. the geometric center and three eigenvectors for each of the 24 genomes are obtained in the same way. refer to table  2 for details about the parameters.(ii) the distance matrix derived from the above parameters. in this paper, the euclid distance is used to reflect the diversity between two pointswhere d ij denotes the distance between the geometric centers of the ith and the jth genomes, and m is the total number of all genomes (m = 24, here). then we obtain a real m · m symmetric matrix whose elements are d ij .to reflect the differences between the trends of every two three-dimensional curves, the angles between the corresponding eigenvectors of every two genomes are used. the three-dimensional vectors are denoted as follows:where c i k is the kth vector of the ith genome. each genome has three such eigenvectors. according to the projections on the three axes, the vectors can be divided into three groups. the three groups of vectors are represented with arrows of different styles (refer to fig.  2a ). obviously they can be separated apart depending on their space distribution. the dark group (x group) has the greatest projections on the x-axis, while the vectors represented with dot (y group) and grey (z 0 group) arrows have the greatest projections on the y-axis and the z 0 -axis, respectively. for each genome, the three vectors can be divided into three groups, i.e., each genome has three vectors belonging to three groups, respectively.the three groups of eigenvectors are obtained, and denoted by c i x , c i y , and c i z 0 , respectively (see table 2 ). the cosine between any two vectors in a certain group can be computed as follows:repeating this procedure for all the three groups, we obtain three real m · m symmetric matrices. these matrices are then translated into angles, whose elements are as follows:the sum of h k ij over k for given i, j can be used to reflect the trend information of the eigenvectors involved consequently, two sets of parameters are obtained. the first reflects the difference of center positions represented by the euclid distance between the geometric centers. the second indicates the difference of the trends of the z-curves represented by the related eigenvectors. the overall distance d ij between the species i and j is defined by(iii) clustering. accordingly, a real symmetric m · m matrix d ij is obtained and used to reflect the evolutionary distance between the species i and j. the clustering tree is constructed using the upgma method in phy-lip package (http://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/ phylip.html). the final phylogenetic tree is drawn using the drawgram program in the phylip package. the branch lengths are not scaled according to the distances and only the topology of the tree is concerned.as mentioned above, one of the advantages of the zcurve is its intuitiveness. the feature of a genome can be viewed intuitively regardless of how long the genome is. therefore, global and local compositional features of a genome can be grasped quickly in a perceivable form . to give an intuitive comprehension of the difference among the three-dimensional curves, we take sars-cov strains tor2, bj01, and bcov as examples. tor2 and bj01 are sars-covs and bcov belongs to another group of coronaviruses. from the coordinates and the trends in figs. 1a-c, we can see that the z-curves of tor2 and bj01 are almost the same while that of bcov is significantly different from both of them, indicating that the former two have close phylogenetic relationship, whereas the relationships between the former two and the latter are more distant. similarity of related z-curves implies close evolutionary relationship of the organisms involved and vice versa. this constitutes the basis of the current algorithm.the z-curve is approximately described by the geometric center and eigenvectors, which indicate its center position and the trends, respectively (fig. 1d) . in fig.  1d the three arrows represent the three eigenvectors, and the point from which they start is the geometric center. the three eigenvectors of a certain genome can be divided into three groups according to their relationships with the axes (refer to fig. 2) . the trends of zcurves carry a part of the information used to construct the phylogenetic tree, and some interesting results can be revealed by this figure. it can be seen from fig. 2b that the vectors in the y group, which have the greatest projections on the positive y-axis, are coplanar perfectly. they are almost in the x-y plane. as can be seen from the plot, the 24 vectors are almost superposed with each other as a single vector. the phenomenon can also be seen from the data in table 2 . all of the absolute value of c i y;z 0 ði ¼ 1; 2; . . . ; mþ are smaller than 0.0059. that is to say, they all have very small projections on the z 0axis and are constrained into the x-y plane. the vectors in the x group and z 0 group (represented with black and grey arrows, respectively, in fig. 2b ) are also coplanar in the x-z 0 plane, though their coplanarity is not as good as that of the y group.as mentioned above, there are three groups of coronaviruses. group i includes hcov-229e, tgev, and pedv and group ii contains bcov, bcovl, bcovm, bcovq, mhv, mhv2, mhvm, mhvp, etc. all the viruses in these two groups are mammalian viruses. group iii contains only avian viruses, of which only the genome of ibv has been completely sequenced. many researchers have analyzed the phylogenetic relationships among coronavirus genomes based on the 3c-like proteinase, polymerase, the structural proteins s, e, m, and n, respectively (marra et al., 2003; rota et al., 2003) . their results indicated that sars-covs are not closely related to any of the previously characterized coronaviruses and form a distinct group (group iv) within the genus coronavirus (marra et al., 2003; rota et al., 2003) . as shown in fig. 3 , four groups of coronaviruses can be seen from the phylogram. the sars-covs appear to cluster together and form a separate branch, which can be distinguished easily from other three groups of coronaviruses. ibv, belonging to group iii, is situated at an independent branch, whereas the tgev, pedv, and hcov-229e, which belong to group i, tend to cluster together. in another branch, the group ii coronaviruses, including bcov, bcovl, bcovm, bcovq, mhv, mhv2, mhvm, and mhvp tend to cluster together. first, group i and group ii, which are all mammalian viruses, cluster together forming a bigger group. second, this group joins group iii, which contains only avian viruses, to form a much bigger group. finally, sars-covs join them and result in the phylogenetic tree shown in fig. 3 . the resulting monophyletic clusters agree perfectly with the established taxonomic groups. to validate the current method, a set of random sequences were used as a control. we generated 100 random sequences meeting the requirements in the method. each time a phylogenetic analysis was done using 25 sequences including one random sequence and the 24 genomes. consequently, 100 phylogenetic trees were obtained. ninety-eight out of the 100 trees showed that the random sequence formed a distinct group without disturbing the other four groups. only two of the random sequences disturbed the four groups, suggesting that the current method is solid with respect to the situation that a random sequence is added.almost all of the previous analyses revealed that sars-covs form a distinct group different from the other three groups of coronaviruses. however, the question that how sars-covs emerged suddenly still remains open. rota et al. and marra et al. performed phylogenetic analysis based on sequence alignments using different genes. the results indicated that sars-covs belong to a new group but the original group that sars-covs were derived from could not be determined . the detection of sars-cov-like viruses in himalayan palm civets and other small animals in live retail market indicates a rout of interspecies transmission, although the natural reservoir is unknown. virus infection was also detected in humans working at the same market. all the animal isolates retain a special 29-nucleotide fragment, which is not found in most human isolates . stavrinides and guttman made phylogenetic analysis on the sars virus replicase, surface spike, matrix, and nucleocapsid proteins. the results support a mammalian-like origin for the replicase protein, an avian-like origin for the matrix and nucleocapsid proteins, and a mammalian-avian mosaic origin for the host-determining spike protein.they proposed that a recombination event between mammalian-like and avian-like parent viruses within the s gene might have taken place (stavrinides and guttman, 2004) . however, the phylogenetic inference based on genome contents tends to locate the recombinant outside of related genomes, such as seen in fig.  3 . therefore, we emphasize that it is very unlikely to trace back the evolutionary history such as the recombination event using the method presented.the present method reflects the global characters of genomes because the whole genome is taken into consideration. the phylogenetic tree (fig. 3) reveals that the sars-covs have undergone an independent evolution path after the divergence from the other coronaviruses. as can be seen from fig. 3 , the distance between the sars-covs and all the others is the greatest. we supposed that the precursor of sars-cov may have existed in some hosts and developed separately for many years. grigoriev found that the mutational patterns in sars-cov genome were strikingly different from the other coronaviruses in terms of mutation rates (grigoriev, 2004) . phylogenetic analysis based on codon usage pattern suggested that sars-cov was diverged far from all the three known groups of coronavirus (gu et al., 2004) . the overall level of similarity between sars-covs and the other coronaviruses is low . we suppose that this is due to different evolution paths. the isolation of sars-cov-like virus in himalayan palm civets indicates a route of interspecies transmission. we hypothesize that some events such as the nucleotide deletion or mutation in some important genes of the precursor may have resulted in the change of host range.due to the lack of morphological features and frequent gene exchanges, it is highly valuable to develop methods of molecular phylogeny for viruses. now phylogenetic analysis based on sequence alignments is well developed. sequence alignments are always based on some special genes or some conserved fragments (saitou, 1996) . such analysis can be done at both the amino acid level and the nucleotide level. to overcome the biases caused by individual genes or genome segments, it is valuable to develop methods of molecular phylogenetic analysis based on whole genome sequences. being different from the sequence alignment method, the current method is a geometric approach which is based on measuring the differences of z-curves of whole genomes, including coding and non-coding sequences. there is no need to search for similar sequences. probably, the most remarkable advantages of the present method is its simplicity and intuitiveness. the result shows that four groups exist in the genus coronavirus. note that group i (hcov-229e, tgev, and pedv) and group ii (bcovm, bcovl, bcovq, bcov, mhvm, mhv2, mhvp, and mhv) cluster together forming a bigger group firstly. second, this group joins group iii (ibv) to form a much bigger group. finally, sars-covs join them and result in the phylogenetic tree shown here. also note that the resulting monophyletic clusters agree perfectly with the established taxonomic groups.the increasing availability of complete genomes has cast doubt instead of adding details to the phylogenetic tree (qi et al., 2004) . phylogenetic analysis based on sequence alignments is usually done on the most conservative part of a gene. these fragments are usually coding sequences, especially the sequences coding for catalytic sites or the core of proteins, because they tend to be more evolutionarily conserved. it was said by a virologist that people could not simply assume that a virus can be represented by its polymerase (http:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ictv/). a virus must be viewed as a whole. non-coding sequences also play an important role in the virus, so do the less conserved genes. in addition, analyses based on different genes may lead to different results. consequently, by using complete genomes one can avoid choosing which genes to be aligned. therefore methods that are based on the whole genome are likely to be more objective. recently, a kstring composition approach was proposed to analyze prokaryote phylogeny based on the whole proteome and satisfactory results were obtained (qi et al., 2004) ; however, such analysis must rely on the annotation information. in contrast, the complete genome sequence is the only input of the current method; neither the annotation information, nor any adjustable parameters are needed. it is noteworthy that the current method is performed automatically without any human intervention.the z-curve, which serves as the foundation of the present method is a powerful tool to study the complete genome sequence. the z-curve contains all the information that the corresponding dna sequence carries. many characteristics of a genome with biological meaning can be observed from the corresponding z-curve, such as the replication origins and genomic islands for some bacterial and archaeal genomes . we can inspect a genome in an intuitive way regardless of the gene content and gene order, even though the sequences are of different lengths. if the zcurves of two species show similar pattern even though the genomes have different lengths, one may infer that they are evolutionarily close organisms, and vice versa. in this paper, we use the geometric center and the eigenvectors to describe the pattern approximately. although this is only a rough approximation, it represents just an attempt to apply the z-curve method to the phylogenetic analysis and the results obtained agree well with previous analyses.this method is aimed to analyze the phylogeny of the genomes which have close phylogenetic relationships. phylogenetics analysis is based on the differences among the three-dimensional z-curves. in this paper, the 24 genomes under study all belong to the same genus coro-navirus. additionally, the differences of length among genomes are not very large. if the genomes under study have much farther phylogenetic relationships, and the differences in length are considerably large, the present method may not work. consequently, cautions must be taken when using the present method to study the phylogeny of organisms with far evolutionary distances. in addition, unlike the estimation based on comparison of orthologous genes, the z-curve approach is also sensitive to genome rearrangements: a single large-scale inversion can change the form of z-curve drastically. therefore, the method presented here is considerably limited in the cases of genome rearrangements. in addition, as mentioned above, the three-dimensional z-curve is approximately depicted by a few parameters, such as the geometric center and the associated three eigenvectors. consequently, information contained in the zcurve is lost considerably in so doing. it is reasonable to suppose that the more information is extracted from the z-curve, the more accurate result can be gained. therefore, the current method can be improved if new and more effective algorithms are proposed to extract information contained in the z-curves. in summary, although the present method has some advantages, it is still in its premature stage. the method may not be applied to some general cases, therefore the applications of it are considerably limited at present.a geometric approach to infer phylogenetic relationships based on the z-curves of complete genomes is proposed in this article. phylogenetic analysis of the 24 coronaviruses shows that sars-covs belong to a new cluster, named group iv, and this result is consistent with those of previous analyses. the method has much room to be improved because of the possibility to extract information from the whole genome, instead of some individual genes. although having some limitations, the current whole-genome-based geometric approach represents a new direction to infer phylogenetic relationships of organisms in the post-genome era. however, the method is still in its premature stage and its applications are considerably limited at present. was supported in part by the national natural science foundation of china (grant 90408028).in december 2019, a novel coronavirus, sars-cov-2, was identified in wuhan, china, as the etiologic agent of coronavirus disease 2019 , which by march 2020 has already spread across more than 80 countries (1) . common symptoms of infection include fever, cough, and shortness of breath, while severe cases are characterized by advanced respiratory distress and pneumonia, often resulting in death (2) . it is still unknown what proportion of infected people that only present mild or no symptoms are spreading the virus. a recent study showed that in wuhan whom roughly 60% of all infections were spread by asymptomatic subjects (3) . this characteristic significantly thwarts the job of public health officials who are trying to detect transmission clusters. few transmission clusters have been identified in china recently through epidemiological contact tracing. however, because of the ongoing nature of the outbreak, it is even more complicated if not impossible to detect transmission clusters using genetic data.soon after the first epidemiological and sars-cov-2 genetic sequence data were made available, a glut of phylogeny-based analyses began to circulate discussing, in scientific papers as well as (social) media, countries that might have been fueling the spread. the implications of misunderstanding the real dynamic of the covid-19 pandemic are extremely dangerous. ethnic or social discrimination resulting from unsupported assumptions on viral contagion -often amplified by irresponsible, uncontrollable communications -can be highly damaging for people and countries. in particular, the us-based nextstrain (4) team has been posting real-time updates on the epidemic tracing by molecular analyses. despite (social) media are often vehicle for fake news and boast news hype, it is also worth noting the tremendous effort of the scientific community to provide free, up-to-date information on ongoing studies, as well as critical evaluations. several discussions and evidence-based debates on controversial hypotheses on the epidemic have ensued -such as the number of untraced infections in the us, the putative virus introduction in italy through germany, and the alleged lineage diversification in china (5) later criticized (6) . recently, an editorial published on science (7) has also highlighted how unsupported or misleading claims circulating in forums, social media, and even peer-reviewed articles, have been led by a substantial over interpretation of the available data. hence, the urgency to reframe the current debate in more rigorous scientific terms, and quantitatively evaluate whether sufficient information for reliable phylogenetic and phylogeographic studies currently exists, or which gaps need to be addressed. we explored the characteristics of few datasets through time and assess phylogenetic signal to understand whether we this data is useful of not.before carrying out any phylogeny-based analysis of virus evolution and spatiotemporal spread, it is crucial to test the quality of sequence data, since uneven sampling, presence of phylogenetic noise, and absence of temporal signal can affect reliability of the results (e.g. ancestral state reconstructions, molecular clock calibrations) (8) . sars-cov-2 full genome sequences were obatained from gisaid (https://www.gisaid.org/) (9) at different timepoints. as of march 30 th , we compared the number of full genomes sampled per country with the number of confirmed cases at the time of sampling, as well as the country's total population (figure 1 ). we obtained 2608 full genomes from 55 countries ( figure 1 ). during the past month, the number of genomes has steeply been increasing: march 3 rd , 169 genome sequences from 22 countries; march 10 th , 331 genome sequences from 29 countries; march 18 th , 794 genome sequences from 35 countries, ρ=0.45; march 25 th , 1662 genome sequences from 42 countries. we found spearman (rank) correlation between confirmed cases and genomes per country to be 0.49 on march 30 th , and we considered it as a proxy for sampling homogeneity. however, correlation could only be investigated with confirmed cases (again as proxy), since not all affected countries have made publicly available the total number of coronavirus testing performed. moreover, even within the same country, sequenced genomes were usually sampled from few hotspots, not necessarily representative of the whole epidemic in that country. it is worrisome that, as of march 30 th 2020, the two top countries in terms of confirmed cases do not show sufficiently large and representative sampling. sars-cov-2 full genome sequences available from patients in the us, the country with the highest number of confirmed cases, have mainly been sampled in washington state (66%) during the early epidemic, while less than one third (32%) are available from the epicenter of the us epidemic, the state of new york. italy, the second country per confirmed cases, uploaded 26 genomes, of which one from the marche region, four from friuli venezia giulia, seven from abruzzo, nine from lazio, and only five from lombardy, which is epicenter of the italian epidemic (table s1) lack of resolution and uncertainty in the sars-cov-2 phylogenetic tree is to be expected, considering that relatively little genetic diversity can be accumulated during the first three months of an epidemic, even for an exponentially spreading and fast-evolving rna virus. assessment of phylogenetic signal in the dataset was carried out using likelihood mapping analysis (11) , which estimates the likelihood of each of possible tree topology for any group of four sequences (quartet), randomly chosen from an alignment, and reports them inside an equilateral triangle (the likelihood map) where the corners represent distinct tree topologies and the center star-like trees.quartets are considered "resolved" when the three likelihoods are significantly different (phylogenetic signal, most dots equally distributed in the corners, i.e. data are suitable for robust phylogeny inference), unresolved or partially resolved, when all three likelihood values or two of them are not significantly different (phylogenetic noise, most dots in sides or center areas, i.e. data may not be sufficient for robust phylogeny inference). extensive simulation studies have shown that, for sequences to be considered robust in terms of phylogenetic signal, side/center areas of the likelihood mapping must include <40% of the unresolved quartets (12) . overall, phylogenetic signal in the present data has been increasing with number of genomes been released. percentage of unresolved quartets detected in the sars-cov-2 full genomes alignment on march 3 rd and 10 th was still too high to allow reliable inferences ( figure s1 ). in other words, such a lack of phylogenetic signal has likely resulted in overall unreliable topology of any sars-cov-2 tree obtained using those data, and even clades with high bootstrap values should have been interpreted with extreme caution.the effect of inhomogeneous sampling, lack of phylogenetic signal and missing data on phylogeography reconstructions, like the ones recently rushed through news and (social) media to claim specific dissemination routes of sars-cov-2 among countries, can be quite dramatic.an instructive example is the putative introduction of sars-cov-2 in italy from germany. a preliminary maximum likelihood (ml) tree, inferred from the full genome viral sequences available on march 3 rd 2020, showed a well-supported cluster of european and asian sequences (reported in figure s2 ), which contained a subclade (subclade a, figure 2a ) including a sequence isolatedin germany that appears to be paraphyletic (with strong bootstrap support) to an italian sequence clustering, in turn, with sequences from finland, mexico, germany and switzerland. based on this observation (which was available on nextstrain), a heated discussion circulated on social media about a transmission event from germany to italy followed by further spread from italy the other countries. however, in a new tree inferred just one week later, when more than 135 new full genome sequences were made available on gisaid (9) , the direct link between germany and italy in subclade a disappeared due to the additional clustering of previously unsampled sequences from portugal, brazil, wales and netherland (figure 2b ). in addition, likelihoods of alternative tree topologies generated arbitrarily switching branches in the tree (arrows in figure   2b ), implying different dissemination scenarios, were not significantly different (shimodaira- hasgawa test, table s2 ) than the likelihood of the tree inferred from the real data. in other words, it is not possible, with present data, to decide which branching pattern (and, therefore, phylogeographic reconstruction) is the one most likely representing actual dissemination routes among european countries.available genome sequences are rapidly growing. sars-cov-2 full genome dataset is now showing less than 40% of unresolved quartets in the center: 38.6% unresolved quartets on march 18 th (794 genome sequences) ( figure s1c ) and 32.3% on march 25 th (1,660 genome sequences) ( figure s1d ). this indicates that the amount of phylogenetic information is now potentially usable to define phylogenetic relationships among strains. plotting mean genetic distance of each sequence from the root of a phylogeny versus the sequence sampling time allows to testing for significant linear correlation, which is necessary for the calibration of a reliable molecular clock (13) ( figure s3 ). as expected in genomes obtained over a very short period of time (~ three months) since the beginning of the outbreak, correlation in the current data is fairly week (table   s3 ). however, bayesian analysis (14) , which infers phylogenetic and phylogeographic patterns from a posterior distribution of trees, might facilitate comparisons about different evolutionary scenarios, help in retrieving the correct topology, and estimate an accurate evolutionary rate using relaxed clock methods (15) . reconstructing the phylogenetic relationships of the same european subclade a discussed above with sequence available on march 18 th 2020 showed a much more complex snapshot of sars-cov-2 spreading ( figure s4 ). taking a closer look at the sublade a reveals that even with more genomes available, inference is bias by over-sampling of some countries and under-sampling of others ( figure s4 ). yet, even with more genomes available, inference is bias by over-sampling of some countries and under-sampling of others ( figure s4 ). recently, methods were developed to estimate, for each pair of viral sequences from two infected individuals, how many intermediates there are in the putative transmission chain connecting them, using a transmission matrix (16) . the analysis of sars-cov-2 genomes shows that numerous links among samples are still missing ( figure s5 ). in such a scenario, it is not advisable to extrapolate conclusions on the origin and dissemination of strains.phylogenetic signal is increasing in the global alignment; yet, likelihood mapping per country, using data from countries reporting highest number of cases -usa, italy, spain, germany, andfrance -indicate that some local datasets lack sufficient signal ( figure s6 neither china nor us showed phylogenetic signal despite the high number of genome sequences available ( figure s6 ). on the contrary, and unexpectedly, countries with low number of genome sequences did show presence of phylogenetic signal: germany, spain and france ( figure s6 ).despite the presence of phylogenetic signal in these countries, only genomes form france also show temporal signal that would allow for calibration of a molecular clock and re-framing phylogenetic and phylogeography inferences in spatiotemporal dimension. on the other hand, the transmission matrix for france indicates that considerable links are still missing due to unsampled infected individuals, limiting the reliability of transmission cluster studies based on sequence data ( figure s8 ).as more genome sequences, sampled at different time points and from diverse geographic areas, are daily becoming available, in depth bayesian phylodynamic and phylogeography analyses of the covid-19 pandemic may soon be a viable option. as long new data do not increase phylogenetic and temporal signal, results will remain highly questionable. characterization of transmission events is fundamental to understand the dynamics of any infectious disease. from a public health standpoint, being able to trace transmission at the local level is crucial. within country identification of active transmission clusters would open the way to more effective public health measures. the most optimal inference of transmission events would have a combination of genetic and epidemiological data for a joint analysis. however, it is not possible, at the moment, to identify transmission clusters within regions, counties, or cities, solely on genetic data, since micro-scale genetic data is not yet available. indeed, transmission investigations that have been performed so far have been based on contact-tracing, epidemiological and clinical data (17, 18) .published scientific data and media are, nowadays, easily accessible to a worldwide audience;properly weighing the information being shared is important more than ever. we deem that current molecular epidemiology data are not solid enough to provide a scientifically sound analysis of sars-cov-2 spread. despite overall increasing of phylogenetic and temporal signal, we suggest that any conclusion drawn, at present, about existing lineages and direction of viral spread, based on phylogenetic analysis of sars-cov-2 sequence data, should be considered at the very best preliminary, and hypothesis-generating. the evolutionary dynamics of sars-cov-2 spread is unveiling an unprecedented amount of information, essential to make policy decisions.the whole of humanity is threatened by the current pandemic, and policy makers need to adjust their mitigation measures while the pandemic itself is developing. some of the urgent answers required lie in the timely availability of abundant, high quality genetic data not only from countries experiencing a high number of reported cases, but also from others that seem to be experiencing, at least for now, a lower number of infections.gisaid was accessed on march 30 th 2020 (table s1 ). after quality control of sequences that transition/transversions vs. genetic distance plot were calculated using dambe6 (19) . evaluation of the presence of phylogenetic signal satisfying resolved phylogenetic relationships among sequences was carried out with iq-tree, allowing the software to search for all possible quartets using the best-fitting nucleotide substitution model (11) . ml tree reconstruction was performed in iq-tree based on the best-fit model chosen according to bayesian information criterion (bic) (20, 21) . exploration of temporal structure, i.e. presence of molecular clock in the data, was assessed by regression of divergence -root-to-tip genetic distance-against sampling time using tempest (13) . in this case, absence of a linear trend indicates that the data does not contain temporal signal and that the data is not appropriate for phylogenetic inference using molecular clock models. transphylo r package was used to infer transmission matrices of sars-cov-2 (16) .ms is supported in part by the stephany w. holloway university chair in aids research. we thank all those who have contributed sars-cov-2 genome sequences to the gisaid database (https://www.gisaid.org/). figure s2 ). each bidirectional arrow, and corresponding number, connects two tip branches that were switched to generate an alternative tree topology to be tested (see table 1 , methods). table s1 . acknowledgment table with full information of genome sequences. downloaded from gisaid on march 10 th 2020 and provided as excel file. currently, the world is facing the largest cov pandemic caused by sars-cov-2 with millions of cases throughout the world. the disease caused by sars-cov-2, covid-19, ranges from asymptomatic infection to severe respiratory failure 5 . in the early infection phases, anti-sars cov igg and igm are produced within a period of approximately 13 days after symptom onset 6 . the infection can be controlled by timely detection of sars-cov-2 rna in patients. similar to sars-cov, sars-cov-2 can be treated by population isolation and antiviral and symptomatic treatments, all of them with varying levels of success 7 . many efforts for more this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.effective sars-cov-2 treatment are in progress now, including compounds targeting viral products that have an essential function, especially the viral main protease 8,9 . one of the most intriguing questions is related to the origin of sars-cov-2 and its interspecies jump to the human population. the first cases of unknown causes of pneumonia originated from the huanan seafood and animal market in the city of wuhan, hubei province, china 7 . so far, the mechanism of interspecies jump of sars-cov-2 has not been fully understood although malayan pangolins (manis javanica) have been suggested as possible intermediate hosts due to the high similarity of pangolin and sars-cov-2 genomes 7,10 while bats are regarded as the original source of the infection 11 .the aim of our study was to analyze the available data of complete zoonotic cov genomes in regards to sars-cov-2 in order to examine possible relationships, interspecies evolution, and suggest a possible intermediate host of sars-cov-2.furthermore, knowing the importance of viral proteins for viral cycle and host adaptation, we have investigated the s gene which is responsible for viral adsorption and probably participates in the host shifts. we also obtained information of the geographic origin of the host, year of virus detection/isolation and the type of the infected host (species name or genus). all of this information was represented on the tree branches. we used the following keyword combinations for the search of complete bat cov genomes in the genbank: for construction of the dataset, the first applied criterion was if the genome was complete, but we also added other characteristics including the geographic origin of the host, year of virus detection/isolation and the type of the infected host (species name or genus). all of this information was represented on the tree branches. the sequences of animal cov were not directly obtained from chinese markets but from this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.we used the following keyword combinations for the search of complete animal cov genomes in the genbank: (i) murine+coronavirus+complete+genome; (ii) camel+coronavirus+complete+genome; (iii) deer+coronavirus+complete+genome;the sequence dataset was aligned using maftt v.7.450 software 12 sequences identified as duplicates in the phylogenetic reconstruction were excluded.for visualization of the tree and for its editing we used the figtree v. 1.4. software 15 .we opted for division of the datasets into two groups and consequently into two different phylogenetic trees due to the following reasons: (i) the phylogenetic tree which included cov complete genomes isolated from bats aimed at investigating bat cov diversity in relation to the bat genera as well as the evolutionary behavior including interspecies jumps which can increase the spread of certain cov isolates;and (ii) the phylogenetic tree which included cov obtained from animal candidates which could hypothetically be commercialized in the chinese markets was reconstructed in order to suggest a possible intermediate host for sars-cov-2 which could have served as a source for viral introduction into the human population.initially, in order to evaluate the impact of the evolutionary pressure for virus-host adaptation, we performed similarity analysis using the brig software v. 0.95 (blast ring image generator) 16 comparing the bat cov isolate ratg13 obtained accepted article from rhinolophus affinis (mn996532) and the first sequenced human strain of sars-cov-2, wuhan-hu-1 (mn908947). in this analysis we obtain a circular graph that verifies similarity between the human and bat strains and attempts to outline areas with significant mutation coverage.consequently, the exact localization of the mutations in high resolution was shown using the pipmaker program 17 finally, we used the predictprotein software 21 to predict aspects of protein structure and function. interspecies jumps were suspected in almost all of the clusters of the phylogenetic tree. however, these events probably occurred in a different manner. we observed that some cases, such as cov jumps from hipposideros to rousettus, occurred in a clade where there were only cov genomes obtained from hipposideros. the same event occurred for pipistrellus cov isolates located among rhinolophus and rousettus cov isolates (see the grey lines in figure 1 ). however, we can consider as interspecies jumps the presence of cov strains with high genetic similarity isolated from evolutionary divergent bat genera, as in the cases of pipistrellus cov isolates with high genetic similarity to cov obtained from hypsugo bats and myotis cov isolates with high genetic similarity to cov strains isolated from rhinolophus bats ( figure 1 ).on the other hand, we observed that the clusters, i ii and iii ( figure 1 this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.the analysis of the possible mutations of sars-cov-2 (wuhan-hu-1 strain) in comparison to zoonotic bat sequence (ratg13) revealed the existence of 1,141 single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) with 96% identity between the two sequences. as was suspected, most of the identified mutations were located in the s (spike) gene, which encompasses positions between 21,563 bp to 25,384 bp (genbank accession number mn908947). therefore, we focused our analyses on the spike (s)-protein portion (with both its subregions s1/s2 and the junction region), where we found 30 (prra), localized in the junction region of the s1/s1 subunits composing the s protein.after carrying out the analyzes using brig software, we found a similarity rate of 96% between ratg13 and sars-cov-2 (wuhan isolate). however, the mutations which were present in the human strain were randomly distributed along the s gene and not concentrated in a specific location, which did not permit their graphical representation.the performed study reveals the phylogenetic relationships between sars-cov-2 and cov genomes obtained from bats from different parts of the world. moreover, we the performed mutation analysis demonstrated several aa changes which were localized in the s region of the sars-cov-2 genome compared to ratg13 bat strain.the aa insertion at position 680 (prra) is already described in the literature and is located at the s1-s2 junction of the s protein and is a polybasic cleavage site leading to generation of the binding (s1) and fusion (s2) subunits 26 . the generation of the furin subunit can be an important adaptation factor for sars-cov-2 replication in humans. moreover, more r in the s1-s2 cleavage site can enhance the cleavage of s1 and s2 subunits with the removal of the structural constraints and as a consequence the insert peptide s2 is exposed and can be inserted into the host cell membrane, the sars-cov-2 is a major world health emergency which has led to breakdowns in the health systems of the affected countries. therefore, detailed studies of the origins in december 2019, a cluster of pneumonia cases epidemiologically linked to an open-air wet market in city of wuhan (hubei province), china zhou et al., 2020b) led local health officials to issue an epidemiological alert to the chinese center for disease control and prevention (china cdc) and the world health organization's (who) china country office. in early january, the etiological agent of the pneumonia cases was found to be a coronavirus (world health organization, 2020a) , subsequently named sars-cov-2 by an international committee on taxonomy of viruses (ictv) study group (gorbalenya et al., 2020) , (also named hcov-19 by (wu et al., 2020b) ). the first available sequence data placed this novel human pathogen in the sarbecovirus subgenus of coronaviridae (lu et al., 2020) , the same sub-genus as the sars virus that caused a global outbreak of nearly 8000 cases in [2002] [2003] . by mid-january, the virus was spreading widely inside hubei province and by early march sars-cov-2 reached pandemic status (world health organization, 2020b) .in outbreaks of zoonotic pathogens, identification of the infection source is crucial, as this may allow health authorities to separate human populations from the wild-life or domestic-animal reservoirs posing the zoonotic risk (stegeman et al., 2004; yu et al., 2013) . if controlling an outbreak in its early stages is not possible -as was the case for the covid-19 epidemic in hubei province -identification of origins and point sources is nevertheless important for containment purposes in other provinces and prevention of future outbreaks. when the first genome sequence of sars-cov-2, wuhan-hu-1, was released on january 10 2020 on virological.org by a consortium led by yong-zhen zhang it enabled the immediate analyses of its ancestry. across a large region of its genome, corresponding approximately to orf1b , it did not cluster with any of the known bat coronaviruses indicating that recombination likely played a role in the evolutionary history of these viruses (lu et al., 2020; wu et al. 2020b ). subsequently, a bat sarbecovirus -ratg13 sampled from a rhinolophus affinis horseshoe bat in 2013 in yunnan province -was reported that clusters with sars-cov-2 in almost all genomic regions with approximately 96% genome sequence identity (zhou et al., 2020b) . zhou et al. (2020b) concluded from the genetic proximity of sars-cov-2 to a bat virus that a bat origin for the current covid-19 outbreak is probable. recent evidence has also identified pangolins as potential intermediate species for sars-cov-2 emergence or as a potential reservoir species themselves (lam et al., 2020; xiao et al., 2020) .unlike other viruses that have emerged in the past two decades, coronaviruses are highly recombinogenic (forni et al., 2017; hon et al., 2008; lam et al., 2018) . influenza viruses reassort (webster et al., 1992) but they do not undergo homologous recombination within rna segments (boni et al., 2008 (boni et al., , 2010 , meaning that 'origins' questions for influenza outbreaks can always be reduced to origins questions for each of influenza's eight rna segments. for coronaviruses however, recombination means that small genomic sub-regions can have independent origins, identifiable if sufficient sampling has been done in the animal reservoirs that support the endemic circulation, coinfection, and recombination that appear to be common.here, we analyse the evolutionary history of sars-cov-2, using available genomic data on sarbecoviruses.we demonstrate that the sarbecoviruses circulating in horseshoe bats have complex recombination histories 5 / 25 permitting generation of novel viral variants, as reported by others (he et al., 2014; hon et al., 2008; hu et al., 2017; li et al., 2020b; lin et al., 2017; wang et al., 2017; yuan et al., 2010; zhou et al., 2020a) .interestingly, despite the lineage leading to sars-cov-2 acquiring residues in its spike (s) protein's receptorbinding domain (rbd) permitting use of human ace2 (wan et al., 2020) and being closer to the pangolin virus than ratg13 in this region (lam et al., 2020 ) -a signal that suggests recombination -the divergence patterns in the s protein show no evidence of recombination between sars-cov-2 and known sarbecoviruses. our results indicate the presence of a single lineage circulating in bats with properties that allowed it to infect human cells, as previously described for the bat sarbecoviruses related to the first sars-cov lineage (ge et al., 2013; menachery et al., 2015 menachery et al., , 2016 .to gauge the length of time this lineage has circulated in bats we estimate the time to most recent common ancestor (tmrca) of sars-cov-2 and ratg13. we use three bioinformatic approaches to remove the effects of recombination, and we combine these approaches to identify putative non-recombinant regions that can be used for reliable phylogenetic reconstruction and dating. collectively our analyses point to bats being the primary reservoir for the sars-cov-2 lineage. while it is possible that pangolins may have acted as an intermediate species facilitating transmission to humans, the evidence is consistent with the virus having evolved in bats resulting in bat sarbecoviruses that can replicate in the upper respiratory tract of both humans and pangolins (zhang and holmes, 2020; zhou et al., 2020a) .of the 68 sequences in the aligned sarbecovirus sequence set, 67 show evidence of mosaicism, indicating involvement in homologous recombination either directly with identifiable parentals or in their deeper shared evolutionary history, i.e., due to shared ancestral recombination events (all dunn-sidak corrected p < 4 × 10 -4 , 3seq (lam et al., 2018) ). this is evidence for numerous recombination events occurring in the evolutionary history of the sarbecoviruses ; however, identifying all past events and their temporal order (eden et al., 2013) is challenging. figure 1 (top) shows the distribution of all identified breakpoints (using 3seq's exhaustive triplet search) by the number of candidate recombinant sequences supporting them. the histogram allows for the identification of non-recombining regions by revealing regions with no breakpoints. sorting these breakpoint-free regions (bfrs) by length results in two segments longer than 5kb: an orf1a sub-region spanning nucleotides 3625-9150 and the first half of orf1b spanning nucleotides 13291-19628. eight other bfrs longer than 500nt were identified. of the nine breakpoints (defining these ten bfrs), four showed phylogenetic incongruence (pi) signals with bootstrap support higher than 80%, adopting previously published criteria on using a combination of mosaic and pisignals to show evidence of past recombination events (boni et al., 2010) . all four of these breakpoints were also identified with the tree-based recombination detection method gard (kosakovsky pond et al., 2006) .the extent of the sarbecoviruses' recombination history can be demonstrated by five phylogenetic trees inferred from bfrs or concatenated adjacent bfrs (figure 1, bottom) . bfrs were concatenated if no 6 / 25 phylogenetic incongruence signal could be identified between them. when viewing the last 7kb of the genome a clade of viruses from northeast (ne) china appears to cluster with sequences from south-central (sc) chinese provinces, but when inspecting trees from different parts of orf1ab the ne china clade is phylogenetically separated from the sc china clade. individual sequences such as rpshaanxi2011, guangxi gx2013, and two sequences from zhejiang province (covzxc21/covzc45), as previously shown zhou et al., 2020a) , show strong phylogenetic recombination signals, as they fall on different evolutionary lineages (with bootstrap support > 80%) depending what region of the genome is being examined.despite this high frequency of recombination among bat viruses, the 'block-like' nature of the genome permits retrieval of a clean sub-alignment for phylogenetic analysis. conservatively, we can combine three >2kb bfrs identified above into a putative non-recombining region 1 (nrr1), after removing five sequences that appear to be recombinants and two small sub-regions of the longer region (nucleotides 13291-19628).alternatively, combining 3seq-inferred breakpoints with gard-inferred breakpoints and the necessity of pi-signals for inferring recombination, we can use the 9.9kb region spanning nucleotides 11885-21753 (nrr2) as a putative non-recombining region; this approach is conservative in identifying breakpoints but not conservative in identifying non-recombining regions. using a third consensus-based approach for identifying recombinant regions in individual sequences -with six different recombination detection methods in rdp5 (martin et al., 2015) -gives a putative recombination-free alignment that we call non-recombinant alignment 3 (nra3) (see methods). figure 2 , with phylogenies reconstructed for two major sub-regions of nrr1.as the sars-cov-2 s protein has been implicated in past recombination events or possibly convergent evolution (lam et al., 2020) , we specifically investigated several sub-regions of the s proteinthe n-terminal domain of s1, the c-terminal domain of s1, the variable loop region of the c-terminal domain, and s2. the variable loop region in sars-cov-2 shows closer identity to the 2019 pangolin coronavirus sequence than to the ratg13 bat virus, supported by phylogenetic inference (figure 3 ). on first examination this would suggest that that sars-cov-2 is a recombinant of an ancestor of pangolin-2019 and ratg13.however, on closer inspection, the relative divergences in the phylogenetic tree (figure 3 , bottom) show that sars-cov-2 is unlikely to have acquired the variable loop from an ancestor of pangolin-2019 as these two sequences are approximately 10% divergent throughout the entire s protein (excluding the ntd). it is ratg13 that is divergent in the variable loop region and is the likely product of recombination, acquiring a divergent 7 / 25 variable loop from an as yet unsampled bat sarbecovirus. this is notable because the variable loop region contains the six key contact residues in the receptor binding domain (rbd) that give sars-cov-2 its ace2 binding specificity wan et al., 2020) . these residues are also in the 2019 pangolin coronavirus sequence. the most parsimonious explanation for these shared residues is a single bat virus lineage (including the common ancestor of sars-cov-2, ratg13, and pangolin guangdong 2019) has the ace2 specific residues, rather than the sars-cov-2 being recombinant. this provides compelling support for the sars-cov-2 lineage being the consequence of a direct or nearly-direct zoonotic jump from bats because the key ace2 binding residues were present in viruses circulating in bats.using the most conservative approach to identifying a non-recombinant genomic region (nrr1), sars-cov-2 forms a sister lineage with ratg13, with genetically related cousin lineages of coronavirus sampled in pangolins in guangdong and guangxi provinces ( figure 2 ). given that these pangolin viruses are ancestral to the progenitor of the ratg13/sars-cov-2 lineage, it is more likely that they are also picking up viruses from bats. while pangolins could be acting as intermediate hosts for bat viruses to get into humansthey develop severe respiratory disease (lie et al., 2019) and commonly come into contact with people as they are trafficked in large numbers for consumption and use in chinese medicine -pangolin infection is not a requirement for bat viruses to cross into humans.phylogenies of sub-regions of nrr1 depict an appreciable degree of spatial structuring of the sarbecoviruses population across different regions ( figure 2 ). one cluster consists of viruses from provinces in southcentral (sc) china (guangxi, yunnan, guizhou) as well as one sequence from sichuan province. the major cluster in its sister lineage is almost exclusively occupied by viruses from provinces in northeast (ne) and central china (hubei, shaanxi, shanxi, henan, hebei, zheijang and jilin). showing two trimmed segments to yield region a' (nt 13291-14932, 15405-17162, 18009-19628) . region b spans nucleotides 3625-9150, and region c spans 9261-11795. to avoid artefacts due to recombination, we focused on the non-recombining regions nrr1, nrr2, and the recombination-masked alignment nra3 for inferring time-measured evolutionary histories. visual exploration using tempest indicates there is no evidence for temporal signal in these data sets ( figure s1 ). this is not surprising for diverse viral populations with relatively deep evolutionary histories. in such cases, even moderate rate variation among long deep phylogenetic branches will significantly impact expected root-to-tip divergences over a sampling time range that represents only a small fraction of the evolutionary history (trova et al., 2015) . however, formal testing using marginal likelihood estimation (duchene et al., 2019) does not reject the absence of temporal signal in all three data sets (table s1) , albeit without strong support in favor of temporal signal (log bayes factor support of 3, 10, and 3 for nrr1, nrr2, and nra3 respectively).in the absence of a strong temporal signal, we sought to identify a suitable prior rate distribution to calibrate the time-measured trees by examining several coronaviruses sampled through time, including hcov-oc43, mers-cov, and sars-cov virus genomes. these data sets were subjected to the same recombination masking approach as nra3 and were characterized by a strong temporal signal (figure 4 ), but also by markedly different evolutionary rates. specifically, using a formal bayesian approach (suchard et al., 2018) (see methods), we estimate a fast evolutionary rate (0.00169 subst/site/yr, 95% highest posterior density we infer time-measured evolutionary histories using a bayesian phylogenetic approach while incorporating rate priors based on the mean mers-cov and hcov-oc43 rates and with standard deviations that allow for more uncertainty than the empirical estimates for both viruses (see methods). using both prior distributions, this results in six highly similar posterior rate estimates for nrr1, nrr2, and nra3, centered around 0.00055 subst/site/yr. the fact that these estimates lie in between the mers-cov and hcov-oc43 14 / 25 rate is consistent with the intermediate sampling time range of about 18 years ( figure 5 ). the consistency of the posterior rates for the different prior means also implies that the data do contribute to the evolutionary rate estimate despite the fact that a temporal signal was visually not apparent ( figure s1 ). below, we report divergence time estimates based on the hcov-oc43-centred rate priors, but also summarize similar corresponding estimates for the mers-cov-centred rate priors in supplementary figure s3 . are in general agreement with estimates using nrr2 and nra3, which result in divergence times of 1982 [1948,2009] and 1948 [1879-1999] , respectively, for sars-cov-2, and estimates of 1952 [1906, 1989] and 1970 [1932-1996] , respectively, for the divergence time of sars-cov from its closest known bat ancestor.the sars-cov divergence times are somewhat earlier than previously estimated dates (hon et al., 2008) as previous estimates were obtained using a collection of sars-cov genomes from human and civet hosts (as well as a few closely related bat genomes) which implies that the evolutionary rates were predominantly informed by the short-term sars outbreak scale and likely biased upwards for the time scale under investigation. indeed, the rates reported by these studies are in line with the short-term sars rates we estimate ( figure 4) . the estimated divergence times for the pangolin virus most closely related to sars-cov-2/ratg13 range from 1851 [1730, 1958] to 1877 [1746, 1986] , indicating that these pangolin lineages were acquired from bat viruses divergent to those that gave rise to sars-cov-2. current sampling of pangolins does not implicate them as an intermediate host.identifying the origins of an emerging pathogen can be critical during the early stages of an outbreak as it may allow for containment measures to be precisely targeted at a stage when the number of daily new infections is still low. early detection via genomics and sequencing was not possible during se asia's initial outbreaks of avian influenza h5n1 (1997, (2003) (2004) (ge et al., 2013; menachery et al., 2015 menachery et al., , 2016 , appropriate measures should have been in place for outbreaks of novel coronaviruses. the key to successful surveillance is that we know which human-adapted viral phenotypes to look for (holmes et al., 2018) .the key difficulty in inferring reliable evolutionary histories for coronaviruses is that their high recombination rate (graham and baric, 2010; su et al., 2016) violates the assumption of standard phylogenetic approaches because different parts of the genome will have different origins. in order to begin characterizing any ancestral relationships for sars-cov-2, non-recombinant regions of the genome must be identified, so that reliable phylogenetic reconstruction and dating can be performed. evolutionary rate estimation can be profoundly affected by the presence of recombination (schierup and hein, 1999) . as there is no single accepted method of inferring breakpoints and identifying clean sub-regions with high certainty, we implemented several approaches to identifying three classic statistical signals of recombination: mosaicism, 16 / 25 green boxplots show the tmrca estimate for the ratg13/sars-cov-2 lineage and its most closely related pangolin lineage (guangdong 2020). transparent boxes of the interquartile range width and with the same colours are superimposed to highlight the overlap between the estimates. in supplementary figure s3 , we compare these divergence time estimates to those obtained using the mers-cov-centred rate priors for nrr1, nrr2 and nra3.phylogenetic incongruence and excessive homoplasy (posada et al., 2002) . our most conservative approach attempted to ensure that putative non-recombining regions had no mosaic or phylogenetic incongruence signals. a second approach was conservative with respect to breakpoint identification, while a third approach attempted to minimize the number of regions removed while still minimizing signals of mosaicism and homoplasy. the origins we present in figure 5 (nrr1) are conservative in the sense that nrr1 is more likely to be non-recombinant than nrr2 or nra3. as the estimated rates and divergence dates were highly similar in the three data sets analyzed, we conclude that our estimates are robust to the method of identifying the genome's non-recombinant regions.due to the absence of temporal signal in the sarbecovirus data sets, we used informative prior distributions on the evolutionary rate to estimate divergence dates. we show that such prior calibration information can be obtained from other coronaviruses (sars-cov, mers-cov, and hcov-oc43), but their rates vary with the time scale of sample collection. in the presence of time-dependent rate variation, a widely observed phenomenon for viruses (duchene et al., 2014; aiewsakun and katzourakis, 2016; membrebe et al., 2019) , the slower rates appear more appropriate for sarbecoviruses that currently encompass a sampling time range of about 18 years. we therefore centered the prior rate distributions on the mean hcov-oc43 and mers-cov rate, but permitted the distributions a greater variance than the empirical rate estimates for these lineages. this approach resulted in similar posterior rates despite the different prior means, implying that the sarbecovirus data do inform the rate estimate even though root-to-top temporal signal was not apparent.the relatively fast evolutionary rate means that it is most appropriate to estimate shallow nodes in the sarbecovirus evolutionary history including the divergence times of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 from their most closely related bat viruses. accurately estimating deeper nodes would require adequately accommodating time-dependent rate variation. while such models have recently been made available, we lack the information to calibrate the rate decline through time (e.g. through internal node calibrations (membrebe et al., 2019) ). as a proxy, it would be possible to model the long-term purifying selection dynamics as a major source of time-dependent rates rates (duchene et al., 2014; aiewsakun and katzourakis, 2016; membrebe et al., 2019) , but this is beyond the scope of the current study. the assumption of long-term purifying selection would imply that coronaviruses are at endemic equilibrium with their natural host species, horseshoe bats, to which they are presumably well-adapted. although there is currently little evidence supporting or contradicting strong positive selection in the sarbecovirus lineage, if multiple host species were to be identified that are able to support endemic viral transmission, then the positive selection that would be associated with new species adaptations would need to be considered when inferring evolutionary rate variation through time.of importance for future emergence events is the appreciation that sars-cov-2 has emerged from the same horseshoe bat subgenus that harbours sars-like coronaviruses. another similarity between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 is their divergence time (40-70 years ago) from currently known extant bat-virus lineages ( figure 5 ). this long divergence period indicates there are unsampled viruses circulating in horseshoe bats that have zoonotic potential . while there is clear involvement of other mammalian species -specifically pangolins for sars-cov-2 -as a plausible conduit for transmission to humans, there 18 / 25 is no evidence pangolins are facilitating adaptation to humans. a hypothesis of snakes as intermediate hosts of sars-cov-2 was posited during the early epidemic phase (ji et al., 2020) , but we found no evidence of this (anderson, 2020; robertson, 2020) ; see supplementary section 3.with horseshoe bats currently the most plausible source for sars-cov-2, it is important to consider that sarbecoviruses circulate in a variety of horseshoe bat species with often widely overlapping species ranges (wong et al., 2019 ). yet, the viral population is largely spatially structured according to provinces in the south and southeast on one lineage, and provinces in the center, east, and northeast on another (figure 2) . this boundary appears to be rarely crossed. two exceptions can be seen in the relatively close relationship of viruses from hong kong bats to viruses from zheijang (with two of the latter, covzc45 and covzxc21, identified as recombinants) and a recombinant virus from sichuan for which part of the genome (region b of sc2018 in figure 2 ) clusters with viruses from provinces in the center, east, and northeast of china. sars-cov-2 and ratg13 are also exceptions as they were sampled from hubei and yunnan, respectively. the fact that they are geographically relatively distant is in agreement with their somewhat distant tmrca because the spatial structure suggests that migration between their locations may be uncommon. from this perspective, it may be useful to perform surveillance for more closely related virus to sars-cov-2 along the gradient from yunnan to hubei.it is clear from our analysis that viruses closely related to sars-cov-2 have been circulating in horseshoe bats for many decades. the substantial unsampled diversity on the sars-cov-2/ratg13 lineage suggests that there is a major clade of bat sarbecoviruses with generalist properties -with respect to their ability to infect a range of mammalian cells -that facilitated its jump to humans and may do so again. although the human ace2-compatible receptor binding domain was very likely to have been present in a bat sarbecovirus lineage that ultimately lead to sars-cov-2, this rbd sequence has thus far only been found in a few pangolin viruses. furthermore, the other key feature thought to be instrumental to sars-cov-2's ability to infect humans -a polybasic cleavage site insertion in the spike protein -has been seen in another close bat relative of the sars-cov-2 virus ; however, the sequence is different and it is likely an independent event.the existing diversity and dynamic process of recombination amongst lineages in the bat reservoir demonstrate how difficult it will be to identify viruses with potential to cause significant human outbreaks before they emerge. this underscores the need for a global network of real-time human disease surveillance systems like that which identified the unusual cluster of pneumonia in wuhan in december 2019 and the rapid deployment of functional studies and genomic tools for pathogen identification and characterization.sarbecovirus data. complete genome sequence data were downloaded from genbank and vipir; accession numbers available in supplementary section 4. sequences were aligned by maftt (katoh et al., 2009) , with a final alignment length of 30927, and used in the analyses below.hcov-oc43. we compiled a data set including 27 human coronavirus oc43 virus genomes and 10 related animal virus genomes (6 bovine, 3 white-tailed deer and one canine virus). the canine viral genome was excluded from the bayesian phylogenetic analyses because temporal signal analyses (see below) indicated that it was an outlier.mers-cov. we extracted a similar number (n = 35) of genomes from a mers-cov data set analysed by dudas et al (2018) using the phylogenetic diversity analyser tool (chernomor et al., 2015) .sars-cov. we compiled a set of 69 sars-cov genomes including 58 genomes sampled from human and 11 sampled from civets and raccoon dogs. this data set comprises an updated version of the one used in hon et al (2008) .as coronaviruses are known to be highly recombinant, we used three different approaches to identify nonrecombinant regions to be used in our bayesian time-calibrated phylogenetic inference.first, we took an approach that relies on identifying mosaic regions (via 3seq) that are also supported by phylogenetic incongruence (pi) signals (boni et al., 2010) . as 3seq is the most powerful the mosaic methods (boni et al., 2007) , we used 3seq to identify the best supported breakpoint history for each potential child (recombinant) sequence in the data set. a single 3seq run on the genome alignment resulted in 67 out of 68 sequences supporting some recombination in the past, with multiple candidate breakpoint ranges listed for each putative recombinant. then, we (a) collected all breakpoints into a single set, (b) complemented this set to generate a set of non-breakpoints, (c) grouped the non-breakpoints into contiguous breakpoint-free regions (bfrs), and (d) sorted these regions by length. a phylogenetic tree -using raxml v8.2.8 (stamatakis, 2014 (stamatakis, , 2006 , gtr+γ model, 100 bootstrap replicates -was inferred for each bfr longer than 500nt.we considered both (1) the possibility that bfrs could be combined into larger non-recombinant regions, and (2) section 5), region d and shorter bfrs were not further included into a combined putative non-recombinant regions.regions a, b, and c were further examined for mosaic signals by 3seq; all showed signs of mosaicism. in region a, we removed sub-region a1 (nt positions 3872-4716 within region a) and sub-region a4 (nt 1642-2113) as both of these showed pi-signals with other sub-regions of region a. after removal of a1 and a4, we named the new region a′. in addition, sequences nc_014470 (bulgaria 2008), covzxc21, covzc45, and dq412042 (hubei-yichang) needed to be removed to maintain a clean non-recombinant signal in a′. region b showed no pi-signals within the region, except one including sequence sc2018 (sichuan), thus this sequence was also removed from the set. region c showed no pi-signals within it.combining regions a′, b, and c, and removing the five mentioned sequences gives us putative nonrecombining region 1, or nrr1, as an alignment of 63 sequences.second, we wanted to construct non-recombinant regions where our approach to breakpoint identification was as conservative as possible. in this approach, we considered a breakpoint supported only if it had three types of statistical support from (1) mosaic signals identified by 3seq, (2) pi-signals identified by building trees around 3seq's breakpoints, (3) the gard algorithm (kosakovsky pond et al., 2006) which identifies breakpoints by identifying pi-signals across proposed breakpoints. since 3seq identified 10 bfrs longer than 500nt, we used gard's inference on 10, 11, and 12 breakpoints. a reduced sequence set of 25 sequences chosen to capture the breadth of diversity in the sarbecoviruses (obvious recombinants not involving the sars-cov-2 lineage were also excluded) was used as gard is computationally intensive. gard identified eight breakpoints that were also within 50nt of breakpoints identified by 3seq. pi-signals were identified (with bootstrap support >80%) for seven of these eight breakpoints: positions 1684, 3046, 9237, 11885, 21753, 22773, and 24628 . using these breakpoints, the longest putative non-recombining segment (nt 11885-21753) is 9.9kb long, and we call this region nrr2. because this approach to breakpoint identification is conservative, the approach to identifying non-recombinant regions is not conservative.our third approach involved identifying breakpoints and masking minor recombinant regions (with gaps, which are treated as unobserved characters in probabilistic phylogenetic approaches). specifically, we used a combination of six methods implemented in rdp5 (rdp, geneconv, maxchi, bootscan sisscan and 3seq) and considered recombination signals detected by more than two methods for breakpoint identification. except for specifying that sequences are linear, all settings were kept to their defaults. based on the identified breakpoints in each genome, only the major non-recombinant region is kept in each genome while other regions are masked. to evaluate the performance procedure, we confirmed that the recombination masking resulted in (i) a significantly different outcome of the phi-test (bruen et al., 2006) , (ii) a removal of well-supported (bootstrap value >95%) incompatible splits in neighbor-nets (bryant and moulton, 2004) , and (iii) a near-complete reduction of mosaic signal as identified by 3seq. if the latter still identified nonnegligible recombination signal, we removed additional genomes that were identified as the major contributors to the remaining signal. this produced non-recombining alignment nra3, which included 63 of the 68 genomes.we focused on these three non-recombining regions/alignments for divergence time estimation. this avoids inappropriately modelling evolutionary processes with recombination on strictly bifurcating trees, which can result in different artefacts such as homoplasies that inflate branch lengths and result in apparently longer evolutionary divergence times. in order to examine temporal signal in the sequenced data, we plotted root-totip divergence against sampling time using tempest based on a maximum likelihood tree. the latter was reconstructed using iqtree (nguyen et al., 2014 ) under a general-time reversible (gtr) model with a discrete gamma distribution to model among-site rate variation.time-measured phylogenetic reconstruction was performed using a bayesian approach implemented in beast (suchard et al., 2018) . when the genomic data included both coding and noncoding regions we used a single gtr+γ substitution model; for concatenated coding genes we partitioned the alignment by codon positions and specified an independent gtr+γ model for each partition with a separate gamma model to accommodate among-site rate variation. we used an uncorrelated relaxed clock model with a lognormal distribution for all data sets, except for the low-diversity sars data for which we specified a strict molecular clock model. for the hcov-oc43, mers-cov, and sars data sets we specified flexible skygrid coalescent tree priors. in the absence of any reasonable prior knowledge on the tmrca of the sarbecovirus data sets (which is required for the grid specification in a skygrid model), we specified a simpler constant size population prior. as informative rate priors for the analysis of the sarbecovirus data sets, we used two different normal prior distributions: one with a mean of 0.00078 and a standard deviation of 0.0003 and one with a mean of 0.00024 and standard deviation of 0.0001. these means are based on the mean rates estimated for mers-cov and hcov-oc43 respectively, while the standard deviations are set ten times larger than the empirical standard deviations to allow more prior uncertainty and avoid strong bias ( supplementary fig. 2 ).in our analyses of the sarbecovirus data sets, we incorporated the uncertainty of the sampling dates when exact dates were not available. to estimate nonsynonymous over synonymous rate ratios for the concatenated coding genes, we used the empirical bayes 'renaissance counting' procedure (lemey et al., 2012) . temporal signal was tested using a recently developed marginal likelihood estimation procedure (duchene et al., 2019) ( table s1) .posterior distributions were approximated through markov chain monte carlo sampling, which were run sufficiently long to ensure effective sampling sizes > 100. beast inferences made use of the beaglev3 library (yres et al., 2019) for efficient likelihood computations. we used treeannotator to summarize the posterior tree distributions and annotated the estimated to a maximum clade credibility tree, which was visualized using figtree.all authors contributed to analyses and interpretations. dlr and xj performed recombination and phylogenetic analysis, and annotated the virus names with geographical and sampling dates. ar performed the s recombination analysis. pb and tc performed the codon-usage analysis. mfb performed the recombination analysis for non-recombining regions 1 and 2, breakpoint analysis, and phylogenetic inference on recombinant segments. pl performed recombination analysis for non-recombining alignment 3, calibration of rate of evolution, and phylogenetic reconstruction and dating. tt-yl collected sars-cov data. pl, mfb, and dlr wrote the first draft of the manuscript, and all authors contributed to manuscript editing.the family coronaviridae is comprised of large, enveloped, single stranded, and positivesense rna viruses that can infect a wide range of animals including humans guan et al., 2003) . the viruses are further classified into four genera: alpha, beta, gamma, and delta coronavirus (king et al., 2012) . so far, all coronaviruses (covs) identified in human belong to the genera alpha and beta. among them betacovs are of particular importance. different novel strains of highly infectious betacovs have been emerged in human populations in the past two decades that have caused severe health concern all over the world. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) was first recognized in 2003, causing a global outbreak (zhong, 2004; peiris et al., 2004; cherry, 2004) . it was followed by another pandemic event in 2012 by a novel strain of coronavirus designated as middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) (lu et al., 2013) . both covs were zoonotic pathogens and evolved in animals. bats in the genus rhinolophus are natural reservoir of coronaviruses worldwide, and it is presumed that both sars-cov and mers-cov have been transmitted to human through some intermediate mammalian hosts (li et al., 2005a; bolles et al., 2011; al-tawfiq and memish, 2014) . recently, emergence of another pandemic termed as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) by world health organization (who) caused by a novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has been reported (zhu et al., 2020) . to date, more than 174,000 people are infected and over 6,600 death tolls, having transmission clusters worldwide including china, italy, south korea, iran, japan, usa, france, spain, germany and several other countries causing alarming global health concern.the large trimeric spike glycoprotein (s) located on the surface of covs is crucial for viral infection and pathogenesis, which is further subdivided into n-terminal s1 subunit and c-terminal s2 domain. the s1 subunit is specialized in recognizing receptors on host cell, comprising of two separate domains located at n-and c-terminal which can fold independently and facilitate receptor engagement (masters, 2006) . receptor-binding domains (rbds) of most covs are located on s1 c-terminus and enable attachment to its host receptor (li et al., 2005b) . the host specificity of virus particle is determined by amino acid sequence of rbd and is usually dissimilar among different covs. therefore, rbd is a core determinant for tissue tropism and host range of covs. this article presents sars-cov-2 phylogenetic trees, comparison and analysis of genome, spike protein, and rbd amino acid sequences of different covs, deducing source and etiology of covid-19 and evolutionary relationship among sars-cov-2 in human.to determine the evolutionary relationship of the sars-cov-2, phylogenetic analysis was performed on whole genomic sequences of different covs from various hosts. the maximum-likelihood (ml) phylogenetic tree is shown in figure 1 , which illustrates four main groups representing four genera of covs, alpha, beta, gamma, and delta. in the phylogenetic tree, strains of sars-cov-2 (red colored) are cluster together and belong to the genera betacoronavirus. among beta-covs, sars-cov, civet sars cov, bat sars-like covs, bat/ratg13 cov, and sars-covs-2 clustered together forming a discrete clade from mers-covs. the clade is further divided into two branches and one of the branches comprises all sars-cov-2 strains clustered together with bat/yunnan/ratg13 cov forming a monophyletic group. bat/yunnan/ratg13 exhibited ~96% genomic similarity with sars-cov-2. this specifies that sars-cov-2 is closely related to bat/yunnan/ratg13 cov.the ml phylogenetic tree demonstrates that covs from bat source are found in the inner joint or neighboring clade of sars-cov-2. this indicates that bats covs particularly bat/yunnan/ratg13 are the source of sars-cov-2, and they are emerged and transmitted from bats to humans through some recombination and transformation events in intermediate host.to explore the emergence of sars-cov-2 in humans, we investigated covs s-protein and its rbd as they are responsible for determining the host range ( table 1) . the s-protein amino acid sequence identity between sars-cov-2 and related beta-covs showed that bat/yunnan/ratg13 shares highest similarity of 97.43%. however, the amino acid sequence identity of rbd of sars-cov-2 with bat/yunnan/ratg13 is 89.57%. on the other hand, beta-covs from pangolin sources (pangolin/guandong/1/2019 and pangolin/guangdong/lung08) revealed highest rbd amino acid sequence identity of 96.68%and 96.08% respectively with sars-cov-2. these indication shows the existence of homologous recombination events within the s-protein gene between bat and pangolin covs.similarity plot analysis of covs genome sequences from bat, pangolin and human also indicated a possible recombination within s-protein of sars-covs-19 ( figure s1 ).the amino acid residues change in s-protein of sars-cov-2 was further analyzed with sars-cov, pangolin and bat covs including pangolin/guandong/1/2019, pangolin/guangdong/lung08, and bat/yunnan/ratg13 (figure 2) . regardless of low homology between sars-cov-2 (wuhan-hu-1_mn908947) and sars-cov (sars_aar07630), they had many homologues areas in s-protein. the five key amino acid residues of s-protein at positions 442,472, 479,480, and 487 of sars-covs are described to be at the angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace2) receptor complex interface and supposed to be crucial for human to human and cross-species transmission (li et al., 2005b; wu et al., 2012) . figure 2b and table s1 describe that all key amino acid residues of rbd (except two positions) are completely homologues between sars-cov-2 (wuhan-hu-1_mn908947) and pangolin covs (pangolin/guandong/1/2019 and pangolin/guangdong/lung08), supporting our postulation of recombination event in s-protein gene. even though, all five crucial amino acid residues of sars-cov-2 for binding to ace2 are different from sars-cov, their hydrophobicity and polarity are similar, having same s-protein structural confirmation and identical rbd 3-d structure (xu et al., 2020) . in addition, six critical key residues in mers-cov rbd binding to its receptor dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4) are all different in sars-cov and sars-cov-2 related coronavirus (figure 2a) .we also investigated some of the important evolutionary and phylogenetic aspects of sars- table 2 . among different orfs of sars-cov-2, orf1a was most variable segment with total number of 44 dissimilar amino acid substitutions. it was followed by spike segment s orf with 13 amino acid residue substitutions. however, orf6 and orf7b are the most conserved regions without amino acid changes. in addition, orf10, e, m and orf7a have tended to be more conserved, with only one or two amino acid substitutions.with the global spread of sars-cov-2, its amino acid sequence is also significantly varied (figure 3) . usually, rna viruses have high rate of genetic mutations, which leads to evolution and provide them with increased adaptability (lin et al., 2019) . to further explore sars-cov-2 evolution in human, we have performed phylogenetic analysis based on the aforementioned sars-cov-2 in correspondence with their amino acid substitution. one hundred and twenty-five newly sequenced sars-cov-2 complete genomes were obtained from global initiative on sharing all influenza data epiflutm database (gisaid epiflu tm ) and genbank. closely related beta-covs genomes sequences from different hosts were also collected and analyzed together with sars-cov-2. open reading frames (orfs) of covs genomes were predicted using orffinder (v0.4.3) with default parameters ignoring nested orfs.raw pair-end reads of pangolin dataset sample (srr10168377) obtained from ncbi were filtered with bbmap.sh (v38.79) by removing adaptors, trimming low quality reads from both sides (quality value < 20), and reads length less than 50 nt were ignored. host reference genome (pangolin manjav1.0, gcf_001685135.1) contaminant reads were removed by bowtie2 (v2.3.5.1) [13] . pangolin cov genome fragments were assembled via megahit (v1.2.9) (li et al., 2015) .the sequences of covs were aligned using multiple sequence alignment mafft (v7.450) (katoh et al., 2019) . aligned sequences were visualized with jalview (v2.10.3) (waterhouse et al., 2009) . poorly aligned regions and gaps were removed by trimal (v1.4.rev22) (capellagutiérrez et al., 2009) . maximum likelihood (ml) phylogenetic trees of whole genome sequences were constructed in iq-tree (v1.6.12) (nguyen et al., 2015) . support for inferred relationships in the phylogenetic tree was assessed by bootstrap analysis with 1000replicates and the best-fit substitution model was determined by iq-tree model test. to be involved in recombination. similarity scores between genomic sequences were generated by simplot (v3.5.1) (lole et al., 1999) . red color highlights interaction positions of sars-cov-2 and pangolin covs with different amino acids residues.binding energy score between rbd and ace2, we highlighted the putative jump in the affinity from a progenitor form of sars-cov-2 to the current virus responsible for covid-19 outbreak. our result was consistent with previously reported phylogenetic analysis and corroborates the opinion that the interface segment of the spike protein rbd might be acquired by sars-cov-2 via a complex evolutionary process rather than a progressive accumulation of mutations. we also highlighted the relevance of q493 and p499 amino acid residues of sars-cov-2 rbd for binding to human ace2 and maintaining the stability of the interface. moreover, we show from the structural analysis that it is unlikely for the interface residues to be the result of genetic engineering. finally, we studied the impact of eight different variants located at the interaction surface of ace2, on the complex formation with sars-cov-2 rbd. we found that none of them is likely to disrupt the interaction with the viral rbd of sars-cov-2.key words: covid-19, ace2, viral spike receptor binding domain, 1 homology-based protein-protein docking, variants. the coronavirus sars-cov-2 (previously known as ncov -19) has been 4 associated with the recent epidemic of acute respiratory distress syndrome 5 [2]. recent studies have suggested that the virus binds to the ace2 receptor 6 on the surface of the host cell using spike proteins, and explored the binary 7 interaction of these two partners [8, 23] . in this work, we focused our 8 analysis on the interface residues to get insight into four main subjects: (1) 9 the architecture of the spike protein interface and whether its evolution in 10 many isolates supports an increase in affinity toward the ace2 receptor; 11 (2) how the affinity of sars-cov-2-rbd and sars-cov-rbd toward 12 different ace2 homologous proteins from different species is dictated by a 13 divergent interface sequences (3) ; a comparison of the interaction hotspots 14 between sars-cov and sars-cov-2; and finally, (4) whether any of the 15 studied ace2 variants may show a different binding property compared to 16 the reference allele. to tackle these questions we used multi-scale modelling 17 approaches in combination with sequence and phylogenetic analysis. with discrete gamma distribution (+g) with 5 rate categories. for the 57 rbd sequences, the best substitution model for maximum likelihood (ml) 58 calculation was selected using a model selection tool implemented on mega 59 6 software based on the lowest bic score. therefore, the wag model [20] 60 using a discrete gamma distribution (+g) with 5 rate categories has been 61 selected.phylogenetic trees were generated using a ml method in mega 6. the 63 consistency of the topology, for the rbd sequences, was assessed using a 64 bootstrap method with 1000 replicates. the resulting phylogenetic tree 65 was edited with itol [9]. the co-crystal structure of the spike protein of sars-cov complexed 69 to human-civet chimeric receptor ace2 was solved at 3å of resolution 70 (pdb code 3scl). we used this structure as a template to build the 71 complex of spike protein from different virus isolates with the human ace2 72 protein (uniprot sequence q9byf1). the template sequences of the ligand 73 (spike protein) and the receptor (ace2) were aligned locally with the 74 target sequences using the program water from the emboss package [12] . 75 modeller version 9.22 [14] was then used to predict the complex model of 76 each spike protein with the ace2 using a slow refining protocol. for each 77 model, we generated ten conformers from which we selected the model with 78 the best dope score [15] .to calculate the binding energy scores we used, prodigy server [22] , 80 mm-gbsa method implemented in the hawkdock server [19] and foldx5 81 [3] . the contribution of each amino acid in protein partners was calculated 82 hawkdock server. different 3d structures of human ace2 (hace2), 83 each comprising one of the identified variants, were modeled using the 84 buildmodel module of foldx5. because it is more adapted to predict the 85 effect of punctual variations of amino acids, we used dynamut at this stage 86 of analysis [13]. 87 2.4 flexibility analysis 88 we ran a protocol to simulate the spike rbd fluctuation of sars-cov-2 89 and sars-cov using the standalone program cabs-flex (version 0.9.14) [7] . 90 three replicates of the simulation with different seeds were conducted using 91 a temperature value of 1.4 (dimensionless value related to the physical 92 temperature). the protein backbone was kept fully flexible and the number 93 of the monte carlo cycles was set to 100. 94 3 resultssequence and phylogenetic analysis 96 phylogenetic analysis of the different rbd sequences revealed two well 97 supported clades. clade 1 includes rm1 isolate, bat-sl-covzc45 and 98 bat-sl-covzxc21. these three isolates are closely related to sars-cov-2 99 as revealed by the phylogenetic tree constructed from the entire genome 100 ( figure 1a ). clade 2 includes sars-cov-2, ratg13, sz16, zs-c, wiv16, 101 ma15, and sars-cov-sino1-11 isolates ( figure 1a ). sars-cov-2 and 102 ratg13 sequences are the closest to the common ancestor of this clade. 103 the exact tree topology is reproduced when we used only the rbd segment 104 corresponding to the interface residues with hace2. this is a linear 105 sequence spanning from residue n481 to n501 in sars-cov-2. to investigate whether the interface of the spike protein isolate evolves 115 by increasing the affinity toward the ace2 receptor in the final host, we 116 predicted the interaction models of the envelope anchored spike protein (sp) 117 from several clinically relevant coronavirus isolates with hace2 receptor 118 (pdb files for the complexes are listed in supplementary materials 1). the 119 construction of the complex applies a comparative-based approach that uses 120 a template structure in which both partners (ligand and receptor) are closely 121 related to those in the target system respectively. in our study, we only 122 modeled the interaction of the rbd which was shown to be implicated in the 123 physical interaction with ace2 ( figure 2a ). the lowest sequence identity 124 of the modeled spike proteins as well as those of any of the orthologous 125 ace2 sequences (human, civet, bat, pig, rat, chicken and snake) do not fall 126 below 63% toward their respective templates. at such values of sequence 127 identities it is expected that the template and the target complexes share 128 the same binding mode [6] . we calculated the binding energy scores of the rbd from different virus 132 isolates interacting with hace2 ( figure 2b ). all three methods used 133 for the calculation are in agreement that rbds from bat-sl-covzc45, 134 bat-sl-covzxc21 and rm1 show the worst energy scores. while the 135 binding energy score falls in the boundary limit of the incertitude margin for 136 prodigy calculation (section 2, supplementary material 2), the differences 137 in the scores calculated by foldx and mm-gbsa are not. therefore we 138 consider that such differences in energies compared to sars-cov-2 are 139 consistent between the three methods. except for foldx, the affinity is 140 predicted to be more favorable for rbd from sars-cov-2 compared to 141 sars-cov. however, mm-gbsa only marginally discriminates between 142 the two values. mm-gbsa allowed us to assign the contribution of each amino acid in 162 the interface with hace2, in the binding energy score. we conducted this 163 analysis using both sequences of the sars-cov-2 wuhan-hu-1 ( figure 3a ) 164 and the sino1-11 sars-cov ( figure 3b) isolates. residues f486, y489, 165 q493, g496, t500 and n501 of sars-cov-2 rbd forming the hotspots of 166 the interface with hace2 protein were investigated (we only consider values 167 > 1 or < 1 kcal/mol to ignore the effect due to the thermal fluctuation). 168 all these amino acids form three patches of interaction spread along the 169 linear interface segment ( figure 3c ): two from the n and c termini and one 170 central. t500 establishes two hydrogen bonds using its side and main chains 171 with y41 and n330 of hace2. n501 forms another hydrogen bond with 172 ace2 residue k353 buried within the interface. on the other hand, sars-173 cov rbd interface contains five residues ( figure 3d ), l473, y476, y485, 174 t487 and t488 corresponding to the equivalent hotspot residues of rbd 175 from sars-cov-2 f487, y490, g497, t501 and n502. therefore, q493 as 176 a hotspot amino acid is specific to sars-cov-2 interface. the equivalent 177 residue n480 in sars-cov only shows a non-significant contribution of 178 0.18 kcal/mol.the similarity matrix analysis was conducted to assess the divergence of 180 the interaction interface of rbds qualitatively, i.e. the specific set of residues 181 implicated in the interaction with ace2, and quantity, i.e. the contribution 182 of each residue in the binding energy score. the similarity matrix was 183 calculated from free energy decomposition of interface residues of rbds 184 from sars-cov-2 and sars-cov in complex with ace2 orthologous 185 and reported as a network representation ( figure 3e and figure 1 and 186 2 in supplementary materials 2). we noticed the existence of densely 187 interconnected edges involving all the protein-protein complexes for sars-188 cov-2 and sars-cov except those involving ace2 from sus scrofa and 189 rattus norvegicus. complexes involving the rbd of sars-cov-2 show less 190 intrinsic similarity compared to rbd of sars-cov. however, similarity 191 scores tend to be uniform in the group involving ace2 from human, civet, 192 dog, bat, snake, and chicken. the complex including hace2 does not seem 193 to diverge from the rest of the members of the sars-cov-2 group such as 194 the case of sus scrofa and rattus norvegicus.196 sequence analysis and the visual inspection of rbd/hace2 complex might 197 reflect the substitution of p499 in sars-cov-2 rbd as a form of adaptation 198 toward a better affinity with the receptor. in order to further investigate 199 its role, we performed a flexibility analysis using a reference structure 200 (sars-cov-2 rbd containing p499) and an in silico mutated form p499t, 201 a residue found in sars-cov and most of the clade 2. our results show 202 that the mutation caused a significant decrease in stability for nine residues 203 of the interface corresponding to segment 482-491 ( figure 3f) . indeed, the 204 rmsf variability per amino acid for this sequence increases compared to 205 the reference structure. a total of eight variants of hace2 that map to the interaction surface 209 are described in the gnomad database ( figure 4a ). all these variants are 210 rare (table 1 ) and mostly found in european non-finnish and african 211 populations. considering both the enthalpy (ddg) and the vibrational 212 entropy in our calculation (dds), we found no significant changes (> 1 or 213 < 1 kcal/mol) in neither the folding energy of the complex ( figure 4b ) nor 214 the interaction energy of the protein-protein partners ( figure 4c ).since the covid-2019 outbreak, several milestone papers have been published 217 to examine the particularity of sars-cov-2 spike protein and its putative 218 interaction with ace2 as a receptor [21] . in the current study, we focused 219 our analysis on the interface segments of sars-cov-2 spike rbd interacting 220 with ace2 from different species by estimating interaction energy profiles. 221 we have studied the effect of eight variants of ace2 in order to detect 222 polymorphisms that may increase or decrease virulence in the host. our 223 results showed that if ace2 is the only route for the infection in humans, 224 variants interacting physically with rbd are not likely to disrupt the 225 formation of the complex and would have a marginal effect on the affinity. 226 therefore, it is unlikely that any form of resistance to the virus, related to 227 the ace2 gene, exists. however, this analysis merits to be investigated in 228 depth in different ethnic groups for a better assessment of the contribution 229 of genetic variability in host-pathogen interaction.the similar values of binding energy scores with different ace2 ortho-231 logues suggest that the ability of binding to different ace2 orthologous is 232 preserved in many species either for sars-cov-2 or sars-cov. therefore, 233 the transition to the zoonotic form is trivial if that depends only on ace2 234 as the primary route to the infection in both the intermediate and the 235 final host. however, we know that such a process is very complex since it 236 requires many protein-protein interactions to acquire the specific capacity 237 of infecting and replicating in the host cells [18] . consequently, it makes 238 sense to assume that many other types of receptors or co-receptors may 239 be critical to determine the capacity of crossing the species barrier. this 240 has been already suggested for sars-cov [1] and similarly, sars-cov-2 241 may show the same feature. moreover, our results show that the significant 242 overlap of glycosylation sites with the protein-protein interface implies a 243 likely interaction of sars-cov-2 progenitors with receptors other than 244 ace2. finally, recent transcriptomic profiling has suggested the possibility 245 of multiple route infections via the interaction of many human receptors 246 for sars-cov-2 [11].whole-genome phylogenetic analysis of the different isolates included in 248 this study is consistent with previous works that place the wuhan-hu-1 249 isolate close to bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21 isolates [10, 17] 250 within the betacoronavirus genus. the use of rbd sequences, however, 251 places the virus in a clade that comprises sars-cov related homologs 252 including isolates from bat and civet. the clade swapping as seen in 253 figure 1a , seems also to occur for ratg13 and rm1 isolated from bat. this 254 is expected as the use of different phylogenetic markers may considerably 255 affect the topology of the tree. however, the significant divergence in 256 the interfaces segments as a key molecular element contributing to the 257 determination of the tree topology has driven our work toward studying 258 their impact on the interaction with hace2. the binding of the spike 259 glycoprotein to ace2 receptor requires a certain level of affinity. in the 260 case where the rbd evolves from an ancestral form closer to that of bat-sl-261 covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21, we expected a decrease of the binding 262 energy scores through the evolution process following incremental changes in 263 the rbd. in such a scenario, we presume that there are other intermediary 264 forms of coronavirus that describe such variation of the binding energy 265 score to reach a level where the pathogen can infect humans with high 266 affinity toward hace2. on the other hand, our results show that the 267 binding energy score and the interface sequence of sars-cov-2 rbd are 268 closer to sars-cov related isolates (either from human or other species). 269 therefore a recombination event involving the spike protein that might 270 have occurred between sars-cov and an ancestral form of the current 271 sars-cov-2 virus might be also possible. this will allow for the virus to 272 acquire a minimum set of residues for the interaction with hace2. the 273 recombination in the spike protein gene has been previously suggested 274 by wei et al in their phylogenetic analysis [4] . thereafter, incremental 275 changes in the binding interface segment will occur in order to reach a 276 better affinity toward the receptor. one of these changes may involve p499 277 residue which substitution to threonine seems to drastically destabilize the 278 interface segment and has a distant effect. moreover, the decomposition 279 of the interaction energy showed that 5 out of 6 hotspot amino acids in 280 sars-cov-2 have their equivalent in sars-cov including n501. contrary 281 to what wan et al [17] have stated, the single mutation n501t does not 282 seem to enhance the affinity. rather, the residue q493 might be responsible 283 for such higher affinity due to a better satisfaction of the van der waals 284 by the longer polar side chain of asparagine. indeed, when we made the 285 same analysis while mutating q493 to n493, the favorable contribution 286 decreases from -2.55 kcal/mol to a non significant value of -0.01 kcal/mol, 287 thus supporting our claim.no major divergence of the interaction interface of sars-cov-2 rbd 289 with hace2 was noticed from the similarity matrix analysis. this suggests 290 that the molecular elements required for the binding with the receptor might 291 also be involved in the interaction with other orthologous forms of ace2 292 and that these elements are not optimized specifically for the human form. 293 therefore, it is unlikely that the interface of rbd from sars-cov-2 is a 294 result of human intervention via genetic engineering aiming to increase the 295 affinity toward ace2. for example, residue e484 contributes unfavorably 296 to the binding energy with 2.24 kcal/mol due to an electrostatic repulsion 297 with e75 from hace2. this residue is an apparent choice for engineering 298 a protein-protein complex with high affinity by substituting e484 with a 299 polar residue. it is, however, noteworthy that the lesser homogeneity of the 300 nodes of sars-cov-2 group, in comparison to sars-cov, may suggest 301 a higher tolerance for the mutation of the new virus which would allow 302 it to cross the species barrier more easily and to efficiently optimize the 303 interaction in the host. being understanding about his absence and for not being able to bring him 312 the marshmallow candy because of the covid-19 outbreak. the coronavirus sars-cov-2 (previously known as ncov -19) has been 4 associated with the recent epidemic of acute respiratory distress syndrome 5 [9] , [2] . recent studies have suggested that the virus binds to the ace2 6 receptor on the surface of the host cell using the spike protein and explored 7 the binary interaction of these two partners [4, 12, 28] . in this work, we 8 focused our analysis on the interface residues to get insight into four main 9 subjects: (1) the architecture of the interface of the spike protein and 10 whether its evolution in many isolates supports an increase in affinity 11 toward the ace2 receptor; (2) how the affinity of sars-cov-2-rbd and 12 sars-cov-rbd toward different ace2 homologous proteins from different 13 species is dictated by a divergent interface sequences (3); a comparison of 14 the interaction hotspots between sars-cov and sars-cov-2; and finally, 15 (4) whether any of the studied ace2 variants may show a different binding 16 property compared to the reference allele. to tackle these questions we 17 used multiscale modelling approaches combined to sequence and phylogeny 18 analysis.sequences and data retrieval 21 full genome sequences of 10 coronaviruses isolates were retrieved from ncbi 22 genebank corresponding to the following accessions: ay485277. 1 the sequences of the surface glycoprotein were extracted from the coding 32 segment (cds) translation feature from each genome annotation or by 33 locally aligning the protein from sars-cov-2 with all possible orfs from 34 the translated genomes. ace2 orthologous sequences from human (uniprot 35 sequence q9byf1), masked palm civet (ncbi protein aax63775. 1 human variants of the ace2 gene were collected from the gnomad 44 database [7] . only variants that map to the protein coding region and 45 belonging to the interface of interaction with the rbd of the spike protein 46 were retained for further analyses.sequence analysis and phylogeny tree calculation 48 mafft was used to align the whole genome sequences and the protein 49 sequences of viral rbds [8] . for the genome comparison, we selected the 50 best site model based on lowest bayesian information criterion calculated 51 . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.976027 doi: biorxiv preprint using model selection tool implemented in mega 6 software [21] . the 52 general time reversible (gtr) model was chosen as the best fitting model 53 for nucleotide substitution with discrete gamma distribution (+g) with 5 54 rate categories. for the rbd sequences, the best substitution model for 55 ml calculation was selected using a model selection tool implemented on 56 mega 6 software based on the lowest bayesian information criterion (bic) 57 score. therefore, the wag model [24] using a discrete gamma distribution 58 (+g) with 5 rate categories has been selected.phylogenetic trees were generated using a maximum likelihood (ml) 60 method in mega 6. the consistency of the topology, for the rbd sequences, 61 was assessed using a bootstrap method with 1000 replicates. the resulting 62 phylogenetic tree was edited with itol [13] . the co-crystal structure of the spike protein of sars coronavirus com-66 plexed to human human-civet chimeric receptor ace2 was solved at 3åof 67 resolution (pdb code 3scl). we used this structure as a template to build 68 the complex of spike protein from different virus isolates with the human 69 ace2 protein (uniprot sequence q9byf1). the template sequences of the 70 ligand (spike protein) and the receptor (ace2) were aligned locally with the 71 target sequences using the program water from the emboss package [16] . 72 modeller version 9.22 [18] was then used to predict the complex model of 73 each spike protein with the ace2 using a slow refining protocol. for each 74 model, we generated ten conformers from which we selected the model with 75 the best dope score [19] .to calculate the binding energy we used the prodigy server [27] . 77 the calculation of contribution of each amino acid in a protein partner 78 was computed with mm-gbsa method implemented in the hawkdock 79 server [23] . different 3d structures of hace2, each comprising one of 80 identified variants, were modeled using the buildmodel module of foldx5 [3] . 81 because it is more adapted to predict the effect of punctual variations of 82 amino acids, we used dynamut at this stage of analysis [17] .. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.976027 doi: biorxiv preprint flexibility analysis 84 we ran a protocol to simulate the spike rbd fluctuation of sars-cov-2 and 85 sars-cov using the standalone program cabs-flex (version 0.9.14) [11] . 86 three replicates of the simulation with different seeds were conducted using 87 a temperature value of 1.4 (dimensionless value related to the physical 88 temperature). the protein backbone was kept fully flexible and the number 89 of the monte carlo cycles was set to 100.sequence and phylogeny analysis 92 phylogenetic analysis of the different rbd sequences revealed two well 93 supported clades. clade 2 includes sars-cov-2, ratg13, sz16, zs-c, 94 wiv16, ma15, and sars-cov-sino1-11 isolates ( figure 1a ). sars-cov-2 95 and ratg13 sequences are the closest to the common ancestor of this clade. 96 clade 1 includes rm1 isolate, bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21. 97 these three isolates are closely related to sars-cov-2 as revealed by the 98 phylogenetic tree constructed from the entire genome ( figure 1a ). the 99 exact tree topology is reproduced when we used only the rbd segment 100 corresponding to the interface residues with hace2. this is a linear 101 sequence spanning from residue n481 to n501 in sars-cov-2.multiple sequence alignment showed that the interface segment of sars-103 cov-2 shares higher similarity to sequences from clade 2 ( figure 1b ). 104 however, we noticed that s494, q498 and p499 are exclusively similar 105 to their equivalent amino acids in sequences from clade 1. sars-cov-2 106 interface sequence is closely related to bat-covratg13 sequence, isolated 107 from a rhinolophus affinis bat.prediction of the rbd/hace2 complex structure 109 to investigate whether the interface of the spike protein isolates evolves 110 by increasing the affinity toward the ace2 receptor in the final host, we 111 predicted the interaction models of the envelope anchored spike protein (sp) 112 from several clinically relevant coronavirus isolates with the human receptor 113 . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.976027 doi: biorxiv preprint ace2 (hace2). the construction of the complex applies a comparative-114 based approach that uses a template structure in which both partners 115 (ligand and receptor) are closely related to those in the target system 116 respectively. in our study, we only modeled the interaction of the rbd 117 which was shown to be implicated in the physical interaction with ace2 118 receptor ( figure 2a ). the lowest sequence identity of the modeled spike 119 proteins as well as those of any of the orthologous ace2 sequences (human, 120 civet, bat, pig, rat, chicken and snake) do not fall below 63% compared to 121 their respective templates. at such values of sequence identities between 122 the equivalent partners of the receptor or the ligand, it is expected that the 123 template and the target complexes share the same binding mode [1, 10] . the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.976027 doi: biorxiv preprintcov with different animal ace2 receptors 136 we made this analysis to investigate the tendency of sars-cov-2 and 137 sars-cov to interact with different orthologous forms of ace2 which is 138 dictated by the divergence in their interacting surfaces. homology based 139 protein-protein docking was conducted to generate the interaction model 140 of sars-cov-2 rbd with ace2 receptor from different animal species 141 ( figure 2c ). we noticed that for the civet, dog, chicken and snake forms, 142 the interaction energy is very low and very similar either for sars-cov-2 143 or sars-cov. although the kd are relatively low for the rat and bat forms 144 interacting with sars-cov rbd, those of sars-cov-2 are high and go 145 beyond 50 nm. on the other hand, it seems that the interaction with pig 146 ace2 is more favorable for sars-cov-2 isolate since the estimated kd is 147 3 folds lesser compared to sars-cov-2.the mm-gbsa calculation allowed us to assign the contribution in the 150 binding energy of each amino acid in the interface with hace2. we 151 carried this analysis using both sequences of the sars-cov-2 wuhan-hu-1 152 ( figure 3a ) and the sino1-11 sars-cov ( figure 3b) isolates. residues 153 f486, y489, q493, g496, t500 and n501 of sars-cov-2 rbd form the 154 hotspots of the interface with hace2 protein were investigated (we only 155 consider values > 1 or < 1 kcal/mol to ignore the effect due to the thermal 156 fluctuation). all these amino acids form three patches of interaction spread 157 along the linear interface segment ( figure 3c ): two from the n and c 158 termini and one central. t500 establishes two hydrogen bonds using its 159 side and main chains with y41 and n330 of hace2. n501 forms another 160 hydrogen bond with ace2 residue k353 buried within the interface. on the 161 other hand, sars-cov rbd interface contains five residues ( figure 3d ), 162 l473, y476, y485, t487 and t488 corresponding to the equivalent hotspot 163 residues of rbd from sars-cov-2 f487, y490, g497, t501 and n502. 164 therefore, q493 as a hotspot amino acid is specific to sars-cov-2 interface. 165 the equivalent residue n480 in sars-cov only shows a non-significant 166 contribution of 0.18 kcal/mol.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.976027 doi: biorxiv preprint flexibility analysis 168 sequence analysis and the visual inspection of rbd/hace2 complex might 169 reflect the substitution of p499 in sars-cov-2 rbd as a form of adaptation 170 toward a better affinity with the receptor. in order to further investigate 171 its role, we performed a flexibility analysis using a reference structure 172 (sars-cov-2 rbd containing p499) and an in silico mutated form p499t, 173 a residue found in sars-cov and most of the clade 2. our results show 174 that the mutation caused a significant decrease in stability for nine residues 175 of the interface corresponding to segment 482-491 ( figure 3e) . indeed, the 176 rmsf variability per amino acid for this sequence increases compared to 177 the reference structure. the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.976027 doi: biorxiv preprinta total of eight variants of hace2 that map to the interaction surface 180 are described in the gnomad database. all these variants are rare (ta-181 ble 1) and mostly found in european non-finnish and african populations. 182 considering both the enthalpy (ddg) and the vibrational entropy in our 183 calculation (dds), we found no significant change in the interaction energy 184 (> 1 or < 1 kcal/mol) (figure 4 ). 185 figure 4 . estimation of the energy changing upon mutation for hace2 variants. both enthalpy and entropy terms are computed.since the covid-2019 outbreak, several milestone papers have been published 187 to examine the particularity of sars-cov-2 spike protein and its putative 188 interaction with ace2 as a receptor [25, 26] . in the current study, we 189 focused our analysis on the interface segments of sars-cov-2 spike rbd 190 interacting with ace2 from different species by estimating interaction 191 energy profiles. 192 we have studied the effect of eight variants of ace2 in order to detect 193 polymorphisms that may increase or decrease the virulence in the host. we 194 concluded that if ace2 is the only route for the infection in humans, variants 195 interacting physically with rbd are not likely to disrupt the formation of 196 the complex and would have a marginal effect on the affinity. therefore, it 197 . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.976027 doi: biorxiv preprint is unlikely that any form of resistance to the virus, related to the ace2 198 gene, exists. however, this analysis merits to be investigated in depth in 199 different ethnic groups for a better assessment of the contribution of genetic 200 variability in host-pathogen interaction. the binding of sars-cov-2 rbd 201 to different forms of ace2 shows similar values compared to sars-cov 202 which is in agreement with the ability of the virus to cross the species barrier. 203 however, although we estimated low kd value between sars-cov rbd 204 and gallus gallus ace2, there have been no reported cases of sars-cov 205 isolated from chicken. on the other hand, while kd is high for sars-cov 206 rbd interacting with porcine ace2, there are only few reported cases 207 of such type [20] . indeed, host-pathogen interaction is a complex process 208 unlikely to be controlled only by the binding of the spike protein with 209 ace2 [5] . for model animals where kd values are very low, ace2 analysis 210 may play a key role in targeting the main animal reservoir of sars-cov-2. 211 for high kd values, other factors might regulate the infection including the 212 implication of different receptors or the response of the immune system but 213 that does not mean that the infection is unlikely to occur. on the other 214 hand, whole-genome phylogenetic analysis of the different isolates included 215 in this study is consistent with previous works that place the wuhan-hu-1 216 isolate close to bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21 isolates [14, 15, 22] 217 within the betacoronavirus genus. the use of rbd sequences, however, 218 places the virus in a clade that comprises sars-cov related homologs 219 including isolates from bat and civet. the clade swapping as seen in 220 figure 1a , seems also to occur for ratg13 and rm1 isolated from bat. this 221 is expected as the use of different phylogenetic markers may considerably 222 affect the topology of the tree. however, given the functional implication 223 of the spike rbd in host-pathogen infection, we have raised the question 224 about where the virus obtained its rbd binding interface. the binding of 225 the spike glycoprotein to ace2 receptor requires a certain level of affinity. 226 in the case where the rbd evolves from an ancestral form closer to that of 227 bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21, we expected a decrease of the 228 binding energy through the evolution process following incremental changes 229 in the rbd. in such a scenario, we presume that there are other intermediary 230 forms of coronavirus that describe such variation of the binding energy to 231 reach a level where the pathogen can cross the species barriers and infect 232 . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.976027 doi: biorxiv preprint humans with high affinity toward hace2. on the other hand, our results 233 show that the binding energy and the interface sequence of sars-cov-2 234 rbd are closer to sars-cov related isolates (either from human or other 235 species). therefore a recombination event involving the spike protein that 236 might have occurred between sars-cov and an ancestral form of the 237 current sars-cov-2 virus might be also possible. this will allow for the 238 virus to acquire a minimum set of residues for the interaction with hace2. 239 the recombination in the spike protein gene has been previously suggested 240 by wei et al in their phylogenetic analysis [6] . thereafter, incremental 241 changes in the binding interface segment will occur in order to reach a 242 better affinity toward the receptor. one of these changes may involve p499 243 residue which substitution to threonine seems to drastically destabilize the 244 interface segment and has a distant effect. moreover, the decomposition 245 of the interaction energy showed that 5 out of 6 hotspot amino acids in 246 sars-cov-2 have their equivalent in sars-cov including n501. contrary 247 to what wan et al [22] have stated, the single mutation n501t does not 248 seem to enhance the affinity. rather, the residue q493 might be responsible 249 for such higher affinity due to a better satisfaction of the van der waals 250 by the longer polar side chain of asparagine. indeed, when we made the 251 same analysis while mutating q493 to n493, the favorable contribution 252 decreases from -2.55 kcal/mol to a non significant value of -0.01 kcal/mol, 253 thus supporting our claim. the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.976027 doi: biorxiv preprintregion. phylogenetic analysis, natural selection investigation and genome recombination analysis 23 were performed. our analysis showed that all saudi sars-cov-2 sequences are of the same origin 24 and closer proximity to bat sars-like covs, followed by sars-covs, however quite distant to 25 mers-cov. moreover, genome recombination analysis revealed two recombination events 26 between sars-cov-2 and bat sars-like covs. this was further assessed by s gene recombination 27 analysis. these recombination events may be relevant to the emergence of this novel virus. 28 moreover, positive selection pressure was detected between sars-cov-2, bat sl-cov isolates 29 and human sars-cov isolates. however, the highest positive selection occurred between sars- 30 cov-2 isolates and 2 bat-sl-cov isolates (bat-sl-rsshc014 and bat-sl-covzc45). this further 31 indicates that sars-cov-2 isolates were adaptively evolved from bat sars-like isolates, and that 32 a virus with originating from bats triggered this pandemic. this study thuds sheds further light on 33 the origin of this virus. 16, 17] . structurally, s is composed of two functional subunits essential for 79 binding to the host cell receptor (s1 subunit) and virus-host cell fusion (s2 subunit) [18] . the s1 breakpoints existed in a single sequence, the sequence region between the breakpoints was 130 denoted the "minor" region, triggered by the minor parent, while the remaining part is called the 131 "major" region, provoked by the major parent. as a consequence, neighbor-joining phylogenetic 132 trees were generated to display the probable topological shifts of specific sequences. 133 phylogenetic discrepancy is revealed by a putative recombinant whose distance in the phylogeny 134 is obviously close to a single parent whilst far from another for each sequence segment [27] . since both recombination events appeared in the s gene region, sequences of s genes of the 13 234 covs were extracted for multiple alignment using clustalw, followed by finding the best 235 substitution model to be implemented in the phylogenetic analysis. gtr and tn93 models were 236 the best fitting owing to achieving the least bic of 51289.85 and 51325.49, respectively. 237 consequently, the phylogenetic tree was constructed using tn93 model and although, it was 238 constructed using the nj method (fig 4) , and the obtained tree was consistent with the tree next, a molecular clock analysis was carried out using the ml method to examine if the s gene of 294 the 13 isolates used in the current study have the same evolutionary rate throughout the tree. it 295 was found that the strains are not evolving at similar rate indicated by rejection of the null 296 hypothesis of equal evolutionary rate throughout the tree at a 5% significance level (p = 297 0.000e+000) as shown in table 5 .298 table 5 . molecular clock analysis of s gene using the ml method. the past two decades have seen the emergence of three novel betacoronaviruses that have been associated with outbreaks in the human population including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) in 2002 1 , middle east respiratory syndrome (mers-cov) in 2012 2 , and sars-cov-2 in 2019 3, 4 . all three coronaviruses appear to have originated from bats and likely were transmitted to humans by zoonotic transmission possibly through an intermediate vertebrate vector 5, 6 .corona virus disease -2019 (covid-19) is the infectious disease caused by the sars-cov-2. the first confirmed case dates to december 8, 2019 in a patient from wuhan city in the hubei province of china 7 . the virus quickly spread through wuhan and neighbouring parts of hubei province despite rapid and aggressive public health interventions 8 . the following months led to global spread of the virus and was officially classified as a pandemic by the who on march 11, 2020 . the spread of sars-cov-2 has had devastating consequence to human health with over 9.12 million documented cases and 473,797 deaths as of june 24, 2020 including 101,637 confirmed cases and 8436 deaths in canada (who situation report number 156).sars-cov-2 is a spherical, enveloped particle, positive-sense, single stranded rna genome that is 29.9 kb in length 3, 9 . genome organization of sars-cov-2 has the characteristic gene order 5'replicase orf1ab, spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m), and nucleocapsid (n)-3' 6 . coronavirus s proteins bind the host receptor enabling viral entry to the cell and have demonstrated the highest sequence variability in the viral genome 10 . the s protein in both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 interact with the host's angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) 11 ; however, the spike protein in sars-cov-2 has ~10-to 20-fold higher binding affinity than sars-cov 12 .the complete sars-cov-2 genome was published on jan 12, 2020 from a patient in wuhan, china 3 . the collaborative effort of many labs around the world have now published the genomes of many sars-cov-2 genomes including 53,992 in gisaid (www.gisaid.org), 24,438 in ncbi (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), and 7,989 in vipr (www.viprbrc.org) (as of june 24, 2020). allelic differences with biased geographic distribution have been observed between three major sars-cov-2 clades, likely the consequence of founder effects 13 . superclade i (a superset of vclade defined in gisaid epicov portal 14 ) , has limited variability with respect to the reference genome and has been described in the majority of isolates in asia 13 . superclade ii (s-clade) has two characteristic variants at c3037t and t28144c 13 and includes most viral isolates from the usa, especially the west coast 13, 15 . superclade iii, (g-clade) has four characteristic variants at c241t, c3037t, c14408t, and a23403g 13 , and includes most viral isolates from europe and many on the east coast of the usa 13, 15 . the a23403g mutation results in a d614g substitution in the s protein which may result in increased fitness as this viral strain is rapidly and repeatedly replacing other forms of the virus around the globe 16 . this mutation is also embedded in an immunological epitope which elicited antibody production in patients during the 2003 sars-cov epidemic 17 , and may mediate antibody escape, making individuals susceptible to a second infection of covid-19 16 .databases containing tens of thousands of sars-cov-2 genomes provide an unprecedented opportunity to reconstruct the establishment and spread of the virus in specific locales. we demonstrate the ability to trace the origin and community spread of sars-cov-2 using sequence data from twenty-five viral genomes isolated from some of first cases of covid-19 in the eastern region of the province of ontario, canada. this knowledge may improve the effectiveness of public health interventions to prevent future pandemicssample collection: nasopharyngeal (np) swabs were collected in viral transport media from symptomatic patients being tested for sars-cov-2 at kingston health sciences center (khsc) and the surrounding hospitals. extraction of total rna from viral transport media was performed using the maxwell rsc whole blood rna/dna kit (promega corporation, madison, wi) on the maxwell rsc 16 automated nucleic acid extractor. each sample was tested for the presence of sars-cov-2 using a laboratory developed multiplex real-time pcr assay targeting the envelope (e) and rna dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) genes 18 on the viia7 real-time pcr system. sars-cov-2 genome sequencing: the extracted nucleic acids from covid-19 positive cases were anonymized and shared with queen's genomics lab at ongwanada (q-glo). rna from each sample (5 μl) was reverse transcribed to complimentary dna using the superscript vilo cdna synthesis kit on a simpliamp thermal cycler. libraries were constructed manually using the ion ampliseq sars-cov-2 research panel, ion xpress barcodes, and the ion ampliseq library kit plus following the manufacturer's recommendations including amplification cycles based on viral load. templating and chip loading were performed on the ion chef system using the ion 510 & ion 520 & ion 530 kit-chef. up to sixteen samples were multiplexed on an ion 530 chip and sequenced using the ion genestudio s5 plus semiconductor sequencer. chart review: demographic data and travel history were extracted from a review of laboratory requisitions, hospital charts, and public health case investigation charts. assessment of linked cases were based off public health case investigation charts. data analysis: preliminary analysis was performed on a torrent suite server and using custom plug-ins created by thermofisher scientific specifically for the ion ampliseq sars cov-2 panel including assemblertrinity for genome-guided assembly of the viral genome, irmareport to build a consensus sequence, and covid19annotatesnpeff to annotate variants. vcf files generated by torrent suite variant caller were filtered to remove eleven variants with read depth less than 1000 and quality score less than 400. filtered variants were used for sample clustering with the maximum likelihood tree 19 in molecular evolutionary genetics analysis (mega) software 20, 21 . phylogenetic analysis: a data analysis pipeline using molecular phylogenetics was developed to reconstruct infection origins and spread utilizing two main assumptions. first, identical sequences are identical by descentthat is, the same variants are unlikely to have evolved independently. second, new mutations accrue at an average rate of 1 base pair (bp) every 7 to 21 days. this is based on an average of 24.225 bp substitutions per year in the nextstrain analysis 22 of the gisaid 14,23 database. briefly, the viral genome sequenced from each patient was used as the query sequence in a blast+ 24 search against a local reference containing 25,132 sars cov-2 genomes from the gisaid database (accessed may 15, 2020). only highly similar sequences with no more than two mismatches were retained from the database reducing the number of reference genomes from 25,132 to 1,251. many references were identical genomes isolated in separate individuals, which were collapsed to 72 unique reference sequences. a reference sequence from wuhan (wuhan-hu1/2019) was added to root the phylogenetic tree. fifty-nine of these 72 reference sequences shared the same common ancestor but differed by one or two substitutions, or otherwise formed derived groups that were not informative to reconstructing the ancestry of the sample genomes. these extraneous tips were removed, leaving only the patient-derived genomes and 13 unique and informative ancestral sequences. phylogenies were built using the ape (v5.3) package in r, using the maximum likelihood approach implemented in the optim.pml function with 100 bootstrap iterations. the ggtree (v2.0.1) and ggplot2 (v3.2.1) packages in r were used to generate tree visualizations.sample demographics including age and biological sex are shown in table 1 . at time of analysis, thirty-two sars-cov-2 samples from local cases of covid-19 were made available, however seven samples did not pass quality control (insufficient viral load or low sequencing coverage) and were excluded from further analysis. for the remaining twenty-five samples, an average of 1.3 million mapped reads per sample was generated, with an average of 8,175 mean read depth and 96.06% uniform coverage (supplementary table 1 ). twenty-one samples have 100% coverage of the genome and four samples have greater than 99.4% coverage. samples 19 and 21 had the lowest uniformity in coverage which resulted in several gaps in the consensus sequence, so these two sequences were removed from phylogenetic analysis. most viral genomes contained between six to eight variants when compared with the nc_045512.2 reference genome with greater number of variants reported in sample 41 (10 variants) and sample 36 (12 variants). the most common nucleotide substitution is from cysteine to thymine (25/45 variants), followed by guanine to thymine (7/45 variants) and adenine to guanine (4/45). all the shared variants are homozygous variants except for heterozygous snp in the orf1ab gene of samples 11 and 30 (c9994a). we see an additional four heterozygous variants in three samples that are unique to that sample (supplementary table 2 ). finally, we observe one shared missense variant (g25217t) and three unique synonymous variants (c24382t, t24982c, c25357t) in the gene encoding the s protein.clustering of the 25 viral sequences within the maximum likelihood tree (fig 1a) is driven by variants that are shared between samples ( fig 1b) and branch length is driven by unique variants carried by each sample (supplementary table 2 ). the samples formed two large clades including two samples that carry two mutations that correspond to the s-clade (c8782t and t28144c) and twenty-three samples that carry four mutations reported in the g-clade (c241t, c3037t, c14408t, and a23403g). within the g-clade we see smaller clusters that correspond to cluster 2 (samples 17, 18, 24, 25, 26, 37, 38, 39, and 42), cluster 5 (samples 1, 10 and 12), and cluster 9 (samples 2, 4, 11, 16, 29, 30, 34, 35, 36, and 41) reported by korber et al. 16 .phylogenetic analysis using local patient sars-cov-2 genomes were matched with blast+ to reference sequences published in the gisaid database. this resulted in 13 ancestral genomes relevant to retracing the origins and spread of local covid-19 cases (fig 2) . sample 23 belongs to the s-clade of sars-cov-2 and is derived from the ancestral genome shared by reference 1. samples sharing this genome are almost exclusively from north america and predominately from the usa (supplementary table 3 ). samples 1, 10, and 12 belong to the gclade cluster 1. this clade contains ancestral reference genomes (16, 39, 46, 68, 69, and 70) reported all over the world, but over-represented in europe, especially the uk and spain. reported travel history supports european origin in these three samples ( table 2 ). the other nineteen samples in the g-clade cluster 2 are derived from several ancestral sequences (3, 14, 53, 57, 67, 72) which are predominantly from north american (usa) patients. reported travel history supports an american origin of infection for patients 34 and 41, who reported visiting the usa before being diagnosed with the virus ( table 2) . within the g-clade 2 samples, we observed four clusters of two or more samples with the same viral genome indicating a common source of infection (fig 2; table 2 ).we analyzed twenty-five sars-cov-2 genomes from cases of covid-19 within the eastern region of the province of ontario, canada. these samples included most of the first cases in the region and therefore infection was assumed to have occurred during international travel or while in proximity to an individual who had recently travelled. genome variation among these samples has important implications for the pathology and epidemiology of this disease, as discussed below.a major concern with novel viruses is mutation rates and how novel mutations will affect virulence, vaccine development, and reinfection [15] [16] [17] 25, 26 . of primary significance are mutations in the s protein because the spike protein defines viral host range and is often the target of neutralizing antibodies 27, 28 . this project identified three novel unique mutations in the coding region of the s protein, however all three are predicted to be synonymous and likely will not affect viral virulence or epitopes. a fourth polymorphic site at c25217t occurs in four samples (2, 4, 34 , and 16) is a missense variant resulting in a glycine to cysteine substitution at the 1219 th residue of the s protein. in silico modeling or functional validation studies may describe the impact of this mutation on the function of the transmembrane domain. this project identified five heterozygous variants c360t, c9729a, g10818t, g17325t, c18136t. four of these heterozygous variants were unique to one sample and had alternate allele frequencies ranging from 25-39% suggesting an emerging viral mutation that occurred since infection of the host. however, one heterozygous variant, c9729a, was shared between two samples (samples 11 and 30) and had an alternate allele frequency of 0.58 and 0.59 indicating that these two individuals likely have superinfection of two sars-cov-2 strains 29 .clustering of shared mutations identified two samples (21 and 23) that belong to the sclade of virus and characterized by two polymorphic sites at c8782t and c28144t 13 . the presence of three additional polymorphic sites at c17747t, a17858g, and c18060t exclusively present in north america 26 support a north american origin for these two samples. furthermore, phylogenetic analysis identified potential ancestral samples for sample 23 that were predominately isolated in the usa. the other twenty-three samples share four shared polymorphic sites at c3037t, c14408t, a23404g, and a23403g and belong to the g-clade of viruses 13 . within the g-clade we observe two distinct clusters, g-clade 1 which appears european in origin and g-clade 2 which appears to originate in the usa. reported travel history supports our phylogenetics analysis for european origin for the g-clade 1 as sample 1 reported recent travel to portugal, sample 10 travelled to ireland, and sample 12 to spain. similarly, reported travel history supports north american origin for the g-clade 2 as sample 34 reported recent travel to florida, usa and sample 41 reported recent travel to arizona, usa. these correlations between phylogenetic origin and reported travel history indicates how viral genome sequencing can successfully trace the origin of sars-cov-2 infections into canada. interestingly, we observed several clusters of samples that shared the same viral sequence indicating that these samples either had a shared source of infection or a result of community transfer. chart review demonstrated that samples 24, 25, and 26 did not travel outside of canada, they are contacts of each other, and share the same sars-cov-2 strain, demonstrating community transfer in eastern ontario was likely even during the early stages of infection. similarly, samples 17, 38, 39 and 42 all share the same viral strain but the connection between these individuals is unknown. identification of the common thread among these patients (or other clusters of cases) could help to identify major sources/pathways of infection. infection in sample 34 is likely attributed to their travel to the usa (table 2) ; however, samples 4 and 34 share the same viral strain and sample 4 tested positive for covid-19 five days earlier than sample 34. a connection between sample 4 and 34 is unknown, as are the travel details of sample 34, but these observations raise the possibility that infection in sample 34 may not be related to their travel to the usa. these results demonstrate how sample clustering and phylogenetic analysis based on viral genome sequencing may assist and prioritize case and contact tracing to further monitor and contain the spread of the virus.there were several limitations in using genomics to trace viral origin and path of transmission of sars-cov-2. first, in the early stages of the pandemic, most countries were only screening and testing international travelers who displayed symptoms. this allowed asymptomatic carriers to go undetected masking potential sources of infection. as a result, gaps exist in the databases reporting sars-cov-2 genomes masking the true sources of infection. however, the rapid publication of genome sequences from around the world can help to offset this limitation, by identifying geographical clusters and specific genomic variants that are shared across regions. the relatively high mutation rate helps to distinguish primary and secondary infections in the span of one to two weeks. a second limitation is a lack of detailed travel and interaction histories for patients due to differences in reporting and data collection among collection sites and agencies. rigorous adherence to standardized data collection protocols, like who's guidance for contact tracing in the context of covid-19 coupled with genomics data as described here, may facilitate effective contact tracing that is required to break the chains of viral transmission. a final limitation is that sequencing sars-cov-2 in covid-19 cases with low viral load was problematic due to lack of rna input for library construction as seen by the number of excluded samples and those with low coverage uniformity (samples 19 and 21). however, this will become less limiting over time as high-throughput sequencing devices continue to improve in sensitivity and throughput.in summary, this is the first description of sars-cov-2 genomes in covid-19 positive cases in eastern ontario. these are many of the first detected cases in eastern ontario and infection was believed to be foreign in origin and the result of international travel or proximity to an individual who had travelled. this analysis illustrates that many of the infections originated from our geographical neighbour, the usa, but other sources of infection include several countries in europe. we also observed community transfer in cases that did not travel out of the country. these results demonstrate how molecular epidemiology and evolutionary phylogenetics can help local health units to track origins and vectors of spread for emerging diseases like sars-cov-2. earlier detection and screening and alternative modes for contact tracing may improve the effectiveness of regional public health interventions to prevent future pandemics. table 2 . summary of viral origin of first covid-19 cases into the eastern region of the province of ontario, canada. phylogenetic analysis determined viral origin based on ancestral sequences in the gisaid database and correlated with patient's reported travel history. samples with identical viral genome sequences are grouped into a single cluster and may represent shared origin or community transfer. * corresponding author (simon.dellicour@ulb.ac.be)since the start of the covid-19 pandemic, an unprecedented number of genomic sequences of the causative virus (sars-cov-2) have been generated and shared with the scientific community. the unparalleled volume of available genetic data presents a unique opportunity to gain real-time insights into the virus transmission during the pandemic, but also a daunting computational hurdle if analysed with gold-standard phylogeographic approaches. we here describe and apply an analytical pipeline that is a compromise between fast and rigorous analytical steps. as a proof of concept, we focus on the belgium epidemic, with one of the highest spatial density of available sars-cov-2 genomes. at the global scale, our analyses confirm the importance of external introduction events in establishing multiple transmission chains in the country. at the country scale, our spatially-explicit phylogeographic analyses highlight that the national lockdown had a relatively low impact on both the lineage dispersal velocity and the long-distance dispersal events within belgium. our pipeline has the potential to be quickly applied to other countries or regions, with key benefits in complementing epidemiological analyses in assessing the impact of intervention measures or their progressive easement.keywords: covid-19, sars-cov-2, phylodynamic, phylogeography, phylogenetic clusters, lockdown measures.first reported in early december 2019 in the province of hubei (china), covid-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) is caused by a new coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; sars-cov-2) that has since rapidly spread around the world 1, 2 , causing an enormous public health and social-economic impact 3, 4 . since the early days of the pandemic, there has been an important mobilisation of the scientific community to understand its epidemiology and help providing a real-time response. to this end, research teams around the world have massively sequenced and publicly released dozens of thousands of viral genome sequences to study the origin of the virus 5, 6 , and to trace its spread at global, country or community-level scales [7] [8] [9] . in this context, a platform like nexstrain 10 , already widely used and recognised by the academic community and beyond, has quickly become a reference to follow the travel history of sars-cov-2 lineages.in the context of the covid-19 pandemic, the volume of genomic data available presents a unique opportunity to gain valuable real-time insights into the dispersal dynamics of the virus. yet, the number of available viral genomes is increasing every day, leading to substantial computational challenges. while bayesian phylogeographic inference represents the gold standard for inferring the dispersal history of viral lineages 11 , these methods are computationally intensive and will fail to provide useful results in an acceptable amount of time.to tackle this practical limitation, we here describe and apply an analytical pipeline that is a compromise between fast and rigorous analytical steps. in practice, we propose to take advantage of the rapid time-scaled phylogenetic tree inference process used by the online nextstrain platform 10 . specifically, we aim to use the resulting time-scaled tree as a fixed empirical tree along which we infer the ancestral locations with the discrete 12 and spatially-explicit 13 phylogeographic models implemented in the software package beast 1.10 14 .in belgium, there are two main different laboratories (from the university of leuven and the university of liège) involved in sequencing sars-cov-2 genomes extracted from confirmed covid-19 positive patients. to date, some genomes (n=58) have also been sequenced at the university of ghent, but for which metadata about the geographic origin are unavailable. as of june 10, 2020, a total of 740 genomes have been sequenced by these research teams and deposited on the gisaid (global initiative on sharing all influenza data 15 ) database. in the present study, we exploit this comprehensive data set to unravel the dispersal history and dynamics of sars-cov-2 viral lineages in belgium. in particular, our objective is to investigate the evolution of the circulation dynamics through time and assess the impact of lockdown measures on spatial transmission. specifically, we aim to use phylogeographic approaches to look at the belgian epidemic at two different levels: (i) the importance of introduction events into the country, and (ii) viral lineages circulating at the nationwide level.on june 10, 2020, we downloaded all belgian sars-cov-2 sequences (n=740) available on gisaid, as well as non-belgian sequences (4,309) originated from 126 different countries and used in nextstrain to represent the overall dispersal history of the virus. we generated a time-scaled phylogenetic tree using a rapid maximum likelihood approach 16 and subsequently ran a preliminary discrete phylogeographic analysis along this tree to identify internal nodes and descending clades that likely correspond to distinct introductions into the belgian territory ( fig. 1, s2 ). we inferred a minimum number of 331 introduction events (95% hpd interval = [315-344]). when compared to the number of sequences sampled in belgium (n=740), this number illustrates the relative importance of external introductions in establishing transmission chains in the country. introduction events resulted in distinct clades (or "clusters") linking varying numbers of sampled sequences (fig. 1) . however, many clusters only consisted of one sampled sequence. according to the time-scaled phylogenetic tree and discrete phylogeographic reconstruction (fig. s1 ), some of these introduction events could have occurred before the return of a cluster is here defined as a phylogenetic clade likely corresponding to a distinct introduction into the study area (belgium). we delineated these clusters by performing a simplistic discrete phylogeographic reconstruction along the time-scaled phylogenetic tree while only considering two potential ancestral locations: "belgium" and "non-belgium". we identified a minimum number of 331 lineage introductions (95% hpd interval = [315-344]), which gives the relative importance of external introductions considering the number of sequences currently sampled in belgium (740). on the tree, lineages circulating in belgium are highlighted in green, and green nodes correspond to the most ancestral node of each belgian cluster (see also figure s1 for a non-circular visualisation of the same tree). besides the tree, we also report the distribution of cluster sizes (number of sampled sequences in each cluster) as well as the number of sequences sampled through time.belgian residents from carnival holidays (around march 1, 2020), which was considered as the major entry point of transmission chains in belgium.to analyse the circulation dynamics of viral lineages within the country, we then performed spatially-explicit phylogeographic inference along the previously identified belgian clades ( fig. 2a ). our reconstructions reveal the occurrence of long-distance dispersal events both before (fig. 2b ) and during (fig. 2c ) the lockdown. by placing phylogenetic branches in a geographical context, spatially-explicit phylogeographic inference allows treating those branches as conditionally independent movement vectors 17 . here, we looked at these movement vectors to assess how the dispersal dynamics of lineages was impacted by the national lockdown, of which the main measures were implemented on march 18, 2020.firstly, we investigated if the lockdown was associated with a change in lineage dispersal velocity. we estimated a substantially higher dispersal velocity before the lockdown (5.4 km/day, 95% hpd [5.0-6.1]) compared to during the lockdown (2.4 km/day, 95% hpd [2.3-2.5]). this trend is further confirmed when focusing on the province of liège for which we have a particularly dense sampling: in that province, we estimated a lineage dispersal velocity of 2.8 km/day (95% hpd [2.2-3.6]) before the lockdown and of 1.1 km/day (95% hpd [1.0-1.2]) during the lockdown. however, the evolution of the dispersal velocity through time is less straightforward to interpret (fig. 3) : while the lineage dispersal velocity was globally higher at the early phase of the belgian epidemic, which corresponds to the week following the returns from carnival holidays, it then seemed to drop just before the beginning of the lockdown before increasing again to reach a plateau. in the second half of april, our estimates indicate that the lineage dispersal velocity drops again. however, this result may be an artefact associated with the notably lower number of phylogenetic branches currently inferred during that period (fig. 3) .secondly, we further investigated the impact of the lockdown on the dispersal events among provinces. our analyses indicate that amongprovinces dispersal events tended to decrease during the epidemic (fig. 3) : such dispersal events were more frequent at the beginning of the epidemic and then progressively decreased until reaching a plateau at the beginning of the lockdown. again, the relatively limited number of phylogenetic branches currently inferred from mid-april does not really allow to interpret the fluctuations of the proportion of among-provinces dispersal events during that period.our preliminary phylogeographic investigation reveals the important contribution of external introduction events for the establishment of the sars-cov-2 epidemic in belgium. this highlights that transmission chains circulating in belgium were not established by a relatively restricted number of isolated infectious cases, e.g. people returning from skiing holidays in northern italy. on the contrary, we identify a large number of distinct clades given the number of analysed sequences sampled in belgium. this overall observation is in line with our spatially-explicit phylogeographic analyses uncover the spatiotemporal distribution of belgian sars-cov-2 clusters, indicating a relatively low impact of the lockdown on both the dispersal velocity of viral lineages and on the frequency of long-distance dispersal events. this contrasts with preliminary results suggesting a lower lineage dispersal velocity during the lockdown period (results not shown). however, these previous results were based on a substantially lower number of sequences sampled during the lockdown period. our latest results highlight that while the national lockdown had an overall impact on the virus transmission, i.e. reducing its reproductive number to a value below one 19 , it does not necessarily decrease the velocity at which the virus can travel or its ability to disperse over long distances. this finding might be important to consider in the context of potential upcoming lockdowns, especially if more localised. while the country now enters a phase of progressive easing of lockdown measures, it will be informative to keep monitoring lineage dispersal across the country. increased dispersal velocity or more frequent long-distance dispersal events could point to an uptick in virus circulation.applying the present phylodynamic pipeline in a real-time perspective does not come without risk as new sequences can sometimes be associated with spurious nucleotide changes that could be associated with sequencing or assembling errors. directly starting from inference results kept up to date by a database like gisaid allows for fast analytical processing but also relies on newly deposited data that could sometimes carry potential errors. to remedy such potentially challenging situations, our proposed pipeline could be extended with a sequence data resource component that makes uses of expert knowledge regarding a particular virus. the glue 20 software package allows new sequences to be systematically checked for potential issues, and could hence be an efficient tool to safely work with frequently updated sars-cov-2 sequencing data. such a "cov-glue" resource is currently being developed (http://cov-glue.cvr.gla.ac.uk/#/home).while we acknowledge that a fully integrated analysis (i.e. an analysis where the phylogenetic tree and ancestral locations are jointly inferred) would be preferable, fixing an empirical time-scaled tree represents a good compromise to rapidly gain insights into the dispersal history and dynamics of sars-cov-2 lineages. indeed, the number of genomes available, as well as the number of different sampling locations to consider in the analysis, would lead to a joint analysis requiring weeks of run-time in a bayesian phylogenetic software package like beast. to illustrate the computational demands of such approach, we ran a classic bayesian phylogenetic analysis on a smaller sars-cov-2 data set (2,795 genomic sequences) using beast 1.10 (data not shown). this analysis required over 150 hours to obtain enough samples from the joint posterior, while using the latest gpu accelerated implementations 21 on 15 parallel runs. with a combined chain length of over 2.2x10 9 states, and an average runtime of 0.9 hours per million states, the significant computational demands required make this approach impractical when speed is critical. on the other hand, we here use a maximum likelihood method implemented in the program treetime 16 to infer a time-scaled phylogenetic tree in a short amount of time (~3 hours for the data set analysed here). given the present urgent situation, we have deliberately assumed a time-scaled maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree as a fair estimate of the true time-scaled phylogenetic tree.our analytical workflow has the potential to be rapidly applied to study the dispersal history and dynamics of sars-cov-2 lineages in other restricted or even much broader study areas. we believe that spatially-explicit reconstruction can be a valuable tool for highlighting specific patterns related to the circulation of the virus or assessing the impact of intervention measures. while new viral genomes are sequenced and released daily, a limitation could paradoxically arise from the non-accessibility of associated metadata. indeed, without sufficiently precise data about the geographic origin of each genome, it is not feasible to perform a spatially-explicit phylogeographic inference. in the same way that viral genomes are deposited in databases like gisaid, metadata should also be made available to enable comprehensive epidemiological investigations with a similar approach as we presented here. inference of a time-scaled phylogenetic tree. to infer our time-scaled phylogenetic tree, we selected all non-belgian sequences in the nextstrain analysis, along with all available belgian sequences in gisaid to be included in our analysis as of june 10 th , 2020. once we knew which were the accessions of interest, we downloaded the latest whole genome alignment from gisaid and removed all non-relevant sequences. we then cleaned the alignment by manually trimming the 5' and 3' untranslated regions (refseq nc_045512.2) and gap-only sites. to obtain a maximum-likelihood phylogeny, we ran iq-tree 2.0.3 22 under a general time reversible 23 (gtr) model of nucleotide substitution with empirical base frequencies and four free rate 24 site categories. this model configuration was selected as the best gtr model using iq-tree?s modelfinder tool. the tree was then inspected for outlier sequences using tempest 25 1.5.3 and, once the outliers were removed, time-calibrated using treetime 0.7.420. to replicate the nextstrain workflow as closely as possible, we specified a clock rate of 8x10 -4 in treetime and removed samples that deviate more than four interquartile ranges from the root-to-tip regression.preliminary discrete phylogeographic analysis. we performed a preliminary phylogeographic analysis using the discrete diffusion model 12 implemented in the software package beast 1.10 14 . the objective of this first analysis was to identify independent introduction events of sars-cov-2 lineages into belgium. to this end, we used our time-scaled phylogenetic tree as a fixed empirical tree and only considered two possible ancestral locations: belgium and non-belgium. bayesian inference through markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) was run on this empirical tree for 10 6 generations and sampled every 1,000 generations. mcmc convergence and mixing properties were inspected using the program tracer 1.7 26 to ensure that effective sample size (ess) values associated with estimated parameters were all >200. after having discarded 10% of sampled trees as burn-in, a maximum clade credibility (mcc) tree was obtained using treeannotator 1.10 14 . we used the resulting mcc tree to delineate belgian clusters here defined as phylogenetic clades corresponding to independent introduction events in belgium.continuous and post hoc phylogeographic analyses. we used the continuous diffusion model 13 available in beast 1.10 14 to perform a spatially-explicit (or "continuous") phylogeographic reconstruction of the dispersal history of sars-cov-2 lineages in belgium. we employed a relaxed random walk (rrw) diffusion model to generate a posterior distribution of trees whose internal nodes are associated with geographic coordinates 13 . specifically, we used a cauchy distribution to model the among-branch heterogeneity in diffusion velocity. we performed a distinct continuous phylogeographic reconstruction for each belgian clade identified by the initial discrete phylogeographic inference, again fixing a time-scaled subtree as an empirical tree. as phylogeographic inference under the continuous diffusion model does not allow identical sampling coordinates assigned to the tips of the tree, we avoided assigning sampling coordinates using the centroid point of each administrative area of origin. for a given sampled sequence, we instead retrieved geographic coordinates from a point randomly sampled within its municipality of origin, which is the maximal level of spatial precision in available metadata. this approach avoids using the common "jitter" option that adds a restricted amount of noise to duplicated sampling coordinates. using such a jitter could be problematic because it can move sampling coordinates to administrative areas neighbouring their actual administrative area of origin 27 . furthermore, the administrative areas considered here are municipalities and are rather small (there are currently 581 municipalities in belgium). the clade-specific continuous phylogeographic reconstructions were only based on belgian tip nodes for which the municipality of origin was known, i.e. 639 out of 740 genomic sequences. furthermore, we only performed a continuous phylogeographic inference for belgian clades linking a minimum of three tip nodes with a known sampling location (municipality). each markov chain was run for 10 6 generations and sampled every 1,000 generations. as with the discrete phylogeographic inference, mcmc convergence/mixing properties were assessed with tracer, and mcc trees (one per clade) were obtained with treeannotator after discarding 10% of sampled trees as burn-in. we then used functions available in the r package "seraphim" 28, 29 to extract spatiotemporal information embedded within the same 1,000 posterior trees and visualise the continuous phylogeographic reconstructions. we also used "seraphim" to estimate the following weighted lineage dispersal velocity, and we verified the robustness of our estimates through a subsampling procedure consisting of re-computing the weighted dispersal velocity after having randomly discarded 25% of branches in each of the 1,000 posterior trees. the weighted lineage dispersal velocity is defined as follows, where d i and t i are the geographic distance travelled (great-circle distance in km) and the time elapsed (in days) on each phylogeny branch, respectively:severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has emerged in wuhan , spread across continents and eventually resulted in the covid-19 pandemic. although there are significant differences between the current and previously known sars-cov genomes, the reason behind its pandemic behaviour is still unclear. genome sequences around the world were revealed and deposited into public databases such as gisaid (shu and mccauley, 2017) . with those genomic datasets, it is possible, in fact crucial to reveal the evolutionary events of sars-cov-2 to understand the types of the circulating genomes as well as in which parts of the genome differ across these types.the sars-cov-2 virus is homologous to sars-cov, and its closer versions were characterized in bats and pangolins . the virus has been under a strong purifying selection . with the isolates obtained so far, the sequences of sars-cov-2 genomes showed more than 99.9% percent identity indicating a recent shift to the human species (tang et al., 2020) . yet, there are unambiguous evolutionary clusters in the genome pool. various studies use snp (tang et al., 2020) or entropy (zhao et al., 2020) based methods to identify evolving virus types to reveal genomic regions responsible for transmission and evolution. tang et. al identified s and l types among 103 sars-cov-2 genomes based on 2 snps at orf1ab and orf8 regions which encode replicase/transcriptase and atf6, respectively (tang et al., 2020) . the entropy-based approach generated informative subtype markers from 17 informative positions to cluster evolving virus genomes (zhao et al., 2020) . another study defined a competitive subtype based on the d614g mutation in the spike protein which facilitates binding to ace2 to receptor on the host cell surface (bhattacharyya et al., 2020) . although whether there is any effect of d614g substitution on the transmissibility is inconclusive (van dorp et al., 2020) , this mutation has been 1 of the landmarks for major groupings of the virus family.in this work, we used publicly available sars-cov-2 genome datasets. we aligned the sequences of more than 15,000 whole genomes and built a phylogenetic tree with the maximum likelihood method. we clustered the genomes based on their clade distribution in the phylogenetic tree, identified their genomic characteristics and linked them with the previous studies. we further analysed clusters, mutations and transmission patterns of the genomes from turkey.to perform our analyses we retrieved virus genomes, aligned them to each other and revealed the evolutionary relationships between them through phylogenetic trees. we assigned the clusters based on the mutations for each genome. we further analyzed the phylogenetic tree with respect to neighbor samples of our genomes of interest to identify possible transmission patterns.the entire sars-cov-2 genome sequences, along with their metadata were retrieved from the gisaid database (table s1 ) (shu and mccauley, 2017) . we retrieved the initial batch of genomes (3,228) from gisaid on 02/04/2020. we used augur toolkit to align whole genome sequences using mafft algorithm (--reorder --anysymbolnomemsave) (katoh and standley, 2016) . the sars-cov2 isolate wuhan-hu-1 genome (genbank: nc_045512.2) was used as a reference genome to trim the sequence and remove insertions in the genomes. since the initial batch, the new sequences in gisaid were periodically added to the preexisting multiple sequence alignment (--existingalignment). the final multiple sequence alignment (msa) contained 15,501 genomes that were available on may 1st 2020. in the metadata file, some genomes lacked month and day information and contained the year of the sample collection date. the genomes with incomplete metadata were filtered out and the filtered msa consisted of 15,277 sequences. maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree was built with iq-tree with the following options: -nt auto (on a 112-core server) -m gtr -fast. augur was used to estimate the molecular clock through timetree (sagulenko et al., 2018) . for the sample epi-isl-428718 we additionally built a separate maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree by using iq-tree multicore version 1.6.1 with ultra-fast bootstrapping option and 1000 bootstraps.the subtree consisting of turkey isolates (table 1) were retrieved from the master time-resolved tree by removing the rest of the genomes with the 'pruning' method from ete3 toolkit (huerta-cepas et al., 2016) . the tree was visualized in figtree v1.4.4 (http://tree.bio. ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/), and rerooted by selecting epi_ isl_428718 as an outgroup. the branch lengths of epi-isl-417413 and epi-isl-428713 samples were shortened for better visualization. ggtree (yu et al., 2017) package in r was used to generate the tree and corresponding clusters.we generated phylo-clusters with treecluster (balaban et al., 2019) which is specifically designed to group viral genomes. the tool supports different clustering options and we used the default option, max clade, which identifies clusters based on 2 parameters, "-t" and "-s". these parameters define the threshold that two leaf nodes can be distant from each other and assign a minimum support value that connects the two leaf nodes or clades, respectively. for this analysis, we only used the distance threshold. the max clade algorithm requires leaves to form a clade and satisfy the distance threshold. the number of clusters that can be generated using a phylogenetic tree depends on the pair wise leaf distance cutoff. we manually searched for a meaningful cutoff for the number of phyloclusters and phylo-subgroups based on their similarity with the previously reported clusters (see below). we used the -t parameter as 0.0084 and 0.00463 for phylo-clusters and phylo-subclusters, respectively. after retrieving the groupings from treecluster, we eliminated clusters containing less than 100 sequences (except a subcluster with 99 sequences). we categorized those clusters having less than 100 sequences as not clustered. as a result, we obtained 4 primary clusters and seventeen subclusters.l/s types of the sars-cov-2 genomes were previously defined based on the nucleotides at 8782nd and 28144th positions (tang et al., 2020) . we categorized "tc" and "ct" haplotypes s and l type, respectively. in the cases both these positions correspond to a gap, the sequences as well as all other cases were classified as unknown. 614 g/d clustering was applied based on the amino acid at the 614th position of the spike protein (jaimes et al., 2020) . combinations of the nucleotides at positions 241; 1059; 3037; 8782; 11083; 14408; 14805; 17747; 17858; 18060; 23403; 25563; 26144; 28144; 28881; 28882; 28883 determined the subtypes for barcode clustering. sequences that belong to the 10 major subtypes (with more than 100 sequences) which constitute 86 percent of all sequences were labelled with their respective 17 nucleotides (zhao et al., 2020) . all other sequences were categorized as unknown for barcode classification. six major clusters (morais júnior et al., 2020) were assigned by the previously determined 12 positions (3037; 8782; 11083; 14408; 17747; 17858; 18060; 23403; 28144; 28881; 28882; 28883) . the lineages were assigned using the proposed nomenclature by lineage assigner web server (rambaut et al., 2020) . sequences that cannot be assigned to any group were categorized as unknown for each classification scheme.we rooted the maximum-likelihood tree for distance calculations by selecting samples that belong to bats and pangolin as an outgroup, namely epi-isl-412976, epi-isl-412977, and epi-isl-412860. we measured the distance from leaf to root for every leaf node that is present in the phylogenetic tree with the ete3 toolkit (huerta-cepas et al., 2016).mutations for each position relative to the reference genome (genbank: nc_045512.2) were catalogued in a table with a custom script. a table of all the mutations of selected sequences was created and ordered according to the phylogenetic tree of the corresponding genomes (table  s2 ). mutations that do not correspond to a nucleotide such as a gap or n were labeled as "gap or n"; the other mutations were marked as nongap. for variations that do not correspond to gap or n, respective nucleotides in the reference genome were obtained and added to the table. the gff file of the reference genome (gcf_009858895.2) was extracted from ncbi genome database. open reading frame (orf) information of each mutation was retrieved from the gff file and added to the table. positions that are not in the range of any orf were labelled as "noncoding region". codon information and position of each mutation in the reference genome were retrieved according to their respective orf start positions and frame. in this process, reported frameshifts in orf1ab (dos ramos et al., 2004; kelly and dinman, 2020) and the overlap between orf7a 3' and 7b 5' ends were taken into account. coding information was used to assign amino acid substitution information to the variations. eventually, the variants were categorized as nonsynonymous, synonymous and noncoding regions.the maximum-likelihood phylodynamic analysis was performed with treetime (sagulenko et al., 2018) to estimate likely times of whole-genome sequences of sars-cov-2 by computing confidence intervals of node dates and reconstruct phylogenetic tree into the timeresolved tree. the slope of the root-to-tip regression was set to 0.0008 to avoid inaccurate inferences of substitution rates. with this model, we eliminated the variation of rapid changes in clock rates by integration along branches (standard deviation of the fixed clock rate estimate was set to 0.0004). the coalescent likelihood was performed with the skyline (strimmer and pybus, 2001) model to optimize branch lengths and dates of ancestral nodes and infer the evolutionary history of population size. the marginal maximum likelihood assignment was used to assign internal nodes to their most likely dates. clock rates were filtered by removing tips that deviate more than four interquartile ranges from the root-to-tip versus time regression. jc69 model was used as general time-reversible (gtr) substitution models to calculate transition probability matrix, actual substitution rate matrix, and equilibrium frequencies of given attributes of sequences. the distribution of subleading migration states and entropies were recorded for each location through augur trait module (sampling bias correction was set to 2.5). closest child-parent pairs that do not go beyond their given locations were identified and evaluated as transmissions using auspice (hadfield et al., 2018) .the first covid-19 case in turkey was reported on march 10th , 2020, later than the reported earliest incidents in asian and european countries. since then, the number of cases increased dramatically. we used all the genomes available in the gisaid database as of may 1st , 2020 and built a phylogenetic tree. after we filtered out the samples with incomplete date or location information, the total number of samples we eventually used was 15,277. the phylogenetic tree was built with the maximum likelihood method and a time-resolved tree was generated (figure 1 ).to verify the accuracy of the phylogenetic tree as well as to assess the distribution of well-characterized genomic features, we mapped several classification schemes on the tree; (i) s/l type (tang et al., 2020) ; (ii) d614g type (bhattacharyya et al., 2020); (iii) barcodes (zhao et al., 2020) ;(iv) six major clusters (morais júnior et al., 2020) . although the methodologies of the clustering attempts were different between these studies, in general, the previously established groups were in line with our phylogenetic tree. besides the already established clustering methods, we classified the clades based on the phylogenetic tree only.there are 2 levels of clustering; we termed phylo-clusters and phylo-subclusters. small clusters were not taken into account (see methods). the phylogenetic map of the virus genomes clearly shows the 2 major s and l type clades. as the ancestral clade, s-type is seen as limited in the number of genomes. twenty-nine of the 30 isolates in turkey were classified in the l-type group.the samples from turkey are dispersed throughout the phylogenetic tree (figure 1) . the 30 samples are classified in 3 out of 4 different phylo-clusters and one remained unclassified. the dispersed groups suggested multiple independent introductions to the country. seven of the 30 genomes encode aspartic acid (d) at the 614th position of the spike protein. the remaining 23 genomes encode glycine (g) in the same position. the d614g mutation is hypothesized to dominate because it enables smoother transmission of the virus (bhattacharyya et al., 2020) . however, this correlation might simply be a founder effect which is basically the loss or gain of genetic information when large population arises from a single individual.one of the genomes isolated in turkey (epi-isl-428718) clustered together with the early subtypes of the virus. this isolate contains t at the position 8782, which is a characteristic of the s-type; however, it has t at the position 28144, which coincides with the l-type. therefore, we characterized this sample as neither s-nor l-type. in the phylogenetic tree, this genome is placed between s and l strains, which suggests a transitioning genome from s to l strain ( figure 2 ). the number of variant nucleotides between this sample and root is lower relative to other turkey samples. phylogenetic placement in the earliest cluster, which is closer to the root, suggests that the lineage of epi-isl-428718 entered turkey as one of the earliest genomes. by the time this sample was isolated in turkey, the l-strain had started to spread in europe, primarily in italy. although the isolation date of this early sample is one week later than the first reported case, the existence of an ancestral genome sequence suggests an earlier introduction of sars-cov-2 to turkey.turkey has genome samples from at least 3 of the 4 major clusters. by taking the transitioning genome into account, samples of turkey are genuinely scattered in the phylogenetic tree. based on the groupings applied, we analyzed the relative abundances of the clusters in turkey and other countries ( figure 3a ). the most samples of turkey belong to cluster 4. iran, denmark and france are also enriched in cluster 4. most european countries are enriched in cluster 3. although turkey has cluster 3 genomes, the fraction of them is lower compared to european countries. with the available genome sequences, the overallcluster profile of turkey does not resemble any country.the divergence of the samples from to tree root was calculated for each subcluster. the subclusters observed in turkey were analyzed along with the other countries ( figure 3b ). the divergence rates are comparable in general. however, within the same subclusters (4 and 8), virus genomes collected in turkey have averagely more diverged than their relatives in other countries. the isolated genomes assigned to subcluster 4 and 8 show higher divergence rates in turkey compared to the others in the same cluster (p-values: 0.00001 and 0.006, respectively, one-tailed t-test between turkey and the rest).we used the turkey isolates (30) to analyze their mutational patterns and their corresponding clusters. from the master tree, we pruned all the leaves except for the samples of interest. we rooted the subtree at the transitioning sample. we aligned the assigned clusters and all the mutations relative to the reference genome (figure 4) , illustrating a correlation between the mutation pattern and the phylogenetic tree clades. observation of no recurrence of a mutationshows that the multiple mutations are the results of founder effects.in total, 55 unique mutations were detected, 2 and 20 of which are noncoding and synonymous, respectively. thirty-three unique amino acid substitutions were detected (table 2) . twenty-three out of 30 genomes we analyzed have the 614g mutation. the d614g mutation seems to have mutated with the 2 synonymous mutations in orf1ab (figure 4 ). besides 614g, 3 more amino acid substitutions were identified in the spike protein (table  2) . g206a, t951i, g227s, s911f, a1420v, a3995f in orf1a and v772i, t1238i in spike protein, v66l in orf5 and s54l in orf8 were found to be specific to some isolates in turkey ( table 2 ). the most abundant amino acid substitutions (23/30) are p314l (orf1b) and d614g (spike), which are dispersed worldwide and not specifically enriched in turkey. orf1a v378i and orf9 s194l are found in 7 and 6 of the 30 isolates, respectively, and show high frequency (15 folds with respect to general) in turkey.the mutational landscape represents the natural classifications of major groupings and subclusters. these mutational footprints can be used to identify the clusters of the future genomes. the combinations of mutations can be used as barcodes to group upcoming virus genomes efficiently without a need for establishing evolutionary associations across lineages, which is a computationally expensive procedure considering the accumulating genomic data.the number of mutations since december 2019 indicates that the sars-cov-2 genome mutates twice a month, on average. genome sequencing reveals mutations and enables a better understanding of the epidemiology by revealing the patterns of virus transmission. the timeresolved phylogenetic distributions of the genomes collected in turkey suggested multiple independent sources of introduction ( figure 5a ). out of the 30 genomes analyzed in this work, the earliest introduction seems to have originated from china. other international imports include the us, australia and europe, probably from the uk. there is a connection between saudi arabia and the 2 cities in turkey. based on the model, this association is reciprocal. the europe-based introductions are observed with the genomes isolated in i̇stanbul. within turkey, a transmission hub appears to be ankara ( figure 5b ). the figure 2 . phylogenetic tree of the transient type (epi-isl-428718) from s to l strain.the maximum likelihood tree was built with iq-tree. 10 s-type and 10 l-type sequences were randomly selected from the assigned samples. the tree was rooted at the genomes obtained from bat and pangolin.isolates in 5 cities are associated with genomes collected in ankara ( figure 5c ).we have published a web application powered by auspice (sarscov2.adebalilab.org/latest). we employed the frontend package (auspice) that nextstrain uses (hadfield, et al. 2018) . with increasing number of virus strains, not far from now, it will be infeasible to display the entire phylogenetic tree even in modern browsers. nextstrain handles this problem by grouping the datasets based on the continents. as the aim of this platform is to trace the spread of virus genomes associated with turkey, we will use representatives in the phylogenetic tree. the representative sequences will cover all the subtypes. the genomes of the samples collected in turkey and their neighboring sequences will be kept in the tree. with this approach, the web application will always contain the genome data from turkey and necessary information of the subtypes with the representative sequences. an additional dimension we added to the application is that it enables to trace virus across the cities of turkey. this approach is applicable to create a comprehensive platform for migration analysis for any country or region of choice.there are 2 most abundant lineages of isolates in turkey: subclusters 4 and 8. if the 30 samples unbiasedly represent the overall distribution of the strains in turkey, subclusters 4 and 8 might comprise approximately 80% of the genomes in the country. the high divergence of the samples in these subclusters in turkey relative to their equivalents in other countries ( figure 3b ) possibly suggests either or both of the 2 scenarios; (i) the viruses dominantly circulating in turkey were introduced to the country later than other countries or (ii) this subcluster has been circulating in turkey at a relatively higher rate than other countries and because of that, it is more likely to select the more diverged isolates by random sampling. much more genomes should be sequenced and analyzed to gain more insight into virus evolution. it is essential to continuously follow up on the upcoming mutations when new samples are added to gisaid database.the phylogenetic analysis of the circulating genomes in a country is necessary to identify the specific groups and their unique mutational patterns. the success of the covid-19 diagnosis test kits, antibody tests and proteintargeting drugs possibly depend on genomic variations. for antibody tests, if a mutation affects protein recognition, the sensitivity of the test might drastically reduce. therefore, mutation profiles of the isolates abundantly circulating in the country should be taken into account to modify these tests. as international travels are limited, viral genome profiles of the countries differ from each other, which is known as bottleneck effect. if international transmissions are kept being restricted, distinct cluster profiles might establish. therefore, each country might need to develop their specific tests targeting the abundant genomes circulating in local.we must note that sample distribution is not in line with the case distribution across turkish cities. due to this sampling bias as well as the low number of genomes, the spread history is undoubtedly incomplete. for instance, only 3 of the 30 samples were collected in i̇stanbul, which hosts approximately 60% of the covid-19 cases. it is highly probable that i̇stanbul will be revealed as the central hub when additional genomes are sequenced. moreover, there was no sample from i̇zmir, 3rd largest city. it should also be noted that the lack of a sufficient number of genomes could have resulted in indirect associations between the cities. more genomes are needed to complement this study with confidence.the spread of the virus is traced by the personal declarations and travel history of the infected people. as sars-cov-2 genomes spread, they leave foot prints behind (mutations) allowing us to trace them. it is feasible to complement the conventional approach with genome sequencing in an unbiased way. implemented feature of city-based tracing of the virus should be useful for authorities to take necessary measures to prevent spread. this approach will be automated with a standard pipeline. we aim to eliminate the technical limitations (because of the size) by applying filtering methods without losing any relevant information.this work, in part, is supported by the european molecular biology organization (embo) installation grant (oa) we would like to thank all the healthcare workers who save lives during the covid-19 pandemic. we thank the research groups who made the genome datasets available for accelerating research. so far, 3 groups in turkey submitted genome sequences; 26 genomes were provided by the ministry of health (fatma bayrakdar, ayşe başak altaş,yasemin coşgun, gülay korukluoğlu, selçuk kılıç); 3 submitted by the glab (i̇lker karacan, tugba kızılboğa akgün, buğra ağaoğlu, gizem alkurt, jale yıldız, betsi köse, elifnaz çelik, mehtap aydın, levent doğanay, gizem dinler); 1 submitted by erciyes university (shaikh terkis islam pavel, hazel yetişkin, günsu aydin, can holyavkin, muhammet ali uygut, zehra b. dursun, i̇lhami çelik, alper i̇şeri, aykut özdarendeli).we thank dr. barış süzek and dr. batu erman for their helpful comments on the manuscript. we would like to acknowledge cem azgari for his contributions throughout the project. we thank molecular biology association for their leadership in taking the initiative of forming a pool of volunteers for covid-19 testing. finally, we would like to thank the members of ecology and evolutionary biology association in turkey for fruitful discussions regarding the preliminary analysis of the sars-cov-2 genomes.oa conceived the study, designed the analysis, interpreted the results and wrote the first draft. ab generated the multiple sequence alignments, bi̇ generated the visualization pipeline with auspice. bs generated the clusters based on the phylogenetic tree and plotted cluster graphs. dç, zk and bt assigned previously identified clusters to the genomes, visualized the clusters aligned with the tree and identified mutations per sample. all authors contributed to manuscript writing and revising. the recent epidemic outbreak of the severe acute respiratory syndrome, known as sars, was first reported in the guangdong province of china late in 2002 and since then several thousand cases have been reported worldwide, mainly in hong kong, vietnam, and canada ksiazek et al., 2003; poutanen et al., 2003] . analysis of the full-length genomic sequence of the causative agent of sars [marra et al., 2003; rota et al., 2003] established that this agent was a unique coronavirus (sars-cov) that displayed no obvious similarity to any other members of the coronavirus genus. coronaviruses (order nidovirales, family coronaviridae, genus coronavirus) have the longest genome (27,000-31,000 nucleotides) amongst all rna viruses. they comprise a highly divergent group of rna-viruses that cause a variety of respiratory and enteric diseases in humans and many animal hosts. previously available sequences of coronaviruses have been classified according to phylogenetic analysis into three main groups [marra et al., 2003; rota et al., 2003] . the newly identified sequence of the sars-cov was not found to cluster within any existing coronavirus group, thus suggesting the existence of an additional lineage, fourth group, within the coronavirus genus poutanen et al., 2003; rota et al., 2003] .the origin of the sars-cov still remains unclear, although data from hong kong researchers indicate that the sars-cov virus is almost identical to viruses infecting civet cats . genetic recombination has been detected between different murine coronaviruses [fu and baric, 1992] . thus, to determine whether recombination has occurred between sars-cov and any members of the three main coronaviruses groups, an in-depth analysis was undertaken of the evolutionary relationships between the sars-cov genome and representative sequences from all members of the coronaviruses genus available currently.amino acid sequence alignments were obtained using the clustal w program (v 1.81) [thompson et al., 1994] and subsequently edited manually for the major gene products orf1ab, spike, m and n proteins to exclude ambiguous parts of the alignment. more specifically, x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, and e genomic regions were excluded since a reliable alignment could not be obtained for these fragments. amino acid sequences derived from the full-length sequences of avian (nc_001451), bovine (nc_003045), human (nc_002645), murine (nc_001846), porcine (nc_002306, nc_003436) coronaviruses, and the sars-cov (ay278488) were used for all the genes. additional amino acid sequences were used for the spike, m, and n genes. for the spike gene, additional amino acid sequences were used for avian (np_040831, aaa70235, aak27168, aac54067, aac42112, caa28432, p11223), bovine (np_150077, aal57308, aaa42908, baa00557, vgihqu), canine (caa01637), feline (caa56778), human (aak32190, p15423, caa71056), murine (aaf68923, aaf69334, p11225, vgihmj, baa23719, jq1534, q02385), and porcine (np_058424, np_598310, a43573, aab30949, aak38656, aam77000, aac96004) coronaviruses. for the m gene, additional amino acid sequences were used foravian(aak91808,p04327,p05136,mmih68),bovine (np_150082, aaa79959, aaf25524, aal40405), feline (aab47501, p25878, caa74229), human (np_073555), murine (aaf05705), porcine (np_058427, aam77004, aab71544, aaa47912, p24412, d36607), and rat (aad33105) coronaviruses. for the n gene, additional amino acid sequences were used for avian (aao46049, aam82282, aac54068, aaf06352, cac39121, vhi-hai), bovine (np_150083, aaa42758, aak83362, p10527), human (np_073556), murine (a45340, p18447), porcine (np_598314, aak38660, p04134, cab91150, s47428, e36607), rat (a45396, baa01591, q02915), and turkey (jq1173) coronaviruses. all the amino acid alignments are available upon request.after constructing the alignments, the separated genes containing only the common strains in all genes were joined in concatenates and a bayesian scanning plot was undertaken as described previously [paraskevis et al., 2003 ] using the wag model [whelan and goldman, 2001] as implemented in the mrbayes program [huelsenbeck and ronquist, 2001] . in particular, within a sliding window of a specified length, bayesian inference was carried out to determine the support of every clade within a given phylogenetic tree, and these support values were plotted along the alignment as described previously [paraskevis et al., 2003] . marginal posterior probabilities between sars-cov and sequences of coronaviruses groups i-iii were plotted throughout the concatenated alignment. posterior probabilities were estimated for a sliding window of 120 amino acids moving in steps of 20 amino acids. metropolis coupled markov chains monte carlo (mcmcmc) analysis was run for 50,000 generations, sampling every 100 steps, and burn-in was set to 5,000 steps. mcmcmc had been checked previously so as to confirm that it had reached equilibrium up to this number of generations in different parts of the alignment, thus suggesting that 5,000 generations could be used as a fixed burnin throughout the alignment.phylogenetic trees were then constructed for every piece of the alignment with evidence of phylogenetic discordance, using the maximum likelihood (ml) and bayesian inference with wag [whelan and goldman, 2001] and mv [muller and vingron, 2000] substitution models, which have been constructed by distantly related amino acid sequences, and a g-distributed rates heterogeneity among sites as implemented in the tree-puzzle (parallel version 5.0) [schmidt et al., 2002] and mrbayes, respectively. a likelihood mapping analysis was also carried out, as implemented in the tree-puzzle program, to investigate the levels of phylogenetic signal in each separate region examined.exploratory phylogenetic analyses in the spike, m, and n genomic regions, including additional partially available coronavirus sequences, revealed that fulllength strains are representative and can be used for the exploration of phylogenetic analysis within the coronaviridae family along the full-genome. bayesian scanning and subsequent phylogenetic analysis revealed that the sars-cov sequence was related more closely to group ii than the other two groups in most of its genome (e.g., at the region spanning amino acid positions 4309-5612 in reference to the murine hepatitis virus orf1ab gene) (fig. 1) . this clustering was supported by high quartet puzzling support values and high posterior probabilities under various substitution models, thus suggesting that 80% of the sars-cov genomic sequence is related more closely to coronaviruses group ii than any other members of this family. likelihood mapping results revealed that all these regions contained enough phylogenetic information (data not shown). intriguingly, clustering of the sars-cov within group ii coronaviruses was not supported significantly in regions spanning amino acid positions: 3937-4309 (920-1240), 5612-5734 (2480-2600), 6159-6284 (3000-3120) (positions in reference to the murine hepatitis virus orf1ab are indicated with their respective positions in reference to the alignment in the parentheses) (fig. 2) . in all cases, sars-cov was more closely related to group i, whereas group ii/group iii-sars-cov/group i nodes were separated by very small distances. likelihood mapping in the above regions revealed that they contain sufficient phylogenetic signal. thus, according to the results of phylogenetic analysis, it is suggested that sars-cov provides a separate lineage in these three genomic regions (fig. 2) . moreover, in region spanning amino acid positions 4373-4540 (1300-1440), bayesian inference suggested a significant cluster between group iii and sars-cov, whereas this finding was not supported by the ml method. however, according to likelihood mapping analysis, the phylogenetic signal is very limited in this region; thus we cannot reliably infer the evolutionary relationships in this region. similarly, in a small fragment at the 5 0 of m gene (amino acid positions 15-104 (4540-4620) with reference to the m protein of the murine hepatitis virus) showed a similar topology to the previous fragment, whereas given the discrepancy between bayesian and ml methods, it cannot be deduced that sars-cov is related more closely to group iii.according to the bayesian full-genomic scanning and phylogenetic analyses based on the ml and bayesian methods, evidence is provided that the sars-cov, for the largest part of the genome, is related more closely to group ii than to any other member of the coronaviruses sequences. the clustering between sars-cov and group ii is close to the root and probably reflects the evolutionary relationship between the ''parental'' sequences, from which sars-cov originated, and group ii. moreover, it was found that in three distinct genomic regions (aa positions 3937-4309, 5612-5734, 6159-6284), sars-cov shows no apparent similarity with any of the coronavirus groups characterized previously. these findings provide a new insight, in addition to previous studies, where sars-cov (using the neighbor joining method for phylogenetic tree reconstruction) was found not to be related significantly to any of the three coronavirus groups, or was separated by a short internal branch from group i and iii . moreover, three recent analyses indicated that sars cov was related more closely to group ii in partial genomic regions rest and mindell, 2003; snijder et al., 2003 ]. on the other hand, several analyses have noted that though sars cov is close to group ii, it has a recombinant origin [rest and mindell, 2003; stavrinides and guttman, 2004] , but these analyses were based only on partial genomic regions, and did not include an exploratory analysis using a sliding window approach [rest and mindell, 2003; stavrinides and guttman, 2004] .evidence is provided that, even though sars-cov in the majority of its genomic regions is closer related to coronavirus group ii, phylogenetic discordance in three partial genomic regions suggests a distinct clustering with respect to group ii. this could be a result of ancient recombination events, altered adaptive evolution in different lineages, or a combination of both. we do not want to speculate which of these explanations is correct, since, it is not easy to discriminate with certainty between these two factors.the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) that emerged in china in 2002-2003 is one of the most significant public health events leading to a global epidemic in the twenty-first century. 1 sars caused more than 8000 human cases with 774 deaths. 1-3 sars coronavirus (sars-cov) is the etiologic agent of sars. [4] [5] [6] since then, several outbreaks, including avian influenza, ebola and middle east respiratory syndrome, have emerged from animal populations causing considerable disease and mortality. 7 investigations regarding the direct progenitor and natural reservoirs of sars-covs have demonstrated that bats are the natural reservoir for several viruses that are closely related genetically to sars-cov, known as bat sars-like covs. 8, 9 bat sars-like covs are thought to be the precursors of sars-cov; however, their genomes are not identical to those of sars-cov. [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] the main differences between bat sars-like covs and sars-covs are found in the third non-structural protein (nsp3), spike protein (s), open reading frame (orf)-3 and orf-8 regions, which exhibit the lowest nucleotide (nt) and amino-acid (aa) identities among different parts of the genome. 8, 10, 19 particularly in the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of s protein, which is responsible for human infection via binding to human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), bat sars-like covs share only low sequence identity and contain a 19-aa deletion compared with sars-covs. 19, 20, 21 these differences indicate that the known bat sars-like covs are not the immediate progenitors of sars-covs. 21, 22 recently, two bat sars-like covs (rs3367 and lyra11) from chinese horseshoe bats (family: rhinolophidae) were shown to be more closely related to sars-cov than any previously identified bat sars-like cov. moreover, these covs contain rbds similar to that in the sars-cov s protein for binding to ace2, suggesting that they can cause direct human infection without an intermediate host. 23, 24 however, it remains unknown whether bat sars-like covs that are even closer to sars-cov exist. identification of the immediate progenitors of sars-covs and their bat hosts will not only shed light on the animal source of sars-covs but might also have implications in the formulation of strategies to prevent the reemergence of sars-like covs in human.here, we report the genetic and evolutionary characteristics of covs identified from least horseshoe bats collected in yunnan province, china. in addition, the whole-genome sequence of one isolate was obtained. genetic, antigenic and recombination analyses of the new isolates were performed. bats were live-captured with nets in 2012 in three counties/prefectures of yunnan province, china. the species were identified and kept in different cages. clean plastic sheets were placed under bat cages overnight, and urine and fecal samples were collected the following morning (~0730-0800 hours). after sample collection, bats were released at their capture sites. the samples were transported under chilled conditions and stored at − 80°c until being processed.baby hamster kidney (bhk-21, atcc ccl-10, manassas, va, usa) and tb1lu (atcc, ccl88) cell lines were grown in dulbecco's modified eagle medium containing a high concentration of glucose (invitrogen, breda, the netherlands) and supplemented with penicillin, streptomycin and 10% fetal bovine serum (invitrogen) at 37°c in the presence of 5% co 2 . urine and fecal samples were thawed at 4°c and centrifuged at 16 000g for 5 min to pellet the debris. the supernatant was filtered through a 0.45-μm filter (millipore, darmstadt, germany) to remove bacterium-sized particles and then diluted 1:10 in cell culture medium. two 200-μl aliquots of diluted supernatant were added to bhk-21 or tb1lu monolayer cells in 24-well plates. after rocking for 2 h at 37°c, 1 ml of fresh cell culture medium was added, and cells were incubated for seven days at 37°c. the flasks were observed daily for toxicity, contamination and viral cytopathic effect.reverse transcription-pcr analysis and whole-genome sequencing of f46 viral rna was extracted from 140 μl of supernatant from urine and fecal samples using a qiaamp viral rna mini kit (qiagen, germantown, md, usa) according to the manufacturer's instructions. cdna was produced using a ready-to-go kit (ge healthcare, pittsburg, pa, usa) using random hexanucleotide primers. one-step rt-pcr (reverse transcription-pcr; invitrogen) was used to detect coronavirus sequences as described previously. 25 pcr products were gel-purified and cloned into the pgem-t easy vector (promega, madison, wi, usa). at least four independent clones were sequenced to obtain a consensus sequence for each of the amplified regions.whole-genome sequencing was performed with a next-generation sequencer. briefly, a qiagen rneasy plus universal kit was used to extract the rna of the f46 isolate from the cell supernatant after one passage in tb1lu cells. genomic dna was eliminated following the manufacturer's instructions. reverse transcription, cdna synthesis and amplification of the cdna library were conducted using the nugen rna-seq kit. the ion onetouch 2 system was used for template preparation and enrichment. sequencing was performed using the ion 318 chip v2 on the ion torrent pgm using barcoded samples. the obtained contigs were subjected to blast analysis and assembled using the clc genomics workbench v. 3.6.5 software (redwood city, ca, usa). the 5′-rapid amplification of cdna ends (5′-race) and 3′-race systems (v. 2.0, invitrogen) were used to amplify the 5′-and 3′-untranslated regions (utrs), respectively. to validate the viral genome, we designed primer pairs that generated overlapping amplicons for the whole genome of f46 (primer sequences are available upon request). in addition, the 5' and 3' ends of f46 were confirmed by 5'-and 3'-race, respectively.the 405-bp amplicons were aligned with their closest phylogenetic neighbors in the genbank using clustalw v.2.0 software (http://www. clustal.org/clustal2/). representatives of various species in the genera alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus and gammacoronavirus were included in the alignment. phylogenetic and molecular evolutionary analyses were performed by the maximum likelihood method using the mega v.6 software with the neighbor-joining algorithm and a bootstrap value of 1000.to detect possible recombination between sars-covs and sars-like covs, the full-length genomic sequence of f46 was aligned with available genome sequences of human/civet (tor2, ay274119; bj01, ay278488; sz3, ay304486; gd01, ay278489; and sz16, ay304488) and bat sars-like covs (rp3, dq071615; rf1, dq412042; rs672, fj588686; rm1, dq412043; rs3367, kc881006; cp-yunnan2011, jx993988; hku3-1, gq153542; and lyra11, kf569997) using clustalw v.2.0. the aligned sequences were initially scanned for recombination events using the recombination detection program (rdp; version 4) with maxchi and chimera methods using 0.6 and 0.05 fractions of variable sites per window, respectively. 25, 26 the potential recombination events suggested by rdp were investigated further by similarity plot and bootscan analyses using the simplot v.3.5.1 software. [26] [27] [28] maximum likelihood trees of genomic regions generated by breakpoints were constructed to investigate the phylogenetic origin of parental regions.the full genome of f46 and amplicon sequences generated in this study were deposited in genbank under accession numbers ku973686 to ku973692. the accession numbers of other sequences from genbank used in this study are indicated in the tables and figure legends.we collected ten rhinolophus luctus, ten r. affinis and ten r. pusillus at tengchong; ten r. affinis, ten r. pusillus and ten myotis daubentonii at mangshi; and six fruit bats at wanding. a total of 66 urine and fecal specimens from the bats, representing various local bat species (table 1) , were collected using plastic sheeting laid in the bat cages in the morning.seven fecal specimens collected from r. pusillus at tengchong and mangshi were identified with positive bands using nested rt-pcr and were sequenced. the 405-nt partial rna-dependent rdrp gene f41 was grouped with the alphacoronaviruses (α-covs). f24 was located in an independent branch. this finding demonstrates great phylogenetic diversity, and the viruses were distributed in relatively separated branches (figure 1 ).virus isolation and sequencing of the complete genome rt-pcr-positive virus isolated from fecal samples was used to inoculate bhk-21 and tb1lu cell lines. no obvious viral cytopathic effect was observed after four continuous passages. identification of virus isolates was accomplished by rna extraction and rt-pcr amplification after three freeze-thaw cycles in one to four generations of inoculated bhk-21 and tb1lu cells. pcr amplification of sample f46 was positive after the first generation of virus propagation in both cell types but negative in the second through fourth generations after inoculation, indicating that f46 did not propagate well in generations 2-4 of successive cell passages. pcr amplification of other samples in the first through fourth generations of inoculation showed no positive results, suggesting that isolation of potential viruses in these samples failed at the inoculation step in these two cell lines. pcr sequence analysis of the first generation revealed identical sequences with that of the original f46 strain.f46 rna was extracted from the cell supernatant after one passage in tb1lu cells. whole-genome sequencing was performed using the ion torrent (pgm) next generation sequencer (life technologies, south san francisco, ca, usa), and 16-fold coverage was generated according to the protocol recommended by the manufacturer. a total of 754 mb of data with 397 895 reads (168-249 bp) was obtained. the clc genomics workbench was used for sequencing data analysis. assembly resulted in 450 contigs with lengths from 192 to 3500 bp. following blast and mapping analyses, we obtained 145 viral reads (200-3217 bp) related to covs. de novo assembly of these sequence reads generated the complete sequences of f46, and no regions had notably lower coverage. the full length of the f46 genome is 29 699 nt (excluding the poly (a) tail) with a gc content of 41.2%. its genome organization and coding potential appear similar to sars-cov sz3 with the exception of orf 4, which is absent from f46 but present in sz3 ( table 2 ). the full genome of f46 shared 91.7% to 91.8% nt identity with those of sars-covs. f46 orfs were compared with human sars-cov (tor2), civet sars-cov (sz3) and five bat sars-like covs (lyra11, rs3367, rf1, cp and rp3; table 2 ), and the results indicate that f46 is closely related to sars-covs. figure 2b ). the location of f46 in the phylogenetic tree is between lyra11 and rs3367, but they are distributed in relatively separate clades. f46 likely represents an intermediate between lyra11 and rs3367 in the evolutionary pathway. further verification of this finding is presented below in the recombination analysis.genetic and antigenic characterization of the spike protein of f46 the spike (s) proteins of covs are responsible for receptor-binding and host species adaptation, and their genes constitute one of the most variable regions within cov genomes. similar to counterparts in other sars-covs or sars-like covs, the s gene of f46 exhibited wide variation, sharing 76.3%-76.5% aa identity with sars-covs and 76.5%-83.5% aa identity with bat sars-like covs ( table 2) . spike protein is post-translationally cleaved into s1 and s2 subunits. the s1 domain of sars-cov s protein mediates virus binding with ace2, the functional receptor for sars-cov on susceptible cells. the rbd of s1 mediates receptor binding of the virus to host cells and determines the host spectrum. 29 (figures 2a  and 3) . 31, 32 recombination analysis covs commonly undergo rna recombination between strains at high frequency. to understand the evolutionary origin and identify the novel coronaviruses in least horseshoe bats l wang et al recombination events of f46, we conducted a recombination analysis using rdp and available genome sequences of human/civet and bat sars-like covs. four breakpoints were detected in the f46 genome, with strong p-values (o10 -30 ) supported by similarity plot and bootscan analyses (figures 4b and 4c) . the breakpoints generated recombination of fragment a covering 1-8 and 848 nts (a total of 8 and 848 nt), including the 5′-utr and partial orf 1a, and fragment b covering 21 684 to 23 271 nt (a total of 1587 nt), including a partial orf of the spike gene. both similarity plots and bootscan analyses revealed that f46 was highly phylogenetically related to sl-cov lyra11 in the first 9000 nt of the genome. downstream of the first 9000 nt of the genome, f46 shared similar sequence similarity to sars-cov bj01 and sl-cov rs3367. phylogenetic analysis using the major and minor parental regions showed that f46 is grouped in the sl-covs and close to sl-cov lyra11 (figures 4d and 4e) . these results indicate that f46 could be a new recombinant virus from sars-like covs or sars-covs.sars and middle east respiratory syndrome-cov are two novel covs discovered in recent years that cause considerable disease and mortality. 1, 2, 5, 33, 34 the origin of the viruses and the extent of their involvement in both human and animal populations remain hot topics. [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] it is believed that middle east respiratory syndrome-cov, like many other covs, originated in bats. 33, 34 this hypothesis proved to be true with sars based on several studies. [35] [36] [37] [38] recent metagenomics studies have identified sequences of closely related sars-like viruses circulating in chinese bat populations that may pose a future threat (references). in 2005, two independent studies identified sarslike covs from bats. 20, 33 since then, additional sars-like covs in various bat species have been reported. 24, 25 among them, horseshoe bats (rhinolophus) are the main reservoir to harbor genetically diverse sars-like covs. 10, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 20, [23] [24] [25] several of these sars-like covs, such as rs3367 and lyra1, appear to be most closely related to sars-covs and the gap-filling viruses between bat sars-like covs and human sars-covs. 23, 24 in this study, several covs belonging to the groups of sars-like covs and α-covs were detected in samples from least horseshoe bats (r. pusillus). samples from other bat species (r. luctus, r. affinis, m. daubentonii and fruit bat) were negative for these viruses, further confirming that the least horseshoe bat is a prominent natural reservoir or mixer of genetically diverse alphacoronavirus and betacoronavirus species and plays a pivotal role in the evolution and dissemination of these viruses.although we failed to isolate infectious virus from the collected samples, we obtained the complete genome sequence of f46 from the tb1lu cell line culture after one passage. the s protein rbd of f46 possesses identifying features typical of those belonging to bat sarslike covs, namely three deletions and mutations within the key residues required for binding ace2 (figures 2a and 3) . 31, 32 predicting from these features, f46 should be incapable of infecting humans directly. phylogenetic analysis demonstrates that f46 is placed in one clade with strain rs3367 and rsshc014, which were more closely related to sars-covs than to other sl-covs (figure 1) , and particularly between lyra11 and rs3367 ( figure 2 ). f46 likely represents an intermediate between lyra11 and rs3367. to understand the evolutionary pathway of f46, we conducted recombination analysis using available genome sequences of human/civet and bat sars-like covs. a total of four breakpoints were detected in the f46 genome with strong p-values (o10 -30 ). the results showed that f46 is a recombinant from rs3367, lyra11 and bj01 lineages.in conclusion, horseshoe bats carry genetically diverse sars-like covs. owing to the high likelihood of recombination among bat covs, additional bat sars-like covs are likely to be identified in the future. to better predict and prevent the next emergence of disease caused by covs of bat origin, it is necessary to maintain long-term surveillance of bat covs. figure 4 recombination analysis of f46 with sars-covs and sl-covs. (a) a gene map of lyra11 is used to position breakpoints. four breakpoints were detected in the f46 genome with strong p-values (o10 -30 ) supported by similarity plot and bootscan analyses (b, c). the breakpoints generated recombination of fragment a covering 1-8 and 848 nts (a total of 8 and 848 nt), including the 5′-utr and partial orf 1a, and fragment b covering 21 684 to 23 271 nt (a total of 1587 nt), including a partial orf of the spike gene. similarity plots (b) and bootscan analyses (c) were conducted with f46 as the query and bat sars-like covs (rs3367 and lyra11) and sars-cov bj01 as potential parental sequences. phylogenetic trees (d, e) were constructed based on the two fragments with a neighbor-joining algorithm and a bootstrap test for inference of phylogeny. bootstrap values were obtained from 1000 data sets. coronavirus, cov; nucleotide, nt; open reading frame, orf; severe acute respiratory syndrome, sars; untranslated region, utr.novel coronaviruses in least horseshoe bats l wang et albinding energy score between rbd and ace2, we highlighted the putative jump in the affinity from a progenitor form of sars-cov-2 to the current virus responsible for covid-19 outbreak. our result was consistent with previously reported phylogenetic analysis and corroborates the opinion that the interface segment of the spike protein rbd might be acquired by sars-cov-2 via a complex evolutionary process rather than a progressive accumulation of mutations. we also highlighted the relevance of q493 and p499 amino acid residues of sars-cov-2 rbd for binding to human ace2 and maintaining the stability of the interface. moreover, we show from the structural analysis that it is unlikely for the interface residues to be the result of genetic engineering. finally, we studied the impact of eight different variants located at the interaction surface of ace2, on the complex formation with sars-cov-2 rbd. we found that none of them is likely to disrupt the interaction with the viral rbd of sars-cov-2.key words: covid-19, ace2, viral spike receptor binding domain, 1 homology-based protein-protein docking, variants. the coronavirus sars-cov-2 (previously known as ncov -19) has been 4 associated with the recent epidemic of acute respiratory distress syndrome 5 [2]. recent studies have suggested that the virus binds to the ace2 receptor 6 on the surface of the host cell using spike proteins, and explored the binary 7 interaction of these two partners [8, 23] . in this work, we focused our 8 analysis on the interface residues to get insight into four main subjects: (1) 9 the architecture of the spike protein interface and whether its evolution in 10 many isolates supports an increase in affinity toward the ace2 receptor; 11 (2) how the affinity of sars-cov-2-rbd and sars-cov-rbd toward 12 different ace2 homologous proteins from different species is dictated by a 13 divergent interface sequences (3) ; a comparison of the interaction hotspots 14 between sars-cov and sars-cov-2; and finally, (4) whether any of the 15 studied ace2 variants may show a different binding property compared to 16 the reference allele. to tackle these questions we used multi-scale modelling 17 approaches in combination with sequence and phylogenetic analysis. with discrete gamma distribution (+g) with 5 rate categories. for the 57 rbd sequences, the best substitution model for maximum likelihood (ml) 58 calculation was selected using a model selection tool implemented on mega 59 6 software based on the lowest bic score. therefore, the wag model [20] 60 using a discrete gamma distribution (+g) with 5 rate categories has been 61 selected.phylogenetic trees were generated using a ml method in mega 6. the 63 consistency of the topology, for the rbd sequences, was assessed using a 64 bootstrap method with 1000 replicates. the resulting phylogenetic tree 65 was edited with itol [9]. the co-crystal structure of the spike protein of sars-cov complexed 69 to human-civet chimeric receptor ace2 was solved at 3 of resolution 70 (pdb code 3scl). we used this structure as a template to build the 71 complex of spike protein from different virus isolates with the human ace2 72 protein (uniprot sequence q9byf1). the template sequences of the ligand 73 (spike protein) and the receptor (ace2) were aligned locally with the 74 target sequences using the program water from the emboss package [12] . 75 modeller version 9.22 [14] was then used to predict the complex model of 76 each spike protein with the ace2 using a slow refining protocol. for each 77 model, we generated ten conformers from which we selected the model with 78 the best dope score [15] .to calculate the binding energy scores we used, prodigy server [22] , 80 mm-gbsa method implemented in the hawkdock server [19] and foldx5 81 [3] . the contribution of each amino acid in protein partners was calculated 82 hawkdock server. different 3d structures of human ace2 (hace2), 83 each comprising one of the identified variants, were modeled using the 84 buildmodel module of foldx5. because it is more adapted to predict the 85 effect of punctual variations of amino acids, we used dynamut at this stage 86 of analysis [13]. 87 2.4 flexibility analysis 88 we ran a protocol to simulate the spike rbd fluctuation of sars-cov-2 89 and sars-cov using the standalone program cabs-flex (version 0.9.14) [7] . 90 three replicates of the simulation with different seeds were conducted using 91 a temperature value of 1.4 (dimensionless value related to the physical 92 temperature). the protein backbone was kept fully flexible and the number 93 of the monte carlo cycles was set to 100. 94 3 resultssequence and phylogenetic analysis 96 phylogenetic analysis of the different rbd sequences revealed two well 97 supported clades. clade 1 includes rm1 isolate, bat-sl-covzc45 and 98 bat-sl-covzxc21. these three isolates are closely related to sars-cov-2 99 as revealed by the phylogenetic tree constructed from the entire genome 100 ( figure 1a ). clade 2 includes sars-cov-2, ratg13, sz16, zs-c, wiv16, 101 ma15, and sars-cov-sino1-11 isolates ( figure 1a ). sars-cov-2 and 102 ratg13 sequences are the closest to the common ancestor of this clade. 103 the exact tree topology is reproduced when we used only the rbd segment 104 corresponding to the interface residues with hace2. this is a linear 105 sequence spanning from residue n481 to n501 in sars-cov-2. to investigate whether the interface of the spike protein isolate evolves 114 by increasing the affinity toward the ace2 receptor in the final host, we 115 predicted the interaction models of the envelope anchored spike protein (sp) 116 from several clinically relevant coronavirus isolates with hace2 receptor 117 (pdb files for the complexes are listed in supplementary materials 1). the 118 construction of the complex applies a comparative-based approach that uses 119 a template structure in which both partners (ligand and receptor) are closely 120 related to those in the target system respectively. in our study, we only 121 modeled the interaction of the rbd which was shown to be implicated in the 122 physical interaction with ace2 ( figure 2a ). the lowest sequence identity 123 of the modeled spike proteins as well as those of any of the orthologous 124 ace2 sequences (human, civet, bat, pig, rat, chicken and snake) do not fall 125 below 63% toward their respective templates. at such values of sequence 126 identities it is expected that the template and the target complexes share 127 the same binding mode [6] . we calculated the binding energy scores of the rbd from different virus 131 isolates interacting with hace2 ( figure 2b ). all three methods used 132 for the calculation are in agreement that rbds from bat-sl-covzc45, 133 bat-sl-covzxc21 and rm1 show the worst energy scores. while the 134 binding energy score falls in the boundary limit of the incertitude margin for 135 prodigy calculation (section 2, supplementary material 2), the differences 136 in the scores calculated by foldx and mm-gbsa are not. therefore we 137 consider that such differences in energies compared to sars-cov-2 are 138 consistent between the three methods. except for foldx, the affinity is 139 predicted to be more favorable for rbd from sars-cov-2 compared to 140 sars-cov. however, mm-gbsa only marginally discriminates between 141 the two values. mm-gbsa allowed us to assign the contribution of each amino acid in 161 the interface with hace2, in the binding energy score. we conducted this 162 analysis using both sequences of the sars-cov-2 wuhan-hu-1 ( figure 3a ) 163 and the sino1-11 sars-cov ( figure 3b) isolates. residues f486, y489, 164 q493, g496, t500 and n501 of sars-cov-2 rbd forming the hotspots of 165 the interface with hace2 protein were investigated (we only consider values 166 > 1 or < 1 kcal/mol to ignore the effect due to the thermal fluctuation). 167 all these amino acids form three patches of interaction spread along the 168 linear interface segment ( figure 3c ): two from the n and c termini and one 169 central. t500 establishes two hydrogen bonds using its side and main chains 170 with y41 and n330 of hace2. n501 forms another hydrogen bond with 171 ace2 residue k353 buried within the interface. on the other hand, sars-172 cov rbd interface contains five residues ( figure 3d ), l473, y476, y485, 173 t487 and t488 corresponding to the equivalent hotspot residues of rbd 174 from sars-cov-2 f487, y490, g497, t501 and n502. therefore, q493 as 175 a hotspot amino acid is specific to sars-cov-2 interface. the equivalent 176 residue n480 in sars-cov only shows a non-significant contribution of 177 0.18 kcal/mol.the similarity matrix analysis was conducted to assess the divergence of 179 the interaction interface of rbds qualitatively, i.e. the specific set of residues 180 implicated in the interaction with ace2, and quantity, i.e. the contribution 181 of each residue in the binding energy score. the similarity matrix was 182 calculated from free energy decomposition of interface residues of rbds 183 from sars-cov-2 and sars-cov in complex with ace2 orthologous 184 and reported as a network representation ( figure 3e and figure 1 and 185 2 in supplementary materials 2). we noticed the existence of densely 186 interconnected edges involving all the protein-protein complexes for sars-187 cov-2 and sars-cov except those involving ace2 from sus scrofa and 188 rattus norvegicus. complexes involving the rbd of sars-cov-2 show less 189 intrinsic similarity compared to rbd of sars-cov. however, similarity 190 scores tend to be uniform in the group involving ace2 from human, civet, 191 dog, bat, snake, and chicken. the complex including hace2 does not seem 192 to diverge from the rest of the members of the sars-cov-2 group such as 193 the case of sus scrofa and rattus norvegicus.195 sequence analysis and the visual inspection of rbd/hace2 complex might 196 reflect the substitution of p499 in sars-cov-2 rbd as a form of adaptation 197 toward a better affinity with the receptor. in order to further investigate 198 its role, we performed a flexibility analysis using a reference structure 199 (sars-cov-2 rbd containing p499) and an in silico mutated form p499t, 200 a residue found in sars-cov and most of the clade 2. our results show 201 that the mutation caused a significant decrease in stability for nine residues 202 of the interface corresponding to segment 482-491 ( figure 3f) . indeed, the 203 rmsf variability per amino acid for this sequence increases compared to 204 the reference structure. a total of eight variants of hace2 that map to the interaction surface 208 are described in the gnomad database ( figure 4a ). all these variants are 209 rare (table 1 ) and mostly found in european non-finnish and african 210 populations. considering both the enthalpy (ddg) and the vibrational 211 entropy in our calculation (dds), we found no significant changes (> 1 or 212 < 1 kcal/mol) in neither the folding energy of the complex ( figure 4b ) nor 213 the interaction energy of the protein-protein partners ( figure 4c ).since the covid-2019 outbreak, several milestone papers have been published 216 to examine the particularity of sars-cov-2 spike protein and its putative 217 interaction with ace2 as a receptor [21] . in the current study, we focused 218 our analysis on the interface segments of sars-cov-2 spike rbd interacting 219 with ace2 from different species by estimating interaction energy profiles. 220 we have studied the effect of eight variants of ace2 in order to detect 221 polymorphisms that may increase or decrease virulence in the host. our 222 results showed that if ace2 is the only route for the infection in humans, 223 variants interacting physically with rbd are not likely to disrupt the 224 formation of the complex and would have a marginal effect on the affinity. 225 therefore, it is unlikely that any form of resistance to the virus, related to 226 the ace2 gene, exists. however, this analysis merits to be investigated in 227 depth in different ethnic groups for a better assessment of the contribution 228 of genetic variability in host-pathogen interaction.the similar values of binding energy scores with different ace2 ortho-230 logues suggest that the ability of binding to different ace2 orthologous is 231 preserved in many species either for sars-cov-2 or sars-cov. therefore, 232 the transition to the zoonotic form is trivial if that depends only on ace2 233 as the primary route to the infection in both the intermediate and the 234 final host. however, we know that such a process is very complex since it 235 requires many protein-protein interactions to acquire the specific capacity 236 of infecting and replicating in the host cells [18] . consequently, it makes 237 sense to assume that many other types of receptors or co-receptors may 238 be critical to determine the capacity of crossing the species barrier. this 239 has been already suggested for sars-cov [1] and similarly, sars-cov-2 240 may show the same feature. moreover, our results show that the significant 241 overlap of glycosylation sites with the protein-protein interface implies a 242 likely interaction of sars-cov-2 progenitors with receptors other than 243 ace2. finally, recent transcriptomic profiling has suggested the possibility 244 of multiple route infections via the interaction of many human receptors 245 for sars-cov-2 [11].whole-genome phylogenetic analysis of the different isolates included in 247 this study is consistent with previous works that place the wuhan-hu-1 248 isolate close to bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21 isolates [10, 17] 249 within the betacoronavirus genus. the use of rbd sequences, however, 250 places the virus in a clade that comprises sars-cov related homologs 251 including isolates from bat and civet. the clade swapping as seen in 252 figure 1a , seems also to occur for ratg13 and rm1 isolated from bat. this 253 is expected as the use of different phylogenetic markers may considerably 254 affect the topology of the tree. however, the significant divergence in 255 the interfaces segments as a key molecular element contributing to the 256 determination of the tree topology has driven our work toward studying 257 their impact on the interaction with hace2. the binding of the spike 258 glycoprotein to ace2 receptor requires a certain level of affinity. in the 259 case where the rbd evolves from an ancestral form closer to that of bat-sl-260 covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21, we expected a decrease of the binding 261 energy scores through the evolution process following incremental changes in 262 the rbd. in such a scenario, we presume that there are other intermediary 263 forms of coronavirus that describe such variation of the binding energy 264 score to reach a level where the pathogen can infect humans with high 265 affinity toward hace2. on the other hand, our results show that the 266 binding energy score and the interface sequence of sars-cov-2 rbd are 267 closer to sars-cov related isolates (either from human or other species). 268 therefore a recombination event involving the spike protein that might 269 have occurred between sars-cov and an ancestral form of the current 270 sars-cov-2 virus might be also possible. this will allow for the virus to 271 acquire a minimum set of residues for the interaction with hace2. the 272 recombination in the spike protein gene has been previously suggested 273 by wei et al in their phylogenetic analysis [4] . thereafter, incremental 274 changes in the binding interface segment will occur in order to reach a 275 better affinity toward the receptor. one of these changes may involve p499 276 residue which substitution to threonine seems to drastically destabilize the 277 interface segment and has a distant effect. moreover, the decomposition 278 of the interaction energy showed that 5 out of 6 hotspot amino acids in 279 sars-cov-2 have their equivalent in sars-cov including n501. contrary 280 to what wan et al [17] have stated, the single mutation n501t does not 281 seem to enhance the affinity. rather, the residue q493 might be responsible 282 for such higher affinity due to a better satisfaction of the van der waals 283 by the longer polar side chain of asparagine. indeed, when we made the 284 same analysis while mutating q493 to n493, the favorable contribution 285 decreases from -2.55 kcal/mol to a non significant value of -0.01 kcal/mol, 286 thus supporting our claim.no major divergence of the interaction interface of sars-cov-2 rbd 288 with hace2 was noticed from the similarity matrix analysis. this suggests 289 that the molecular elements required for the binding with the receptor might 290 also be involved in the interaction with other orthologous forms of ace2 291 and that these elements are not optimized specifically for the human form. 292 therefore, it is unlikely that the interface of rbd from sars-cov-2 is a 293 result of human intervention via genetic engineering aiming to increase the 294 affinity toward ace2. for example, residue e484 contributes unfavorably 295 to the binding energy with 2.24 kcal/mol due to an electrostatic repulsion 296 with e75 from hace2. this residue is an apparent choice for engineering 297 a protein-protein complex with high affinity by substituting e484 with a 298 polar residue. it is, however, noteworthy that the lesser homogeneity of the 299 nodes of sars-cov-2 group, in comparison to sars-cov, may suggest 300 a higher tolerance for the mutation of the new virus which would allow 301 it to cross the species barrier more easily and to efficiently optimize the 302 interaction in the host. being understanding about his absence and for not being able to bring him 311 the marshmallow candy because of the covid-19 outbreak. highlights for the paper "interaction of the spike protein rbd from sars-cov-2 with ace2: similarity with sars-cov, hot-spot analysis and effect of the receptor polymorphism"• we noticed a large difference in the binding energy of rbd from the spike protein of sars-cov-2 with ace2, compared to the closest isolates to the proposed progenitor forms.• currently, available sequence data do not explain the transition from low-affinity rbd forms to high-affinity rbd that are capable to infect the humans.• we suggest that residues n493q and not n501t as was reported previously is responsible for a higher affinity toward ace2 when we compare sars-cov-2 to• the mutation t499p is responsible for stabilizing the interface of rbd interacting with ace2 when we compare sars-cov-2 to sars-cov• it is unlikely that the interface of rbd from sars-cov-2 is a result of human intervention aiming to increase the affinity toward ace2. • the role of receptors other than ace2 is shown, and these may have a more critical function in crossing the species barrier.• variants that corresponding to residues on the ace2 interface are unlikely to be associated with resistance or sensibility forms compared to the reference allele.the severe respiratory disease covid-19 was first noticed in late december 2019 (1) . it rapidly became epidemic in china, devastating public health and finance. by mid-march, covid-19 had spread to ~150 countries and infected over 150,000 people (2) . on march 11, 2020 , the world health organization (who) officially declared it a pandemic.a complete genome sequence of the etiological agent of covid-19 (3), severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) (4), identified it as a new member of the genus betacoronavirus, which include a diverse reservoir of coronaviruses (covs) isolated from bats (5-7). while genetically distinct from the betacoronaviruses that cause sars and mers in humans (8, 9) , sars-cov-2 shares the highest level of genetic similarity (96.3%) with cov ratg13, sampled from a bat in yunnan in 2013 (8) . recently, cov sequences closely related to sars-cov-2 were obtained from confiscated malaya pangolins in two separate studies (10, 11) . pangolin sars-like covs (pan_sl-cov) form two distinct clades corresponding to their collection location. pan_sl-cov_gd from guangdong (gd) province in china and are genetically more similar to sars-cov-2 (91.2%) than pan_sl-cov_gx from guangxi (gx) province (85.4%).understanding the origin of sars-cov-2 may help resolve strategies to deter future crossspecies transmissions and to establish appropriate animal models. viral sequences nearly identical to sars and mers viruses were found in civets and domestic camels, respectively (12, 13) , demonstrating that they originated from zoonotic transmissions with intermediate host species between the bat reservoirs and humans-a common pattern leading to cov zoonosis (5). viruses nearly identical to sars-cov- 2 have not yet been found. in this paper we demonstrate, through localized genomic analysis, a complex pattern of evolutionary recombination between covs from distinct host species and cross-species infections that likely originated sars-cov-2.phylogenetic analysis of 43 complete genome sequences from three clades (sars-covs and bat_sl-covs; sars-cov-2, bat_sl-covs and pan_sl-covs; and two divergent bat_sl-covs) within the sarbecovirus group (9) confirms that ratg13 is overall the closest sequence to sars-cov-2 (fig. s1). it is followed by pan_sl-cov_gd viruses next, and then pan_sl-cov_gx. among the bat-cov sequences in clade 2 ( fig. s1 ), zxc21 and zc45, sampled from bats in 2005 in zhoushan, zhejiang, china, are the most divergent, with the exception of the beginning of the orf1a gene (region 1, fig. 1a ). all other bat_sl-cov and sars-cov sequences form a separate clade 3, while clade 1 comprises btky72 and bm48-31, the two most divergent bat_sl-cov sequences, in the sarbecovirus group ( fig. s1 ). recombination in the first sars-cov-2 sequence (wuhan-hu-1) with other divergent covs has been previously observed (3) . here, to better understand the role of recombination in the origin of sars-cov-2 among these genetically similar covs, we compare wuhan-hu-1 to six representative bat_sl-covs, one sars-cov, and the two pan_sl-cov_gd sequences using simplot analysis (14) . ratg13 has the highest similarity across the genome (8), with two notable exceptions where a switch occurs ( fig. 1a ). in phylogenetic reconstructions, sars-cov-2 clusters closer to zxc21 and zc45 than ratg13 at the beginning of the orf1a gene (region 1, fig. 1b) , and, as reported (10, 15) , to a pan_sl-cov_gd in region 2 (fig.s 1c and s2), which spans the receptor angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ace2) binding site in the spike (s) glycoprotein gene. comparing wuhan-hu-1 to pan_sl-cov_gd and ratg13, as representative of distinct host-species branches in the evolutionary history of sars-cov-2, using the recombination detection tool rip (16), we find significant recombination breakpoints before and after the ace2 binding site ( fig. s2a ), suggesting that sars-cov-2 carries a history of cross-species recombination between the bat and the pangolin covs.pan_sl-cov sequences are generally more similar to sars-cov-2 than cov sequences, other than ratg13 and zxc21, but are more divergent from sars-cov-2 at two regions in particular: the beginning of the orf1b gene and the highly divergent n terminus of the s gene (regions 3 and 4, respectively, fig. 1a ). within-region phylogenetic reconstructions show that pan_sl-cov sequences become as divergent as btky72 and bm48-31 in region 3 ( fig. 1d ), while less divergent in region 4, where pan_sl-cov_gd clusters with zxc21 and zc45 (fig .  1e ). together, these observations suggest ancestral cross-species recombination between pangolin and bat covs in the evolution of sars-cov-2 at the orf1a and s genes. furthermore the discordant phylogenetic clustering at various regions of the genome among clade 2 covs also supports extensive recombination among these viruses isolated from bats and pangolins.the sars-cov-2 s glycoprotein mediates viral entry into host cells and therefore represents a prime target for drug and vaccine development (17, 18) . while sars-cov-2 sequences share the greatest overall genetic similarity with ratg13, this is no longer the case in parts of the s gene. specifically, amino acid sequences of the receptor binding motif (rbm) in the c terminal of the s1 subunit are nearly identical to those in two pan_sl-cov_gd viruses, with only one amino acid difference (q498h)-although the rbm region has not been fully sequenced in one of guangdong pangolin virus (pan_sl-cov_gd/p2s) ( fig. 2a ). pangolin covs from guangxi are much more divergent. phylogenetic analysis based on the amino acid sequences of this region shows three distinct clusters of sars-cov, sars-cov-2 and bat-cov only viruses, respectively ( fig. 2b ). interestingly, while sars-cov and sars-cov-2 viruses use ace2 for viral entry, all covs in the third cluster have a 5-aa deletion and a 13-14-aa deletion in rbm ( fig. 2a) although both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 use the human ace2 as their receptors (8, 20) they show a high level of genetic divergence (figs. 1 and s1). however, structures of the s1 unit of the s protein from both viruses are highly similar (21) (22) (23) , with the exception of a loop, not proximal to the binding site, that bends differently ( fig. 2c ). this suggests that viral entry through binding of ace2 is structurally constrained to maintain the correct conformation. among 17 distinct amino acids between sars-cov-2 and ratg13 ( fig. 2a ), five contact sites are different, likely impacting ratg13's binding to ace2 ( fig. 2d and table s1 ). the single amino acid difference (q or h at position 498) between sars-cov-2 and pan_sl-cov_gd is at the edge of the ace2 contact interface; neither q or h at this position form hydrogen bonds with ace2 residues ( fig. 2e ). thus, a functional rbm nearly identical to the one in sars-cov-2 is naturally present in pan_sl-cov_gd viruses. the very distinctive ratg13 rbm suggests that this virus is unlikely to infect human cells, and that the acquisition of a complete functional rbm by a ratg13-like cov through a recombination event with a pan_sl-cov_gd-like virus enabled it to use ace2 for human infection.three small insertions are identical in sars-cov-2 and ratg13 but not found in other covs in the sarbecovirus group (24) . the ratg13 sequence was sampled in 2013, years before sars-cov-2 was first identified. it is unlikely that both sars-cov-2 and ratg13 independently acquired identical insertions at three different locations in the s gene. thus, it is plausible that an ratg13-like virus served as a progenitor to generate sars-cov-2 by gaining a complete human ace2 binding rbm from pan_sl-cov_gd-like viruses through recombination. genetic divergence at the nucleic acid level between wuhan-hu-1 and pan_sl-cov_gd viruses is significantly reduced from 13.9% ( fig. 1e ) to 1.4% at the amino acid level ( fig. 2b ) in the rbm region, indicating recombination between ratg13-like covs and pan_sl-cov_gd-like covs. furthermore, sars-cov-2 has a unique furin cleavage site insertion (prra) not found in any other covs in the sarbecovirus group (24), although similar motifs are also found in mers and more divergent bat covs (25) (fig. s3 ). this prra motif makes the s1/s2 cleavage in sars-cov-2 much more efficiently than in sars-cov and may expand its tropism and/or enhance its transmissibility (23) . a recent study of bat covs in yunnan, china, identified a three-amino acid insertion (paa) at the same site (26) . although it is not known if this paa motif can function like the prra motif, the presence of a similar insertion at the same site indicates that such insertion may already be present in the wild bat covs. the more efficient cleavage of s1 and s2 units of the spike glycoprotein (25) and efficient binding to ace2 by sars-cov-2 (22, 27) may have allowed sars-cov-2 to jump to humans, leading to the rapid spread of sars-cov-2 in china and the rest of the world.recombination from pan_sl-cov_gd at the rbm and at the unique furin cleavage site insertion prompted us to examine the sars-cov-2 sequences within these regions. amino acid sequences from sars-cov-2, ratg13, and all pan_sl-cov viruses are identical or nearly identical before, between, and after the rbm and the furin cleavage site, while all other covs are very distinctive ( fig. 3a and s3) . the average of all pairwise dn/ds ratios (w) among sars-cov-2, ratg13, and pan_sl-cov viruses at the 3'-end of the s gene (after the furin cleavage site) is 0.013, compared to w =0.05 in the s region preceding the furin cleavage site, and to w =0.04 after the site for all other covs. the much lower w value at the 3'-end of the s gene among the sars-cov-2, ratg13, and pan_sl-cov viruses indicates that this region is under strong purifying selection within these sequences ( fig. 3a) . a plot of synonymous and nonsynonymous substitutions relative to wuhan-hu-1 highlights the regional differences across the region before and after the rbm and the furin cleavage site ( fig. 3a) : the 3' end of the region is highly conserved among the sars-cov-2, ratg13, and pan_sl-cov viruses (group a), while far more nonsynonymous mutations are observed in the rest of the cov sequences (group b). the shift in selective pressure in the 3' -end of the gene among these related viruses versus other covs begins near codon 368 ( fig. 3b ), and such a shift was not evident among other compared covs ( fig. 3b-d) .we observe similar patterns of purifying selection pressure in other parts of the genome, including the e and m genes, as well as the partial orf1a and orf1b genes ( fig. 4) . interestingly, the purifying selection pressure varies among different viruses depending on which genes are analyzed. the broadest group includes sars-cov-2, ratg13, all pan_sl-cov and the two bat covs (zxc21 and zc45) for both e and m genes (figs. 4 and s5). the second group includes sars-cov-2, ratg13, and all pan_sl-cov only for the 3' end of the s gene. the narrowest selection group only contains sars-cov-2, ratg13, and pangolin covs from guangdong for the partial regions of orf1a and orf1b (figs. 4 and s6). consistently low ω values and strong purifying selection pressure on sars-cov-2, ratg13 and pan_sl-cov_gd viruses suggest that these complete and partial genes are under similar functional/structural constraints among the different host species. in two extreme cases, amino acid sequences of the e gene and the 3' end of orf1a are identical among the compared cov sequences, although genetic distances are quite large among these viruses at the nucleic acid level. such evolutionary constraints across viral genomes, especially at functional domains in the s gene, which plays an important role in cross-species transmission (5, 17), coupled with frequent recombination, may facilitate cross-species transmissions between ratg13-like bat and/or pan_sl-cov_gd-like viruses.previous studies using more limited sequence sets found that sars-covs originated through multiple recombination events between different bat-covs (10, 17, 19, 28, 29) . our phylogenetic analyses of individual genes show that sars-cov sequences tend to cluster with yn2018b, rs9401, rs7327, wiv16 and rs4231 (group a) for some genes and rf4092, yn2013, anlong-112 and gx2013 (group b) for others ( fig. s7 ). simplot analysis using both groups of bat_sl-covs and the closely related bat cov ynlf-34c (29) shows that sars-cov gz02 shifts in similarity across different bat sl-covs at various regions of the genome (fig. 5a ). in particular, phylogenetic reconstruction of the beginning of orf1a (region 1) confirms that sars-covs cluster with ynlf-34c (29) , and this region is distinctive comparing to all other covs ( fig. 5b ). ynlf-34c is more divergent from sars-cov than other bat-cov viruses before and after this region, confirming the previously reported complex recombinant nature of ynlf-34c (29) ( fig.  5a ). at the end of the s gene (region 2), sars-covs cluster with group a covs, forming a highly divergent clade ( fig. 5c ). in region 3 (orf8), sars-covs and group b covs, together with ynlf-34c, form a very divergent and distinctive cluster ( fig. 5d ). to further explore the recombinant nature of sars-covs, we compared gz02 to representative bat cov sequences using the rip recombination detection tool (16) . we identified four significant breakpoints (at 99% confidence) between the two parental lineages ( fig. s8a ), further supported by phylogenetic analysis ( fig. s8b-s8d ). in addition, the two aforementioned groups of bat covs (shown in light brown and light blue in the trees) show similar cluster changes across the five recombinant regions, suggesting multiple events of historic recombination among bat sl-covs. these results demonstrate that sars-cov shares a recombinant history with at least three different groups of bat-covs and confirms the major role of recombination in the evolution of these viruses.of the bat sl-covs that contributed to the recombinant origin of sars-cov, only group a viruses bind to ace2. group b bat sl-covs do not infect human cells (5, 19) and have two deletions in the rbm (figs. 1e and 2a). the short deletion between residues 445 and 449, and in particular the loss of y449, which forms three hydrogen bonds with ace2, will significantly affect the overall structure of the rbm (figs. 2f and 2e). the region encompassing the large deletion between residues 473 and 486 contains the loop structure that accounts for the major differences between the s protein of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 ( fig. 2c ). this deletion causes the loss of contact site f486 and affects the conserved residue f498's hydrophobic interaction with residue m82 on ace2 (fig. 2f ). these two deletions will render rbm in those covs incapable to bind human ace2. therefore, recombination may play a role in enabling cross-species transmission in sars-covs through the acquisition of an s gene type that can efficiently bind to the human ace2 receptor.orf8 is one of the highly variable genes in coronaviruses (5, 17, 29) and its function has not yet been elucidated (5, 17, 30) . breakpoints within this region show that recombination occurred at the beginning and the end of orf8 ( fig. s9) , where nucleic acid sequences are nearly identical among both sars-covs and group b bat covs. moreover, all compared viruses form three highly distinct clusters ( fig. 5d ), suggesting that the orf8 gene may be biologically constrained and evolves through modular recombination. the third recombination region at the beginning of orf1a is where sars-cov-2 also recombined with other bat covs (region 1, fig. 1a ). this region is highly variable (5, 17) and recombination within this part of the genome was also found in many other covs, suggesting that it may be a recombination hotspot and may factor into cross-species transmission.there are three important aspects to betacoronavirus evolution that should be carefully considered in phylogenetic reconstructions among more distant coronaviruses. first, there is extensive recombination among all of these viruses (10, 17, 19, 28, 29) (figs. 1 and 5), making standard phylogenetic reconstructions based on full genomes problematic, as different regions of the genome have distinct ancestral relationships. second, between more distant sequences, synonymous substitutions are often fully saturated, which can confound analyses of selective pressure and add noise to phylogenetic analysis. finally, there are different selective pressures at work in different lineages, which is worth consideration interpreting trees.the currently sampled pangolin covs are too divergent from sars-cov-2 for them to be sars-cov-2 progenitors, but it is noteworthy that these sequences contain an rbm that can most likely bind to human ace2. while ratg13 is the most closely related cov sequence to sars-cov-2, it has a distinctive rbm, which is not expected to bind to human ace2. sars-cov-2 has a nearly identical rbm to the one found in the pangolin covs from guangdong. thus, it is plausible that ratg13-like bat-cov viruses may have obtained the rbm sequence binding to human ace2 through recombination with pan_sl-cov_gd-like viruses. we hypothesize that this, and/or other ancestral recombination events between viruses infecting bats and pangolins, may have had a key role in the evolution of the strain that lead to the introduction of sars-cov-2 into humans.all three human covs (sars, mers and sars-2) are the result of recombination among covs. recombination in all three viruses involved the s gene, likely a precondition to zoonosis that enabled efficient binding to human receptors (5, 17). extensive recombination among bat coronaviruses and strong purifying selection pressure among viruses from humans, bats and pangolin may allow such closely related viruses ready jump between species and adapt to the new hosts. many bat covs have been found able to bind to human ace2 and replication in human cells (10, 19, (31) (32) (33) . serological evidence has revealed that additional otherwise undetected spillovers have occurred in people in china living in proximity to wild bat populations (34) . continuous surveillance of coronaviruses in their natural hosts and in humans will be key to rapid control of new coronavirus outbreaks.so far efforts have failed to find the original pathway of sars-cov-2 into humans by identifying a coronavirus that is nearly identical to sars-cov-2, as those found for sars and mers in civets and domestic camels respectively (12, 13) . however, if the new sars-cov-2 strain did not cause widespread infections in its natural or intermediate hosts, such a strain may never be identified. the close proximity of animals of different species in a wet market setting may increase the potential for cross-species spillover infections, by enabling recombination between more distant coronaviruses and the emergence of recombinants with novel phenotypes. while the direct reservoir of sars-cov-2 is still being sought, one thing is clear: reducing or eliminating direct human contact with wild animals is critical to preventing new coronavirus zoonosis in the future. coronaviruses are a group of rna viruses that cause various diseases in humans, other mammals, and birds. in the last two decades, there have been three documented strains of coronavirus that have caused major epidemics in humans. these include severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) in 2002, middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) in 2012, and most recently, a novel coronavirus referred to as covid-19 or sars-cov-2 that emerged in wuhan, china in december 2019. as of june 2020, there have been over 8 million confirmed cases of sars-cov-2 globally [3] .the rapid spread of sars-cov-2 has demonstrated the need to understand how the virus spreads and for measures of epidemic intervention such as stay-at-home orders and social distancing. to gain insight into disease transmission and origins, phylogenetic analyses are often performed using bioinformatics methods to quantify and visualize the relatedness of viral sequences. a typical workflow for phylogenetic analysis and reconstruction involves four main steps: (1) data acquisition, (2) sequence alignment, (3) phylogenetic inference, and (4) tree visualization [6] .acquiring data involves identifying homologous nucleotide or protein sequences that are representative of the point of interest, whether that be a specific gene or species or something else. this step may involve additional preprocessing (e.g. filtering by length or sample type) to ensure that the sequences are valid and that the inferred tree will provide meaningful results. there are many public databases that provide viral (and other) sequences and accompanying metadata, including ncbi (ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), gisaid (gisaid.org), and vipr (viprbrc.org).multiple sequence alignment (msa) refers to the alignment of related biological sequences of similar length, the output of which may be used to infer more specific evolutionary relationships. given the classification of msa computation as an np-complete problem, there are many existing algorithms that solve this problem [1] . examples include mafft [7] , muscle [5] , and viralmsa [15] , all of which are implemented in vireport, along with others.phylogenetic inference is the reconstruction of evolutionary trees by grouping individual elements based on shared ancestry. estimation of phylogenetic trees can be performed through various methods such as bayesian inference and maximum likelihood [6] , which have spawned tools such as beast [4] and raxml [17] , respectively. the resulting phylogenies can be input into online tree visualization tools for further examination.while there exist various tools that seek to automate this process such as mega5 [18] and phylogeny.fr [2] , vireport is robust in its integration of modules that allows for the user to select their desired tool for each stage in the workflow. furthermore, vireport includes options for rooting and dating the inferred phylogeny, calculating pairwise distances, ancestral sequence reconstruction, and transmission clustering, all of which provide additional information beyond the tree itself. vireport was used to preprocess the data, perform the msa and phylogenetic inference steps, and produce the input tree files for tree visualization.for this study, sequences were retrieved from the ncbi virus database, which hosts data from genbank. nucleotide sequences were selected for using the sars-cov-2 virus specification and by filtering out sequences under 26,000 bases as to only include full genome sequences [22] . sequence metadata was also compiled, specifically that regarding the coun-try of origin and the collection date.multiple sequence alignment was performed using viralmsa [15] utilizing minimap2 [10] and the reference sequence with accession id nc 045512, defined as "severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 isolate wuhan-hu-1" and dated december 2019. pairwise sequence distances were calculated using the tn93 tool from hiv-trace [8].fasttree 2 [16] was used to infer a maximum-likelihood phylogeny under the general time-reversible model [19] using a gamma20-based likelihood. the phylogeny was minvarrooted using fastroot [11] and dated using lsd2 [20] . pairwise phylogenetic distances were calculated using treeswift [14] .the phylogenies were visualized using itol [9] and icytree [21] . comparison of the visualization of the vireport output and the figure from this study [23] shows that the results are very similar, despite the two analyses having used different tools (viralmsa and iq-tree for vireport, muscle and raxml for the article [23] ), as the overall clades are nearly identical. both analyses indicate that, while sars-cov, mers, and sars-cov-2 fall into distinct clades, sars-cov-2 is more closely related to sars-cov, as both fall under the subgenus sarbecovirus, whereas mers falls under a different subgenus merbecovirus. additionally, sars-cov-2 is most closely related to a sars-like coronavirus found in bats. we can see from the histogram above that the peak of the sample distribution falls around late march 2020. sequences were also grouped by geographical location, as shown below. we can see from the distribution that nearly 40 countries were represented in the dataset, with the five highest sequence counts from the u.s., australia, hong kong, germany, and china. incidentally, as of june 2020, the top five countries in terms of total number of confirmed cases are the u.s., brazil, russia, india, and the united kingdom [3] . while there does not seem to be significant correlation between sequence counts and confirmed cases, which could be the result of sampling bias, it is notable that the u.s. has the highest counts for both metrics. the following maximum-likelihood phylogeny was inferred, with an average pairwise phylogenetic distance of 0.000381 and a standard deviation of 0.000208. the maximum pairwise phylogenetic distance (i.e. tree diameter) was 0.00505, which describes the distance between the two least closely related sequences. given the large number of sequences included, it is evidently difficult to visualize the specific relationships between sequences in the tree. these individual relationships can be visualized by inputting the rooted tree file to itol, but the tree is too large to include in this report.the pairwise phylogenetic distances were also used for transmission clustering using treen93 [12] , which resulted in 736 clusters and 2535 singletons. the average cluster size was 2.853 with a standard deviation of 2.0284, and cluster sizes ranged from 2-30. some considerations of the limitations of this analysis include the dataset used; given that there are well over 8 million confirmed cases of sars-cov-2 in the world (as of june 2020) but the sample only included around 4500 sequences, the sample is evidently a very small subset that may not be representative of current events both in geographical distribution and time. for example, the uk has the fifth most cases in the world [3] but is not listed as one of the categories represented by the sample. as the viral sequence database updates with new sequences or sequences from other sources are pooled together, the analysis may become more representative.future directions for this work include additional analysis of the generated statistics; a topic of interest is how the sequences are distributed by date for each country, as this may be indicative of how successful policies in place are in terms of managing the ongoing epidemic. another topic is exploring the distribution of pairwise distances over time, which may lead to conclusions regarding the mutation rate of the sars-cov-2 virus. with regard to vireport, additional work is being done to analyze potential differences in results based on which tools are selected at each step.all genome sequences are available at ncbi virus. the complete vireport output can be found at https://github.com/mirandajsong/vireport-sars-cov-2.fears are mounting worldwide over the cross-border spread of the new coronavirus (denoted as sars-cov-2) that originated in wuhan, the largest city in central china, after its spread to many countries around the world. the newly emerging pathogen belongs to the same virus family as the deadly severe acute respiratory syndrome and middle east respiratory syndrome coronaviruses (sars-cov and mers-cov, respectively). the world health organization (who) has recently published surveillance recommendations for a possible "large epidemic or even pandemic" (pandemic declared on march 11 th , 2020) of the novel coronavirus and it has issued guidelines for hospitals across the world. however, many questions about sars-cov-2 remain unanswered: (i) what is the origin and/or natural reservoir of the virus? (ii) is it easily transmitted from human to human? and (iii) what are the potential diagnostic, therapeutic and vaccine targets? currently, only nucleotide sequences of eight human sars-cov-2 isolates are available without any additional information about biological properties of the virus, beyond the morphological confirmation of the virion using electronic microscopy. this is likely not enough information to answer the important abovementioned questions.the informational spectrum method (ism), a virtual spectroscopy method for analysis of proteins, is based on the fundamental electronic properties of amino acids and requires only nucleotide sequence availability to investigate proteins 1 . for this reason, ism was previously used for analysis of novel viruses for which little or no information were available 2-5 . here, the sars-cov-2 was analyzed with ism to identify its possible origin and natural host, as well as putative therapeutic and vaccine targets.the s1 surface protein sequences from the first 8 human sars-cov-2, deposited in the publicly available gisaid database (assessed on january 19, 2020), were analyzed by ism. the studied sequences were betacov/wuhan/ ivdc-hb-04/2020, betacov/wuhan/ivdc-hb-01/2019, beta-cov/wuhan/ivdc-hb-05/2019, betacov/wuhan/ipbcams-wh-01/2019, betacov/wuhan/wiv04/2019, betacov/ wuhan-hu-1/2019, betacov/nonthaburi/61/2020, and betacov/ nonthaburi/74/2020. in the phylogenetic analysis, different amino acid sequences of other coronaviruses were also included: (i) s1 proteins from the following viruses: avp78042, avpvp78031, ay304486, ay559093, jx163927, yn2018b, ky417146, used already by other authors in the study of the phylogenetic relationship between sars-cov-2 and nearest bat and sars-like covs (gisaid database); and (ii) s1 proteins from three first isolated human mers-cov: agg22542, afs88936, afy13307, deposited in the gisaid databasethe ism detailed description of the sequence analysis based on ism has been published elsewhere 2 . according to this approach, sequences (protein or dna) are transformed into signals by assignment of numerical values of each element (amino acid or nucleotide). these values correspond to electron-ion interaction potential 6 , determining electronic properties of amino acid/nucleotides, which are essential for their intermolecular interactions. the signal obtained is then decomposed in a periodical function by the fourier transformation. the result is a series of frequencies and their amplitudes. the obtained frequencies correspond to the distribution of structural motifs (primary structure) with defined physico-chemical characteristics responsible for the biological function of the putative protein corresponding to the analyzed sequence. when comparing proteins that share same biological or biochemical function, the technique allows detection of code/frequency pairs that are specific for their common biological properties. the method is insensitive to the location of the motifs and, therefore, does not require previous alignment of the sequences. in addition, this is the only method that allows immediate functional analysis.the phylogenetic tree of s1 proteins from coronaviruses was generated with the ism-based phylogenetic algorithm istree, previously described in detail elsewhere 7 . in the presented analysis, we calculated the distance matrix with the amplitude on the frequency f(0.257) as the distance measure between sequences.in order to compare informational similarity between sars-cov-2, sars-cov, mers-cov and bat sars-like cov, the cross-spectra (cs) of s1 proteins from these viruses were calculated. figure 1a shows the cs of sars-cov-2, sars-cov and mers-cov. these cs contain only one dominant peak corresponding to the frequency f(0.257). figure 1b displays the cs of s1 proteins from sars-cov-2 and bat sars-like cov. amplitudes in these latter cs are significantly lower than in those cs presented in figure 1a . these results show that (i) s1 proteins from sars-cov-2, sars-cov, mers-cov and bat sars-like cov encode common information, which is represented with the frequency f(0.257), and (ii) s1 proteins from sars-cov-2 are remarkable more informationally similar with s1 from sars-cov and mers-cov than with s1 from bat sars-like cov. this suggests that biological properties of sars-cov-2 are apparently more similar to sars-cov and mers-cov than to bat sars-like cov.to confirm this conclusion, the ism-base phylogenetic tree for s1 proteins was calculated ( figure 2 ). in this calculation the amplitude on the frequency f(0.257) was used as the distance measure. as observed in figure 2 , all analyzed sars-cov-2 s1 amino acid sequences are grouped with sars-cov and mers-cov and separated from bat sars-like cov. this indicates that sars-cov-2 are more phylogeneticallythe manuscript is slightly modified in accordance with the suggestions of the second reviewer. this includes brief comments of predictions in the article which concern the sars-cov-2 origin and its natural reservoirs.any further responses from the reviewers can be found at the end of the article revised similar to sars-cov and mers-cov than to bat sars-like cov. this result differs from those obtained with the homologybased phylogenetic analysis, which showed that sars-cov-2 are closely related to bat sars-like cov (https://platform.gisaid. org/epi3/frontend#lightbox1296857287).it has been previously shown that the dominant frequency in the informational spectrum of viral envelope proteins corresponds to interaction between the virus and its receptor 2,3,7,8 . the ism analysis showed that the frequency component f(0.257) is present in the cs of s1 sars-cov and its receptor angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) 9 , but not in the cs of s1 mers-cov and its main receptor dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4) 10 . of note is that both receptors ace2 and dpp4 are expressed in airway epithelia. presence of f(0.257) in the informational spectrum of mers-cov ( figure 1 ) suggests also possible interaction between this virus and the ace2. the dominant peak on the frequency f(0.257) in the cs of s1 from sars-cov and mers-cov and ace2 supports this possibility (figure 3) , although this has not been formally proved for mers-cov 11 .as it is shown in figure 1a , the frequency f(0.257) is also present in the informational spectrum of the sars-cov-2, suggesting that ace2 might be the receptor for this novel coronavirus too. this prediction was subsequently confirmed by functional studies in vitro 12 . calculation of the cs for s1 protein from the sars-cov-2 and all ace2 sequences available at the uniprot database revealed that the highest amplitudes on the frequency f(0.257) correspond to ace2 from civet and chicken. this result indicates that these species can be included as potential candidates for the natural reservoir of the sars-cov-2. however, it is possible that sars-cov-2 viruses use very different receptors in the natural host(s) and not only the ace2 as it is the putative case in humans. an experimental study performed on chicken, however, indicated lack of susceptibility of this species to the novel virus 13 ; civets so far have not been tested, but the indicated study confirmed susceptibility of domestic cat to sars-cov-2.finally, the s1 amino acid sequence from the sars-cov-2 was scanned to look for the domain that gives the highest contribution to the information represented by the frequency f(0.257) (figure 4a ). this analysis revealed domain 266-330 (numbering concerns the maturated protein) is essential for interaction of sars-cov-2 with ace2. of note is the striking homology between these domains of s1 proteins from sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, but not from mers-cov for which ace2 is not the main receptor (figure 4b) .further, s1 spike proteins from sars-cov (table 1) and sars-cov-2 (table 2 ) were compared. the cs of s1 proteins from sars-cov (figure 5a ) and sars-cov-2 (figure 5b ) were assessed. principal information encoded in s1 proteins from sars-cov and sars-cov-2 is represented with two different frequencies f(0.222) and f(0.478), respectively. this result indicates some potential difference(s) in the virus-host interaction of these two viruses although they apparently use the same receptor ace2.to identify the host proteins involved in the attachment and/ or internalization of the sars-cov-2, the uniprot database (https://www.uniprot.org) was screened by ism for human proteins with the dominant peak on the frequency f(0.478). the list of human proteins that have a dominant peak in is at the frequency f(0.478) are given in table 3 . according to the is criterion, these proteins are potential candidate interactors with the sars-cov-2 s1 protein. further, literature data mining was performed to identify which proteins presented in table 3 might be involved in the processes of infection with human coronaviruses. this analysis revealed that the actin protein plays an important role in the early entry events during human coronavirus infections 14 . actin proteins were selected as the best candidate interactors for the sars-cov-2 among the host proteins that are characterized with frequency f(0.478). figure 5c shows that cs of actins from different mammalian species (table 4) contains the dominant peak on f(0.478), suggesting that actin probably encodes the conserved information important for their biological function.the data mining of the pubmed database (www.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov/pubmed/) also showed that actin protein plays an important role in the rapid virus cell-to-cell spread and dissemination of infection 15 . additionally, the actin filament reorganization is a key step in lung inflammation induced by systemic inflammatory responses caused by infectious agents 16 . these findings indicate that interaction between actin proteins and the s1 could be involved in the infection and pathogenesis of sars-cov-2. (b) sequence homology between domains of s1 proteins from sars-cov and sars-cov-2 with essential contribution to the information corresponding to the frequency f(0.257). betacov/zhejiang/wz-01/2020 figure 5 . cs of s1 proteins from sars-cov and sars-cov-2 and actin proteins. (a) cs of s1 proteins from human sars-cov; (b) cs of s1 proteins from sars-cov-2; (c) cs of mammalian actin proteins. the abscissa and the ordinate are as described in figure 1 .in consequence, the possibility to interfere on this interaction might represent a valid hypothesis for development of promising prevention and therapeutic strategies.interestingly, further data mining revealed that ibuprofen (fda approved drug with excellent safety record) attenuates interleukin-1β-induced inflammation as well as actin reorganization 17 . actin was also found to be the primary component by which ibuprofen can bind to the tissue in different organs 18 . this suggests that ibuprofen might impact the sars-cov-2-induced disease by indirect interaction with actin proteins. previously, ibuprofen was predicted as a candidate entry inhibitor for ebola virus using the same in silico approach 19 , and this prediction was confirmed experimentally at a later time point 20,21 . these results prompt the possibility to experimentally test the effects of ibuprofen on sars-cov-2 infection under in vitro and in vivo conditions.in silico methods are considered very important tools to generate first hypotheses and identify first drug candidates against newly discovered agents, like in the case of sars-cov-2, especially in the short-term. ism, a technology based on electronic biology, allowed identifying potential importance of human actin proteins for viral infection/dissemination as well as one fda approved drug that may have an indirect antiviral activity within weeks of the initial outbreak. however, additional experiments are required to confirm our initial findings.in conclusion, results of the presented in silico analysis suggest the following: (i) the newly emerging sars-cov-2 is highly related to sars-cov and, to a lesser degree, mers-cov, and ace2 is a likely receptor of it; (ii) civets and poultry are potential candidates for the natural reservoir of the sars-cov-2, (iii) human actin proteins possibly participate in attachment/internalisation of sars-cov-2, (iv) drugs which interact with actin proteins (e.g. ibuprofen) should be investigated as possible therapeutics for treatment of sars-cov-2 infection, and (v) domain 266-330 of s1 protein from the sars-cov-2 represents promising therapeutic and/or vaccine target. further research on these issues are needed, including the development of reverse genetics and animal models to study the biology of sars-cov-2. due to the fast evolving of scientific knowledge on sars-cov-2, the first prediction has been already confirmed, while the chicken as potential candidate as intermediate host has not been supported. importantly, link between ibuprofen/actin interactions and viral entry remains an exciting path for future therapeutic investigations.underlying data sequence data of the viruses were obtained from the gisaid epiflu™ database. to access the database each individual user should complete the "registration form for individual users", which is available alongside detailed instructions. after submission of the registration form, the user will receive a password. there are not any other restrictions for the access to gisaid. conditions of access to, and use of, the gisaid epiflu™ database and data are defined by the terms of use. the first sars case was reported in late 2002 in china's guangdong province (1 ) . the disease was contagious and spreaded rapidly, resulting in a sars outbreak in hong kong in mid-february 2003, and other outbreaks elsewhere in the world. at the end of march 2003, a virus of the coronaviridae family was identified as the causative agent of the disease (2 -4 ) . this identification has been confirmed by the world health organization, and the virus concerned has been designated as the sars-associated coronavirus (sars-cov). during the sars outbreaks in 2002 and 2003, sars cases were identified in 19 countries, and in total 8,605 individuals became infected, of whom 774 died (http://www.who.int/ csr/sars/country/table2003 09 23/en/).in addition to its cost in human lives, the sars outbreak also had a great impact on the health care system and economy of hong kong and other infected regions. in hong kong, the estimated economic loss was about hk$46 billion (us$5.9 billion; ref. 5 ). the possibility that sars-cov transmission can occur between human beings without reinforcement from the * corresponding author. e-mail: fcleung@hkucc.hku.hk animal reservoir (5 ) and the capability of the virus to infect multiple cell types (6 ) and animals (7 ) further increased the epidemiological burden of the sars pandemic.although the spread of the virus had seemed to be confined by july 2003 through rigorous quarantine measures (http://www.who.int/csr/sars/country/table2003 09 23/en/), it may still be circulating in the animal reservoir and it is impossible to say that it will not return (8 -10 ) . because of this possibility, better monitoring of sars outbreaks through accurate diagnostic tests and the development of effective anti-viral therapies are urgently required. these in turn depend on better molecular knowledge about the sars-cov. such research is therefore of vital importance if the community is to be properly prepared for a possible recurrence of the sars pandemic.the etiological entity of a viral infection relies on both molecular and traditional virological methods includ-ing serological techniques, virus isolation by cell culture, and electron microscopy (2 , 10 ) . both molecular approaches and conventional approaches were employed for the initial characterization of the sars pathogen (2 ) . peiris et al (2 ) firstly isolated the virus from in vitro tissue culture and subsequently yielded a 646-bp genomic fragment by rt-pcr using degenerate primers, which showed more than 50% homology to the rna polymerase gene of bovine coronavirus (bcv) and murine hepatitis virus (mhv). the use of gene chip further confirmed the coronavirus as a possible cause of sars (11 ) .soon after the identification of the sars-cov, laboratories started to investigate the phylogenetic relationship between the virus and the other members of the same family through extensive comparison of their genome sequences. in mid-april 2003, the british columbia cancer agency (bcca) genome science center in canada (12 ) , the center of disease control in the united states (13 ) and the university of hong kong (14 ) announced at nearly the same time that the complete genome sequence of the sars-cov had been isolated in the corresponding areas (15 ) . the results of independent sequencing of the sars-cov genome all indicated that it was a polyadenylated genomic rna of 29.7 kb in length. comparative analysis of the genome with other coronaviruses suggested that the virus genome was very similar to previously characterized coronaviruses, with the order (starting from the n-terminal): replicase (r), spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m) and nucleocapsid (n) gene, where there are few accessory genes or motifs spanning between the structural genes and at the 3 utr (untranslated region), which may not be necessary for viral replication (12 ) . the replicase gene, with two open reading frames (orf) 1a and 1b, covering more than two thirds of the genome, is predicted to encode only two proteinases (12 -14 ) that regulate both the replication of the positive-stranded genomic rna and the subsequent transcription of a nested set of eight subgenomic (sg) mrnas (table 1; ref. 16 ), which is a common transcription strategy adopted by coronavirus members (17 -21 ) . the 5 utr of the sars-cov genome was characterized by 5 rapid amplification of cdna ends (5 race; ref. 14 ) and northern blot assay (13, 16, 22 ) . these procedures elucidated the leader sequence and the transcription regulatory sequence (trs). the leader sequence found in the viral sg mrna tran-scripts is at least 72 nucleotides long. through the alignment of the leader sequence at the 5 end of the eight sg mrnas, there is a minimal consensus trs, namely, 5 -acgaac-3 , which participates in the discontinuous synthesis of sg mrnas as a signaling sequence. the degree of sequence variance flanking the trs showed no clear relationship with the abundance of the sg mrnas (22 ) . a highly conserved s2m motif with 32 nucleotides was also identified in the 3 region of the genome, which had also been described in avian infectious bronchitis virus (aibv; ref. 12 -14 ) .the replicase gene of the sars-cov encodes for at least two proteins as a consequence of the proteolytic processing of the large polyprotein (orf 1a and 1b; ref. 16 ). the translation of segment 1b of such polyprotein is interrupted by the −1 ribosomal frame shifting by a putative "slippery" sequence and a putative pseudoknot structure (16 ) . two functional domains-papain-like cysteine proteinase (pl2 pro ) and 3c-like cysteine proteinase (3cl pro ), were identified experimentally and were responsible for the proteolytic processing of the polyprotein into 16 subunits (16 , 22 , 23 ) . a 375-a.a. sars-cov unique domain was identified upstream of the pl2 pro domain, which is unparalleled in any other known coronaviruses (16 ) . in addition, seven more putative regions encoding rna processing enzymes were identified, namely, rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), rna helicase (hel) poly (u)specific endoribonuclease (xendou), 30-to-50 exonuclease (exon), s-adenosylmethionine-dependent ribose 20-o-methyltransferase (20-o-mt), adenosine diphosphate-ribose 100-phosphatase (adrp), and a cyclic phosphodiesterase (cpd; ref. 16 ). the translation of two polyproteins from orf 1a and 1b starts the genome expression. the two proteinases, pcl2 pro and 3cl pro , are then coupled with the proteolytic processing of the two polyproteins into 16 units. pcl2 pro is responsible for the n-proximal cleavage and 3cl pro is responsible for the c-proximal cleavage. the helicase is then released. atpase activity and dna duplex-unwinding activity were demonstrated by purified helicase, indicating that the protein has rna polymerase activity (16 , 24 ) .together with the m protein, the spike protein is believed to be incorporated into the viral envelope before the mature virion is released (17 ) . initial analysis of the 1255-a.a. peplomer protein of the virus reveals the possible existence of a signal peptide that would likely be cleaved between residues 13 and 14 (12 ) . the whole structure is predicted to contain a receptor-binding unit (s1) in the n-terminus (14 , 25 -27 ) and a transmembrane unit (s2) in the c-terminus (13 , 14 , 25 , 27 ) . molecular modeling of the s1 and s2 subunits of the spike glycoprotein (26 , 28 ) suggested that the former unit is consisted of mainly anti-parallel β-sheets with dispersed α and β regions, in addition to the three domains identified in the s2 unit. the confidence level of the predicted molecular models was strengthened by the good correlation between predicted accessibility and hydropathy profiles and by the correct locations of the n/o-glycosylation sites and most of the disulfide bridges. whether the experimentally determined n-glycosylated sites from purified spike protein treated by tryptic digest together with pngase followed by time-of-flight (tof) mass spectrometry (29 ) are correctly located in the proposed model remains to be clarified. in the aspect of biological activities, receptors for the binding of the sars-cov remain mysterious, as comparative genomics did not point out any significant similarity with the s1 domain of other human coronaviruses, implying that these viruses are using different receptors for cell entry (12 ) . subsequently, angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ace2) was demonstrated to be a functional receptor for the sars-cov in vitro. synctia was observed in cell culture expressing ace2 and the sars-cov s1 domain, which could be inhibited by anti-ace2 antibody (30 ) . fine mapping on the n-terminal unit of the spike protein indicates that the receptor-binding domain is probably located between the residues 303 and 537 (31 ) .the sequence of the gene product from orf 3a shows no homology to any known proteins (12 , 14 ) . signal peptide or a cleaved site is likely to be present in the protein except three predicted transmembrane domains (12 ) . the exact function of the protein is yet to be determined, though the c-terminal of the protein may be involved in atp-binding properties (12 ) .the envelope protein of the sars-cov is thought to be the component of the virus envelope. topology prediction suggested that the e protein is a type ii membrane protein with the c-terminus hydrophilic domain exposed on the virion surface. comparative protein sequence analysis suggested the sars-cov e protein resembles the protein connected with mhv (12 , 32 , 33 ) .the matrix glycoprotein is not likely to be cleaved (12 ) and contains three putative transmembrane domains (12 -14 ) . its hydrophilic domain is believed to interact with the nucleocapsid protein and is located inside the virus particle (12 ) . linear epitope mapping of the m protein using synthetic peptides revealed that amino acid residues 2,137-2,158 interacted with sars patient sera by elisa assay, implying the potential capability of the m protein to induce immune response (34 , 35 ) .like orf 3a, sequence homology search yielded no significant result for any existing proteins, but the existence of a cleavage site (between residues 15 and 16) and a transmembrane helix were predicted. for orf 7a, it is a putative type i membrane protein (12 ) .the n gene sequence showed high homology with the nucleocapsid protein of other coronaviruses. a putative short lysine-rich nuclear localization signal (ktf-pptepkkdkkkktdeaq) was identified (12 ) . a potential and well-conserved rna interaction domain was also identified at the middle region of the gene, in which its basic nature may assist its role (12 , 14 ) . the n protein was reported to activate the ap-1 signal transduction pathway, indicating that the protein may play a role in the regulation of the host cell cycle (36 ) . apart from the possible role in pathogenicity, n gene was also believed to be the most abundant antigen in the host during the course of infection, making it an excellent candidate for diagnostic purposes. the linear epitopes of the protein have been mapped (35 , 37 , 38 ) , and the possibility of using these antigenic peptides or recombinant proteins in the diagnosis was discussed.the phylogenetic relationship by the comparison of the deduced amino acid sequences of the replicase gene and four structural genes (s, e, m, n) with other coronaviruses was described (12 -14 ) . the conclusions drawn by the different research groups were similar, with the observation that sars-cov itself forms a distinct cluster-the fourth group of coronaviridae, a notion supported by the high bootstrap values (above 90%). as a result, it has been concluded that the sars-cov is phylogenetically equidistant from all other known coronaviruses. moreover, no detectable recombination event was concluded in the similarity plot on the whole genome alignment with other coronaviruses (14 ) . the above findings suggest that the sars-cov is neither a mutant nor a recombinant of existing coronaviruses, and that the possibility of such a virus emerging as a product of genetic engineering can be excluded, as it is unlikely to generate an infectious coronavirus with 50% of its genome different from the existing coronaviruses (9 ) .snijder et al (22 ) conducted an extensive phylogenetic analysis concerning the replicase gene of the sars-cov by using torovirus as an outgroup. these authors criticized the phylogram construction based on different sars-cov proteins as unconvincing, and suggested the possibility that the sars-cov can be clustered into an existing group. as the structural and other accessory genes can either be gained or lost throughout the evolutionary process and in view of their low level of conservation, the author decided to target the replicase gene to perform the phylogenetic analysis. for this reason, the phylogenetic relationship was reconstructed through a rooted tree. the construction of the phylogram was done with the fused replicase gene with manual adjustment and exclusion of poorly conserved region. the resulting tree reveals that the gene was mostly related to group 2 coronaviruses and was assigned as a subgroup 2b. the author further pointed out that the sars-cov contains homologues of domains that are unique for group 2 coronaviruses, in the region of nsp1 and nsp3 (pl2 pro ), in addition to the differences in the sequence and arrangements of the 3 -located orfs, and the lack of antigenic cross-reactivity do not contradict their conclusion, as such a phenomenon was also observed in group 1 coronaviruses.using bayesian phylogenic inference approach, a recombination break point within the sars-cov rdrp was identified at protein sequence level (39 ) . phylogenetic analysis on the 5 end of the domain indicated that it might originate from the common ancestor of all existing coronaviruses, while the same analysis on the 3 end gave another tree topology that suggests a sister relationship with group 3 avian coronaviruses. these results suggested that a recombination event occurred between the common ancestor of the sars-cov and that of other coronaviruses, or alternatively that the 5 fragment of the sars-cov diverged before the one between or within other known coronaviruses and the 3 fragment diverged more recently (39 ) .based on the antigenic cross reactivity and genome characteristics, existing coronaviruses are generally classified into three subgroups (40 ) . all coronaviruses share a very similar organization in their functional and structural genes, but the arrangement of the so-called non-essential genes is remarkably different among the subgroups. group 1 coronaviruses are mainly characterized by the presence of orfs following the n gene. group 2 coronaviruses have two additional orfs, non-structural protein 2 (ns2) and he gene, located between orf 1b and the s gene. only group 3 species have orfs located between the m and n gene, and a conserved stem-loop motif s2m at their 3 utr (figure 1 ). accessory orfs are found between the s and e genes in all of the subgroups. however, these accessory orfs within the s-e intergenic region do not seem to be homologous between the subgroups, though they are conserved within subgroups. the rate of evolution of these accessory genes is obviously higher than that of the essential genes, which provides an alternative to access the phylogeny of the coronavirus family. the names of the group-specific accessory orfs were unified and denoted on the top of the corresponding subgroup orfs. the x (black cross) represents the absence of orfs within the region. genome organization and accessory orfs of these covs were confirmed except for the n2s of phev. all the accessory genes are group-specific and highly diverged within subgroups, particular within the s−e intergenic region. sars-cov has a very similar genome structure with group 3 covs, with two orfs located between m and n gene, and a conserved stem-loop motif s2m at their 3 utr. although the orf 5a/5b of group 3 covs and orf 5/6 of sars-cov are in homologous location, they do not have any significant sequence homology. based on the confirmed orfs of the sars-cov described above, a comparison of all homologous accessory and essential orfs of known coronaviruses with the novel sars-cov is shown in figure 1 . from the results, it does not seem that the coding regions are a consequence of a newly occurring recombination event between any of the existing known coronaviruses, similar to the conclusion made by holmes (9 ) . interestingly, the sars-cov genome has a very similar organization to that of group 3 avian coronaviruses (ibv and tcv), with the presence of three orfs within the m-n intergenic region, two orfs spanning between the s and e genes (65 ) , and a stem-loop motif s2m in 3 utr. the presence of s2m and the finding that the 3 fragment of sars-cov rdrp clustered into group 3 in the phylogenetic analysis (39 ) suggest that the avian coronaviruses and the sars-cov might share a common ancestor which gained the s2m from a single rna horizontal transfer event from a non-related virus family, as the astroviruses did (39 , 66 ) . another possibility, that a common coronavirus ancestor had once gained the motif but subsequently lost it, except the group 3 and sars-cov, cannot of course be excluded. pairwise sequence homology search among the accessory orfs at the s-e intergenic region of the sars-cov and all other coronaviruses shows no significant sequence homology (12 -14 ) but they are homologous within subgroups. the orf 5a/5b of group 3 coronaviruses and orfs 6-8 of the sars-cov are in a homologous location, but they do not have any significant sequence homology. the above results imply that, although the sars-cov and group 3 coronaviruses have a very similar genome organization, they might have acquired these accessory genes from several rna recombination events with different hosts or viral sources. it is observed that the accessory orfs are group-specific but are usually truncated to a different extent within a subgroup (figure 1 ). another interesting observation is the genetic diversity at the s-e intergenic region. usually two or three group-specific orfs are found within this region of each subgroup, but only one confirmed orf (orf 3) is found in this region of the sars-cov genome (12 -14 , 16 , 22 ) . the diversity (mainly due to truncation and deletion) of these s-e intergenic orfs within the subgroups is higher than that of other accessory orfs. their sequence divergence implies their common ancestors might have acquired these orfs by rna recombination, which is a common phenomenon in large rna viruses (67 , 68 ) , rather than evolved from mutations of a single ancestral rna sequence segment (9 ) . typical examples are the acquirement of the he gene from influenza c (69 ) and recombination events with berne virus at the he-ns2 region (52 ) .based on the recombination and truncation events occurring within these intergenic regions, the phylogenetic relationship between the sars-cov and other group 3 coronaviruses has been reconstructed (figure 2) . at least four subgroup common ancestors (♦ in figure 2 ) have acquired their s-e intergenic orfs and other group-specific orfs from several independent rna recombination events. moreover, there is a tendency of deletions or truncations of these orfs when crossing the species barriers within the subgroups, e.g. orf 4a/b in group 2 (54 -58 ); orf 3a/b and orf 7a/b in group 1 (41 , 42 , 47 , 48 , 50 , 70 -72 ) . the deletions of these redundant accessory orfs are likely to be the result rather than the cause of crossing the host barriers, as coronavirus host range specificity and tropism have been demonstrated, at least in four studies (7 , 73 -75 ) , as determined by the receptorbinding domain of the spike glycoprotein.recombination within certain types of viruses is a common phenomenon in various virus families (67 ), particularly for large rna viruses, as a means of shedding the deleterious effects of the errors accumulated during its genome replication (68 ) . recombination events within the coronavirus family (70 , 76 , 77 ) or with other non-related virus families (52 , 66 , 69 ) have been reported. apparently, the diversity of the redundant accessory genes has been accompanied by extensive genome rearrangement by heterogeneous or homogenous rna recombination events, providing useful information for the taxonomy of the coronaviruses. from this point of view, the sars-cov is definitely a new and unique member of the coronavirus family. the divergence of these redundant orfs between the sars-cov and other known coronaviruses suggests that the sars-cov might have been circulating in other animal hosts long before its emergence, and somehow crossed into a human host several months ago either by a sudden bottleneck mutation event or a rna recombination event with unknown sources.it has been demonstrated that the sars-cov possesses the ability to infect macaques, which display symptoms similar to the clinical signs of sars patients (78 ) , and to replicate in cats and ferrets (79 ) . together with the evidence implied by the phylogenetic studies, it is tempting to identify the possible animal reservoir of the coronavirus. recent studies of domestic and wild animals in guangdong, where the sars epidemic was first reported, identified the existence of the sars-cov from several animals found in the livestock market, including himalayan palm civets (paguma larvata) and raccoon dogs (nyctereutes procyonoides; ref. 80 ), in spite of the failure of another group to identify any sars-cov after the screening of more than 60 animal species (81 ) . the genome sequences of the coronaviruses isolated from these animals are almost identical (99.8%) to that of the sars-cov, revealing the extremely close phylogenetic relationship between them. another major finding from the sequence analysis highlighted a 29-bp deletion upstream the n gene, which was noted only in one guangdong isolate available from the gen-bank (gd01, accession number 278489). such deletion leads to the fusion of the two orfs identified in mrna 8 into one orf. yet its biological significance remains to be elucidated (8 ) . comparison of the s gene nucleotide sequence of the animal and human sars-cov indicated 11 consistent nucleotide signature mutations that appeared to distinguish them.the phylogenetic analysis of the s gene sequence between human and animal sars-cov likely ruled out the possibility that it is a consequence of human to animal transmission, implying the infected animals may acquired the virus from a true animal source that has yet to be identified (80 ) . this was also supported by the host-association analysis of coronaviruses based on the nucleocapsid gene (39 ) , which pinpointed that host-shifts had played an important role in the evolution of the virus and the host. the occurrence of avian-mammal host-shift supports the hypothesis that the sars-cov emerged from an unknown animal coronavirus.the reverse genetics system, a very useful tool in studying function of viral proteins and its mutations, was firstly described by master's group (82 ) for mhv in coronaviridae. in less than six months since the first identification of the sars-cov (2 ), yount et al (83 ) developed the reverse genetic systems for this coronavirus using the full-length cdna clone of urbani strain, by combining six component clones spanning through the entire genome. following in vitro transcription and the transfection of the resulting rna transcripts, a rescued recombinant virus was found to be capable of replication in the same way as the wild type. expected marker mutations introduced were also identified. the success of the experiment offers hope for the development of attenuated strains of live vaccine against the sars-cov (9 ).there is considerable scientific interest in the identification of the genetic agents responsible for the unusual susceptibility of the sars-cov in some ethnic groups. a molecular survey of the hla system, a common method adopted to identify autoimmune disorders and emerging infectious diseases, was conducted in taiwan during the sars epidemic (84 ) . using pcr amplification plus sequencespecific oligonucleotide probing (pcr-ssop), researchers identified the hla genotype of sars patients. healthy, unrelated taiwanese were used as controls, and the hla genotype of sars patients was compared with probable cases and with high-risk, uninfected health care workers. the results indicated that a higher frequency of hla-b*4601 allele was found in severe sars cases, which may explain the severity of sars in these patients. such genotype, as stated in the report, is common in southern han chinese, singaporeans and vietnamese, but not in indigenous taiwanese. there was no reported sars case within the latter ethnic group. such findings may explain the unusual sars epidemic in south asia.work on developing a laboratory diagnosis of the sars-cov began immediately after the sars outbreak, although an ideal diagnostic system is still being sought. numerous protocols have been developed for the diagnosis of infectious viral diseases. most of these protocols are pcr-based, and the remainder depends on measurable immune response. several factors affect the choice of proper diagnosis techniques, including time, the availability of equipment and expertise, the biological nature of the available samples, and the requirement of data output format (table 2; ref. 10 ). the presence of the virus can be detected by molecular testing such as pcr and virus isolation. measurable immune responses basically rely on sars-cov specific antibodies by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa). advances have been made in molecular diagnostic techniques in recent years, and such rapid and sensitive methods allow efficient monitoring of infectious viral diseases. for sars, the first genetic fragment of the virus was generated by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr; ref.2 ). two rt-pcr protocols were then developed by two who sars network laboratories (http://www.who.int/csr/sars/primers/en). the sen-sitivities of the assay were demonstrated to be at least 50%, with the highest percentage found in throat swab specimens (85 ) . no false positive was found in these assays.the first rapid real-time assay was developed based on the most conserved region of the orf1b gene sequence (86 , 87 ) . a person will be confirmed to be infected by the sars-cov if viral rna is detected by either the two pcr assays, two aliquots of specimen, or two sets of primers (http://www.cdc.gov/nci dod/sars/specimen collection sars2.htm). the sec-ond generation of this test protocol can detect the existence of the virus within 10 days after the onset of fever (87) (88) (89) and provides 80% sensitivity and 100% specificity in the testing of 50 npa samples collected from sars patients within three days after the onset of the disease (87 ) . to further increase the sensitivity, one-step real-time rt-pcr has been recently developed (89 ) . specificity of the pcr can be enhanced by coupling it with the use of an additional amplification target using the virus n gene fragment (89 ) , which is theoretically the most abundant subgenomic mrna produced during transcription (13 ) . the technique provides information on viral load during anti-viral treatments in real time, so that the efficacy of the therapy can be evaluated (10 ) . however, although the pcr assays are powerful, their performance is also technically demanding and labor intensive (10 ) .the development of microarray technology for viral discovery was firstly described by wang et al in 2002 (90 ) . the capability of the rapid high throughout screening of unknown viral pathogen gives it great potential to be used as a diagnostic tool. in the identification of the sars-cov, wang et al (11 ) employed the use of an improved microarray platform, which comprised conserved 70mers from each of the 1,000 viruses, to characterize the coronavirus genome. four hybridizing oligonucleotides from astroviridae which share the s2m motif and three from coronaviridae sharing conserved orf1ab fragment were firstly recognized in the experiment. the sequence recovered from the surface of the microarray further confirmed that it is a member of the coronavirus family. the identity of the sars-cov was confirmed within 24 hours, and this feat was followed by the partial sequencing of the novel virus a few days later. such technique demonstrated a rapid and accurate means of unknown virus characterization through genetic data.virus isolation by cell culture is used extensively as a traditional technique in virology. coronavirus presenting in the clinical specimens of sars patients was detected by inoculating the clinical specimens in cell cultures to allow the infection and the subsequent isolation of the virus. fetal rhesus kidney (frhk-4; ref.2 ) and vero cells (3 ) were found to be susceptible to sars-cov infection. after the isolation procedure, the pathogen was identified as the sars-cov by further tests, such as electron microscopy, rt-pcr, or immunofluorescent viral antigen detection. virus isolation is the only means to detect the existence of live virus from the tissue. the methodology is generally employed only for a preliminary identification of an unknown pathogen, as the procedure requires skillful technicians and is time consuming. the requirement of infectious viruses and that the duration of live virus existence varies add on further problems for conducting such assays, but they are nevertheless of very high specificity.the n protein is usually chosen as the antigen for anticoronavirus antibody detection assay (91 , 92 ) as it is believed to be a predominant antigen of the sars-cov (35 , 36 ) . it is also the only viral protein recognized by acute and early convalescent sera from patients recovering from sars (29 ) . in addition to the n protein, the s protein in the sars-cov was also reported as an antigen eliciting antibodies in human body (29 ) , but at a much lower titer than that of the n protein (35 , 36 ) .the assay based on the presence of sars-cov antibodies is suggested to be valid only for specimens obtained more than three weeks after the onset of fever (88 , 89 ) , although some patients have detectable sars-cov antibodies within 14 days of the onset of illness. nevertheless, the negative result, i.e. absence of sars-cov antibodies, within the first three weeks cannot conclude that the patient is free of the virus, though the elisa method was still defined as a good standard for rapid diagnosis of sars (85 ) . seroconversion from negative to positive or a four-fold rise in antibody titer from acute to convalescent serum indicates recent infection (http://www.who.int/csr/sars/diagnostictests/en/).the epidemiology of sars has been extensively investigated since the outbreak of sars in november 2002 in guangdong (1 ). this traditional method was used to access the epidemiology of sars initially. molecular epidemiology can be used to trace the disease transmission by using phylogenetic analysis of viral nucleotide sequence, which can quickly identify and aid in monitoring the transmission (93 ) .in coronavirus, variations in the spike protein can drastically affect viral entry, pathogenesis (94 ), antiviral immune response (29 ) , virulence (95 ), cellular (6 ), or even species tropism (7 ) . the s gene has been used as a target for genotyping most coronaviruses, like human coronaviruses (96 ) and ibv (97 ) . study of the n-terminal region of the sars-cov spike protein produced similar conclusions by conventional epidemiology methods (98 ) . the investigation included the collection s1 gene sequences from sars patients in hong kong and guangdong during february-april 2003 mainly by direct sequencing of rt-pcr products derived from clinical specimens, and compared it phylogenetically to additional 27 other sequences available from genbank. the majority of the hong kong viruses, including those from a large outbreak in a high-rise apartment block, amoy garden, clustered to a single index case that came from guangdong to hong kong in late february ( figure 3 ). most of the viruses derived from hong kong patients belong to the same lineage with viruses derived from the hong kong index case. outbreaks in canada, singapore, taiwan and vietnam were also derived from the sars-cov of the same initial virus lineage as judged from the same phylogenetic analysis. a number of viruses derived from the early patients were excluded from the major lineage and formed distinct cluster, implying multiple introductions of the virus have occurred, although these viruses did not caused large-scale outbreaks. viral sequences identified in guangdong and beijing are genetically more diverse (1 , 98 ) , implying that the sars-cov has been circulating there for a while before the introduction to hong kong. the hong kong index case that initiated the first super-spreading incident to affect 12 other patients might be simply a matter of chance or the viruses found in that patient were contagious to initiate super-spreading events, but these still need further investigations. apart from findings that indicate the possible transmission routes, transitional isolates that possess both the characteristics of two lineages were also identified. ruan et al (99 ) and tsui et al (100 ) performed similar analysis based on the comparison of full genome sequences of different sars-cov isolates. they independently identified some of the variations, as guan et al (98 ) did. chiu et al (101 ) have recently identified the nucleotide substitution in the s gene that is unique to the taiwan isolates and was linked to the hong kong index case. sequence comparison of the amoy garden isolates revealed no significant variations within the s1 gene, or across the whole genome, implying that other non-viral factors may contribute to the abnormal transmission and clinical presentation of sars in this cluster of high-rise apartments (98 , 102 ) . in summary, the transmission route of the sars-cov in different countries and areas correlates well with the traditional epidemiological findings, implying the successful application of molecular epidemiological techniques in tracing the virus transmission history.concerning viral evolution, zeng et al (103 ) have performed a linear regression analysis and tried to estimate the last appearance of the sars-cov common ancestor. with such effort, which has been successfully applied in timing of the ancestral sequence of human immunodeficiency virus (hiv; ref. 104 ), the ancestral sequence is believed to have appeared last in late 2002. these preliminary findings provide important information for tracing the origin of the sars-cov and monitoring its spread.current knowledge on coronavirus immunity has mainly been acquired from research on animal coronaviruses. clinical observations have shown that humoral and cell-mediated immune responses may be both necessary against sars-cov infection (105 ) . it was reported that t cell (cd3+, cd4 and cd8+) depletion was observed in early infection, but that levels returned to normal as the disease was improved (106 ) . igg antibody could be detected at the 7th day after the onset of symptoms and kept at high titer at least three months (107 ) . another report indicated that the virus was still detectable in respiratory and stool specimens by rt-pcr diagnosis but could not be cultured more than 40 days after presentation (108 ) , implying that the antibody could be stimulated rapidly and might restrict the virus infection. however it has also been reported in fowl and feline coronaviral diseases that low-level antibody may exacerbate diseases (109 ) . it is therefore important to conduct further investigations into the immune response to sars patients in the future so as to benefit the vaccine development and disease control.concerning the candidate target for vaccine development, the s1 unit of the spike proteins has been identified as the host protective antigen and used as a vaccine candidate in other coronaviruses (110 ) . an extensive structural analysis of the corresponding pro- the branch length shows the genetic distance with reference to the horizontal scale bar. all sample names were hidden for the convenience of display, except the index case isolate hku-33 (gray) and subcluster transition isolates (dark). the locations of these isolates on the tree were pinpointed by dots besides their names. the hypothetical common ancestors of the subclusters were highlighted as described in the right bottom of the figure. tein in sars is thus desirable. with the identification of the sars-cov functional receptor (30 ) and the mapping of the receptor-binding domain on the spike protein (31 ) , subunit vaccine targeting the receptorbinding domain and the preparation of killed or attenuated vaccine using ace2 expression cell line may be promising (30 ) . antiviral drugs represent an alternative anti-sars strategy to vaccination. inhibiting chemicals targeting the sars-cov replication-related proteins were considered as anti-sars-cov drug candidates, e.g. inhibition the enzymatic activity of 3cl pro . an extensive structural analysis of 3cl pro encoded from nsp5 on orf 1a was performed (28 , 111 ) . the 3cl pro structure showed a considerable degree of conservation of the substrate-binding sites, with the evidence that it could retain its proteolytic activity upon tgev (transmissible gastroenteritis virus) main proteinase (111 ) , though another group mentioned that the inactive property of the enzyme might exist in vitro (112 ) . from this result, these authors suggested that the use of rhinovirus 3c pro inhibitor might be useful in anti-sars therapy. two months later, a research group from the us conducted a study on the interaction of two chemicals (kz7088 and the avlqsgfr octapeptide) with 3cl pro (113 ), further highlighting the importance of the main proteinase as a target for anti-viral drug design. fan et al (114 ) provided valuable additional information, and concluded that only the dimeric form of the 3cl pro is active and that the proteinase-substrate interaction can be speeded up if more beta-sheet-like structure is involved in the substrate. recently the crystal structure of 3cl pro was reported by yang et al (115 ) . the 3cl pro crystal underwent conformational changes under different ph conditions while complexing with the specific inhibitor at the same time. a serine-protease fold with a cys-his at the active site was recognized. on the other hand, the modeling of the structure of 20-o-mt domain located at nsp16 was proposed by von grotthuss et al (116 ) using the 3d jury system with high reliability (3d jury score >100). the conservation of the unique tetrad residues k-d-k-e of the domain assigned a proposed mrna cap methylation function of this domain, suggesting an alternative target for anti-viral drug design. in addition to main proteases, blocking the virus entry should be considered as well. structural analysis of the s2 domain of the sars-cov s protein, which plays a role in fusion of the virus with host cell, revealed a conservation of sequence motifs with the wellstudied gp41 protein of hiv-1 and other viruses with class i transmembrane domain (27 ) . such a structure may be another target for drug design.the collaborative efforts of the global scientific community have provided invaluable insights into the molecular biology of the sars-cov. the development of a rapid and accurate method of diagnosis based on the molecular findings has helped to identify sars patients at an early stage of the disease, thereby providing valuable information for national authorities to monitor the spread of the disease and take effective quarantine measures, and contributing to the understanding of the clinical presentations of the syndrome. the elucidation of the molecular biology of the sars-cov has provided a foundation for vaccine design and narrowed down the targets for large-scale high throughput drug screening program for anti-viral therapy. these advances helped the global community to contain the spread of sars within four months since its first identification. however, much remains to be discovered about this novel coronavirus, and it may yet pose a serious threat. unlike other recently identified viral diseases like ebola and west nile virus, it seems the transmission of sars-cov does not need a visible vector for spreading, and that a tiny, invisible, respiratory droplet is sufficient to infect another person (117 ) . the nearly undetectable symptom presented by the recently confirmed sars case in singapore suggests that the virus may continue to circulate undetectably (65 ) . the possibility that common domestic animals are also a virus reservoir for sars further complicates the struggle to contain and ultimately eradicate this disease. in these aspects, sensitive, accurate and rapid diagnosis plays an extremely important role in limiting the disease spread, especially in the developing world and densely populated countries. luckily, the aggressive quarantine measures imposed by the who proved to be effective in containing the outbreak, and the experience gained in the last sars outbreak has prepared us to face another outbreak with some confidence. nevertheless, nobody can predict exactly when an effective vaccine or anti-viral drug will be developed. all that can be said is that, based on our growing knowledge of the molecular epidemiology and evolution of the virus, the successful development of countermeasures to sars is very possible.the first sars case was reported in late 2002 in china's guangdong province (1 ) . the disease was contagious and spreaded rapidly, resulting in a sars outbreak in hong kong in mid-february 2003, and other outbreaks elsewhere in the world. at the end of march 2003, a virus of the coronaviridae family was identified as the causative agent of the disease (2 -4 ) . this identification has been confirmed by the world health organization, and the virus concerned has been designated as the sars-associated coronavirus (sars-cov). during the sars outbreaks in 2002 and 2003, sars cases were identified in 19 countries, and in total 8,605 individuals became infected, of whom 774 died (http://www.who.int/ csr/sars/country/table2003 09 23/en/).in addition to its cost in human lives, the sars outbreak also had a great impact on the health care system and economy of hong kong and other infected regions. in hong kong, the estimated economic loss was about hk$46 billion (us$5.9 billion; ref. 5 ). the possibility that sars-cov transmission can occur between human beings without reinforcement from the * corresponding author. e-mail: fcleung@hkucc.hku.hk animal reservoir (5 ) and the capability of the virus to infect multiple cell types (6 ) and animals (7 ) further increased the epidemiological burden of the sars pandemic.although the spread of the virus had seemed to be confined by july 2003 through rigorous quarantine measures (http://www.who.int/csr/sars/country/table2003 09 23/en/), it may still be circulating in the animal reservoir and it is impossible to say that it will not return (8 -10 ) . because of this possibility, better monitoring of sars outbreaks through accurate diagnostic tests and the development of effective anti-viral therapies are urgently required. these in turn depend on better molecular knowledge about the sars-cov. such research is therefore of vital importance if the community is to be properly prepared for a possible recurrence of the sars pandemic.the etiological entity of a viral infection relies on both molecular and traditional virological methods includ-ing serological techniques, virus isolation by cell culture, and electron microscopy (2 , 10 ) . both molecular approaches and conventional approaches were employed for the initial characterization of the sars pathogen (2 ) . peiris et al (2 ) firstly isolated the virus from in vitro tissue culture and subsequently yielded a 646-bp genomic fragment by rt-pcr using degenerate primers, which showed more than 50% homology to the rna polymerase gene of bovine coronavirus (bcv) and murine hepatitis virus (mhv). the use of gene chip further confirmed the coronavirus as a possible cause of sars (11 ) .soon after the identification of the sars-cov, laboratories started to investigate the phylogenetic relationship between the virus and the other members of the same family through extensive comparison of their genome sequences. in mid-april 2003, the british columbia cancer agency (bcca) genome science center in canada (12 ) , the center of disease control in the united states (13 ) and the university of hong kong (14 ) announced at nearly the same time that the complete genome sequence of the sars-cov had been isolated in the corresponding areas (15 ) . the results of independent sequencing of the sars-cov genome all indicated that it was a polyadenylated genomic rna of 29.7 kb in length. comparative analysis of the genome with other coronaviruses suggested that the virus genome was very similar to previously characterized coronaviruses, with the order (starting from the n-terminal): replicase (r), spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m) and nucleocapsid (n) gene, where there are few accessory genes or motifs spanning between the structural genes and at the 3 utr (untranslated region), which may not be necessary for viral replication (12 ) . the replicase gene, with two open reading frames (orf) 1a and 1b, covering more than two thirds of the genome, is predicted to encode only two proteinases (12 -14 ) that regulate both the replication of the positive-stranded genomic rna and the subsequent transcription of a nested set of eight subgenomic (sg) mrnas (table 1; ref. 16 ), which is a common transcription strategy adopted by coronavirus members (17 -21 ) . the 5 utr of the sars-cov genome was characterized by 5 rapid amplification of cdna ends (5 race; ref. 14 ) and northern blot assay (13, 16, 22 ) . these procedures elucidated the leader sequence and the transcription regulatory sequence (trs). the leader sequence found in the viral sg mrna tran-scripts is at least 72 nucleotides long. through the alignment of the leader sequence at the 5 end of the eight sg mrnas, there is a minimal consensus trs, namely, 5 -acgaac-3 , which participates in the discontinuous synthesis of sg mrnas as a signaling sequence. the degree of sequence variance flanking the trs showed no clear relationship with the abundance of the sg mrnas (22 ) . a highly conserved s2m motif with 32 nucleotides was also identified in the 3 region of the genome, which had also been described in avian infectious bronchitis virus (aibv; ref. 12 -14 ) .the replicase gene of the sars-cov encodes for at least two proteins as a consequence of the proteolytic processing of the large polyprotein (orf 1a and 1b; ref. 16 ). the translation of segment 1b of such polyprotein is interrupted by the −1 ribosomal frame shifting by a putative "slippery" sequence and a putative pseudoknot structure (16 ) . two functional domains-papain-like cysteine proteinase (pl2 pro ) and 3c-like cysteine proteinase (3cl pro ), were identified experimentally and were responsible for the proteolytic processing of the polyprotein into 16 subunits (16 , 22 , 23 ) . a 375-a.a. sars-cov unique domain was identified upstream of the pl2 pro domain, which is unparalleled in any other known coronaviruses (16 ) . in addition, seven more putative regions encoding rna processing enzymes were identified, namely, rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), rna helicase (hel) poly (u)specific endoribonuclease (xendou), 30-to-50 exonuclease (exon), s-adenosylmethionine-dependent ribose 20-o-methyltransferase (20-o-mt), adenosine diphosphate-ribose 100-phosphatase (adrp), and a cyclic phosphodiesterase (cpd; ref. 16 ). the translation of two polyproteins from orf 1a and 1b starts the genome expression. the two proteinases, pcl2 pro and 3cl pro , are then coupled with the proteolytic processing of the two polyproteins into 16 units. pcl2 pro is responsible for the n-proximal cleavage and 3cl pro is responsible for the c-proximal cleavage. the helicase is then released. atpase activity and dna duplex-unwinding activity were demonstrated by purified helicase, indicating that the protein has rna polymerase activity (16 , 24 ) .together with the m protein, the spike protein is believed to be incorporated into the viral envelope before the mature virion is released (17 ) . initial analysis of the 1255-a.a. peplomer protein of the virus reveals the possible existence of a signal peptide that would likely be cleaved between residues 13 and 14 (12 ) . the whole structure is predicted to contain a receptor-binding unit (s1) in the n-terminus (14 , 25 -27 ) and a transmembrane unit (s2) in the c-terminus (13 , 14 , 25 , 27 ) . molecular modeling of the s1 and s2 subunits of the spike glycoprotein (26 , 28 ) suggested that the former unit is consisted of mainly anti-parallel β-sheets with dispersed α and β regions, in addition to the three domains identified in the s2 unit. the confidence level of the predicted molecular models was strengthened by the good correlation between predicted accessibility and hydropathy profiles and by the correct locations of the n/o-glycosylation sites and most of the disulfide bridges. whether the experimentally determined n-glycosylated sites from purified spike protein treated by tryptic digest together with pngase followed by time-of-flight (tof) mass spectrometry (29 ) are correctly located in the proposed model remains to be clarified. in the aspect of biological activities, receptors for the binding of the sars-cov remain mysterious, as comparative genomics did not point out any significant similarity with the s1 domain of other human coronaviruses, implying that these viruses are using different receptors for cell entry (12 ) . subsequently, angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ace2) was demonstrated to be a functional receptor for the sars-cov in vitro. synctia was observed in cell culture expressing ace2 and the sars-cov s1 domain, which could be inhibited by anti-ace2 antibody (30 ) . fine mapping on the n-terminal unit of the spike protein indicates that the receptor-binding domain is probably located between the residues 303 and 537 (31 ) .the sequence of the gene product from orf 3a shows no homology to any known proteins (12 , 14 ) . signal peptide or a cleaved site is likely to be present in the protein except three predicted transmembrane domains (12 ) . the exact function of the protein is yet to be determined, though the c-terminal of the protein may be involved in atp-binding properties (12 ) .the envelope protein of the sars-cov is thought to be the component of the virus envelope. topology prediction suggested that the e protein is a type ii membrane protein with the c-terminus hydrophilic domain exposed on the virion surface. comparative protein sequence analysis suggested the sars-cov e protein resembles the protein connected with mhv (12 , 32 , 33 ) .the matrix glycoprotein is not likely to be cleaved (12 ) and contains three putative transmembrane domains (12 -14 ) . its hydrophilic domain is believed to interact with the nucleocapsid protein and is located inside the virus particle (12 ) . linear epitope mapping of the m protein using synthetic peptides revealed that amino acid residues 2,137-2,158 interacted with sars patient sera by elisa assay, implying the potential capability of the m protein to induce immune response (34 , 35 ) .like orf 3a, sequence homology search yielded no significant result for any existing proteins, but the existence of a cleavage site (between residues 15 and 16) and a transmembrane helix were predicted. for orf 7a, it is a putative type i membrane protein (12 ) .the n gene sequence showed high homology with the nucleocapsid protein of other coronaviruses. a putative short lysine-rich nuclear localization signal (ktf-pptepkkdkkkktdeaq) was identified (12 ) . a potential and well-conserved rna interaction domain was also identified at the middle region of the gene, in which its basic nature may assist its role (12 , 14 ) . the n protein was reported to activate the ap-1 signal transduction pathway, indicating that the protein may play a role in the regulation of the host cell cycle (36 ) . apart from the possible role in pathogenicity, n gene was also believed to be the most abundant antigen in the host during the course of infection, making it an excellent candidate for diagnostic purposes. the linear epitopes of the protein have been mapped (35 , 37 , 38 ) , and the possibility of using these antigenic peptides or recombinant proteins in the diagnosis was discussed.the phylogenetic relationship by the comparison of the deduced amino acid sequences of the replicase gene and four structural genes (s, e, m, n) with other coronaviruses was described (12 -14 ) . the conclusions drawn by the different research groups were similar, with the observation that sars-cov itself forms a distinct cluster-the fourth group of coronaviridae, a notion supported by the high bootstrap values (above 90%). as a result, it has been concluded that the sars-cov is phylogenetically equidistant from all other known coronaviruses. moreover, no detectable recombination event was concluded in the similarity plot on the whole genome alignment with other coronaviruses (14 ) . the above findings suggest that the sars-cov is neither a mutant nor a recombinant of existing coronaviruses, and that the possibility of such a virus emerging as a product of genetic engineering can be excluded, as it is unlikely to generate an infectious coronavirus with 50% of its genome different from the existing coronaviruses (9 ) .snijder et al (22 ) conducted an extensive phylogenetic analysis concerning the replicase gene of the sars-cov by using torovirus as an outgroup. these authors criticized the phylogram construction based on different sars-cov proteins as unconvincing, and suggested the possibility that the sars-cov can be clustered into an existing group. as the structural and other accessory genes can either be gained or lost throughout the evolutionary process and in view of their low level of conservation, the author decided to target the replicase gene to perform the phylogenetic analysis. for this reason, the phylogenetic relationship was reconstructed through a rooted tree. the construction of the phylogram was done with the fused replicase gene with manual adjustment and exclusion of poorly conserved region. the resulting tree reveals that the gene was mostly related to group 2 coronaviruses and was assigned as a subgroup 2b. the author further pointed out that the sars-cov contains homologues of domains that are unique for group 2 coronaviruses, in the region of nsp1 and nsp3 (pl2 pro ), in addition to the differences in the sequence and arrangements of the 3 -located orfs, and the lack of antigenic cross-reactivity do not contradict their conclusion, as such a phenomenon was also observed in group 1 coronaviruses.using bayesian phylogenic inference approach, a recombination break point within the sars-cov rdrp was identified at protein sequence level (39 ) . phylogenetic analysis on the 5 end of the domain indicated that it might originate from the common ancestor of all existing coronaviruses, while the same analysis on the 3 end gave another tree topology that suggests a sister relationship with group 3 avian coronaviruses. these results suggested that a recombination event occurred between the common ancestor of the sars-cov and that of other coronaviruses, or alternatively that the 5 fragment of the sars-cov diverged before the one between or within other known coronaviruses and the 3 fragment diverged more recently (39 ) .based on the antigenic cross reactivity and genome characteristics, existing coronaviruses are generally classified into three subgroups (40 ) . all coronaviruses share a very similar organization in their functional and structural genes, but the arrangement of the so-called non-essential genes is remarkably different among the subgroups. group 1 coronaviruses are mainly characterized by the presence of orfs following the n gene. group 2 coronaviruses have two additional orfs, non-structural protein 2 (ns2) and he gene, located between orf 1b and the s gene. only group 3 species have orfs located between the m and n gene, and a conserved stem-loop motif s2m at their 3 utr (figure 1 ). accessory orfs are found between the s and e genes in all of the subgroups. however, these accessory orfs within the s-e intergenic region do not seem to be homologous between the subgroups, though they are conserved within subgroups. the rate of evolution of these accessory genes is obviously higher than that of the essential genes, which provides an alternative to access the phylogeny of the coronavirus family. the names of the group-specific accessory orfs were unified and denoted on the top of the corresponding subgroup orfs. the x (black cross) represents the absence of orfs within the region. genome organization and accessory orfs of these covs were confirmed except for the n2s of phev. all the accessory genes are group-specific and highly diverged within subgroups, particular within the s−e intergenic region. sars-cov has a very similar genome structure with group 3 covs, with two orfs located between m and n gene, and a conserved stem-loop motif s2m at their 3 utr. although the orf 5a/5b of group 3 covs and orf 5/6 of sars-cov are in homologous location, they do not have any significant sequence homology. based on the confirmed orfs of the sars-cov described above, a comparison of all homologous accessory and essential orfs of known coronaviruses with the novel sars-cov is shown in figure 1 . from the results, it does not seem that the coding regions are a consequence of a newly occurring recombination event between any of the existing known coronaviruses, similar to the conclusion made by holmes (9 ) . interestingly, the sars-cov genome has a very similar organization to that of group 3 avian coronaviruses (ibv and tcv), with the presence of three orfs within the m-n intergenic region, two orfs spanning between the s and e genes (65 ) , and a stem-loop motif s2m in 3 utr. the presence of s2m and the finding that the 3 fragment of sars-cov rdrp clustered into group 3 in the phylogenetic analysis (39 ) suggest that the avian coronaviruses and the sars-cov might share a common ancestor which gained the s2m from a single rna horizontal transfer event from a non-related virus family, as the astroviruses did (39 , 66 ) . another possibility, that a common coronavirus ancestor had once gained the motif but subsequently lost it, except the group 3 and sars-cov, cannot of course be excluded. pairwise sequence homology search among the accessory orfs at the s-e intergenic region of the sars-cov and all other coronaviruses shows no significant sequence homology (12 -14 ) but they are homologous within subgroups. the orf 5a/5b of group 3 coronaviruses and orfs 6-8 of the sars-cov are in a homologous location, but they do not have any significant sequence homology. the above results imply that, although the sars-cov and group 3 coronaviruses have a very similar genome organization, they might have acquired these accessory genes from several rna recombination events with different hosts or viral sources. it is observed that the accessory orfs are group-specific but are usually truncated to a different extent within a subgroup (figure 1 ). another interesting observation is the genetic diversity at the s-e intergenic region. usually two or three group-specific orfs are found within this region of each subgroup, but only one confirmed orf (orf 3) is found in this region of the sars-cov genome (12 -14 , 16 , 22 ) . the diversity (mainly due to truncation and deletion) of these s-e intergenic orfs within the subgroups is higher than that of other accessory orfs. their sequence divergence implies their common ancestors might have acquired these orfs by rna recombination, which is a common phenomenon in large rna viruses (67 , 68 ) , rather than evolved from mutations of a single ancestral rna sequence segment (9 ) . typical examples are the acquirement of the he gene from influenza c (69 ) and recombination events with berne virus at the he-ns2 region (52 ) .based on the recombination and truncation events occurring within these intergenic regions, the phylogenetic relationship between the sars-cov and other group 3 coronaviruses has been reconstructed (figure 2) . at least four subgroup common ancestors (♦ in figure 2 ) have acquired their s-e intergenic orfs and other group-specific orfs from several independent rna recombination events. moreover, there is a tendency of deletions or truncations of these orfs when crossing the species barriers within the subgroups, e.g. orf 4a/b in group 2 (54 -58 ); orf 3a/b and orf 7a/b in group 1 (41 , 42 , 47 , 48 , 50 , 70 -72 ) . the deletions of these redundant accessory orfs are likely to be the result rather than the cause of crossing the host barriers, as coronavirus host range specificity and tropism have been demonstrated, at least in four studies (7 , 73 -75 ) , as determined by the receptorbinding domain of the spike glycoprotein.recombination within certain types of viruses is a common phenomenon in various virus families (67 ), particularly for large rna viruses, as a means of shedding the deleterious effects of the errors accumulated during its genome replication (68 ) . recombination events within the coronavirus family (70 , 76 , 77 ) or with other non-related virus families (52 , 66 , 69 ) have been reported. apparently, the diversity of the redundant accessory genes has been accompanied by extensive genome rearrangement by heterogeneous or homogenous rna recombination events, providing useful information for the taxonomy of the coronaviruses. from this point of view, the sars-cov is definitely a new and unique member of the coronavirus family. the divergence of these redundant orfs between the sars-cov and other known coronaviruses suggests that the sars-cov might have been circulating in other animal hosts long before its emergence, and somehow crossed into a human host several months ago either by a sudden bottleneck mutation event or a rna recombination event with unknown sources.it has been demonstrated that the sars-cov possesses the ability to infect macaques, which display symptoms similar to the clinical signs of sars patients (78 ) , and to replicate in cats and ferrets (79 ) . together with the evidence implied by the phylogenetic studies, it is tempting to identify the possible animal reservoir of the coronavirus. recent studies of domestic and wild animals in guangdong, where the sars epidemic was first reported, identified the existence of the sars-cov from several animals found in the livestock market, including himalayan palm civets (paguma larvata) and raccoon dogs (nyctereutes procyonoides; ref. 80 ), in spite of the failure of another group to identify any sars-cov after the screening of more than 60 animal species (81 ) . the genome sequences of the coronaviruses isolated from these animals are almost identical (99.8%) to that of the sars-cov, revealing the extremely close phylogenetic relationship between them. another major finding from the sequence analysis highlighted a 29-bp deletion upstream the n gene, which was noted only in one guangdong isolate available from the gen-bank (gd01, accession number 278489). such deletion leads to the fusion of the two orfs identified in mrna 8 into one orf. yet its biological significance remains to be elucidated (8 ) . comparison of the s gene nucleotide sequence of the animal and human sars-cov indicated 11 consistent nucleotide signature mutations that appeared to distinguish them.the phylogenetic analysis of the s gene sequence between human and animal sars-cov likely ruled out the possibility that it is a consequence of human to animal transmission, implying the infected animals may acquired the virus from a true animal source that has yet to be identified (80 ) . this was also supported by the host-association analysis of coronaviruses based on the nucleocapsid gene (39 ) , which pinpointed that host-shifts had played an important role in the evolution of the virus and the host. the occurrence of avian-mammal host-shift supports the hypothesis that the sars-cov emerged from an unknown animal coronavirus.the reverse genetics system, a very useful tool in studying function of viral proteins and its mutations, was firstly described by master's group (82 ) for mhv in coronaviridae. in less than six months since the first identification of the sars-cov (2 ), yount et al (83 ) developed the reverse genetic systems for this coronavirus using the full-length cdna clone of urbani strain, by combining six component clones spanning through the entire genome. following in vitro transcription and the transfection of the resulting rna transcripts, a rescued recombinant virus was found to be capable of replication in the same way as the wild type. expected marker mutations introduced were also identified. the success of the experiment offers hope for the development of attenuated strains of live vaccine against the sars-cov (9 ).there is considerable scientific interest in the identification of the genetic agents responsible for the unusual susceptibility of the sars-cov in some ethnic groups. a molecular survey of the hla system, a common method adopted to identify autoimmune disorders and emerging infectious diseases, was conducted in taiwan during the sars epidemic (84 ) . using pcr amplification plus sequencespecific oligonucleotide probing (pcr-ssop), researchers identified the hla genotype of sars patients. healthy, unrelated taiwanese were used as controls, and the hla genotype of sars patients was compared with probable cases and with high-risk, uninfected health care workers. the results indicated that a higher frequency of hla-b*4601 allele was found in severe sars cases, which may explain the severity of sars in these patients. such genotype, as stated in the report, is common in southern han chinese, singaporeans and vietnamese, but not in indigenous taiwanese. there was no reported sars case within the latter ethnic group. such findings may explain the unusual sars epidemic in south asia.work on developing a laboratory diagnosis of the sars-cov began immediately after the sars outbreak, although an ideal diagnostic system is still being sought. numerous protocols have been developed for the diagnosis of infectious viral diseases. most of these protocols are pcr-based, and the remainder depends on measurable immune response. several factors affect the choice of proper diagnosis techniques, including time, the availability of equipment and expertise, the biological nature of the available samples, and the requirement of data output format (table 2; ref. 10 ). the presence of the virus can be detected by molecular testing such as pcr and virus isolation. measurable immune responses basically rely on sars-cov specific antibodies by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa). advances have been made in molecular diagnostic techniques in recent years, and such rapid and sensitive methods allow efficient monitoring of infectious viral diseases. for sars, the first genetic fragment of the virus was generated by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr; ref.2 ). two rt-pcr protocols were then developed by two who sars network laboratories (http://www.who.int/csr/sars/primers/en). the sen-sitivities of the assay were demonstrated to be at least 50%, with the highest percentage found in throat swab specimens (85 ) . no false positive was found in these assays.the first rapid real-time assay was developed based on the most conserved region of the orf1b gene sequence (86 , 87 ) . a person will be confirmed to be infected by the sars-cov if viral rna is detected by either the two pcr assays, two aliquots of specimen, or two sets of primers (http://www.cdc.gov/nci dod/sars/specimen collection sars2.htm). the sec-ond generation of this test protocol can detect the existence of the virus within 10 days after the onset of fever (87) (88) (89) and provides 80% sensitivity and 100% specificity in the testing of 50 npa samples collected from sars patients within three days after the onset of the disease (87 ) . to further increase the sensitivity, one-step real-time rt-pcr has been recently developed (89 ) . specificity of the pcr can be enhanced by coupling it with the use of an additional amplification target using the virus n gene fragment (89 ) , which is theoretically the most abundant subgenomic mrna produced during transcription (13 ) . the technique provides information on viral load during anti-viral treatments in real time, so that the efficacy of the therapy can be evaluated (10 ) . however, although the pcr assays are powerful, their performance is also technically demanding and labor intensive (10 ) .the development of microarray technology for viral discovery was firstly described by wang et al in 2002 (90 ) . the capability of the rapid high throughout screening of unknown viral pathogen gives it great potential to be used as a diagnostic tool. in the identification of the sars-cov, wang et al (11 ) employed the use of an improved microarray platform, which comprised conserved 70mers from each of the 1,000 viruses, to characterize the coronavirus genome. four hybridizing oligonucleotides from astroviridae which share the s2m motif and three from coronaviridae sharing conserved orf1ab fragment were firstly recognized in the experiment. the sequence recovered from the surface of the microarray further confirmed that it is a member of the coronavirus family. the identity of the sars-cov was confirmed within 24 hours, and this feat was followed by the partial sequencing of the novel virus a few days later. such technique demonstrated a rapid and accurate means of unknown virus characterization through genetic data.virus isolation by cell culture is used extensively as a traditional technique in virology. coronavirus presenting in the clinical specimens of sars patients was detected by inoculating the clinical specimens in cell cultures to allow the infection and the subsequent isolation of the virus. fetal rhesus kidney (frhk-4; ref.2 ) and vero cells (3 ) were found to be susceptible to sars-cov infection. after the isolation procedure, the pathogen was identified as the sars-cov by further tests, such as electron microscopy, rt-pcr, or immunofluorescent viral antigen detection. virus isolation is the only means to detect the existence of live virus from the tissue. the methodology is generally employed only for a preliminary identification of an unknown pathogen, as the procedure requires skillful technicians and is time consuming. the requirement of infectious viruses and that the duration of live virus existence varies add on further problems for conducting such assays, but they are nevertheless of very high specificity.the n protein is usually chosen as the antigen for anticoronavirus antibody detection assay (91 , 92 ) as it is believed to be a predominant antigen of the sars-cov (35 , 36 ) . it is also the only viral protein recognized by acute and early convalescent sera from patients recovering from sars (29 ) . in addition to the n protein, the s protein in the sars-cov was also reported as an antigen eliciting antibodies in human body (29 ) , but at a much lower titer than that of the n protein (35 , 36 ) .the assay based on the presence of sars-cov antibodies is suggested to be valid only for specimens obtained more than three weeks after the onset of fever (88 , 89 ) , although some patients have detectable sars-cov antibodies within 14 days of the onset of illness. nevertheless, the negative result, i.e. absence of sars-cov antibodies, within the first three weeks cannot conclude that the patient is free of the virus, though the elisa method was still defined as a good standard for rapid diagnosis of sars (85 ) . seroconversion from negative to positive or a four-fold rise in antibody titer from acute to convalescent serum indicates recent infection (http://www.who.int/csr/sars/diagnostictests/en/).the epidemiology of sars has been extensively investigated since the outbreak of sars in november 2002 in guangdong (1 ). this traditional method was used to access the epidemiology of sars initially. molecular epidemiology can be used to trace the disease transmission by using phylogenetic analysis of viral nucleotide sequence, which can quickly identify and aid in monitoring the transmission (93 ) .in coronavirus, variations in the spike protein can drastically affect viral entry, pathogenesis (94 ), antiviral immune response (29 ) , virulence (95 ), cellular (6 ), or even species tropism (7 ) . the s gene has been used as a target for genotyping most coronaviruses, like human coronaviruses (96 ) and ibv (97 ) . study of the n-terminal region of the sars-cov spike protein produced similar conclusions by conventional epidemiology methods (98 ) . the investigation included the collection s1 gene sequences from sars patients in hong kong and guangdong during february-april 2003 mainly by direct sequencing of rt-pcr products derived from clinical specimens, and compared it phylogenetically to additional 27 other sequences available from genbank. the majority of the hong kong viruses, including those from a large outbreak in a high-rise apartment block, amoy garden, clustered to a single index case that came from guangdong to hong kong in late february ( figure 3 ). most of the viruses derived from hong kong patients belong to the same lineage with viruses derived from the hong kong index case. outbreaks in canada, singapore, taiwan and vietnam were also derived from the sars-cov of the same initial virus lineage as judged from the same phylogenetic analysis. a number of viruses derived from the early patients were excluded from the major lineage and formed distinct cluster, implying multiple introductions of the virus have occurred, although these viruses did not caused large-scale outbreaks. viral sequences identified in guangdong and beijing are genetically more diverse (1 , 98 ) , implying that the sars-cov has been circulating there for a while before the introduction to hong kong. the hong kong index case that initiated the first super-spreading incident to affect 12 other patients might be simply a matter of chance or the viruses found in that patient were contagious to initiate super-spreading events, but these still need further investigations. apart from findings that indicate the possible transmission routes, transitional isolates that possess both the characteristics of two lineages were also identified. ruan et al (99 ) and tsui et al (100 ) performed similar analysis based on the comparison of full genome sequences of different sars-cov isolates. they independently identified some of the variations, as guan et al (98 ) did. chiu et al (101 ) have recently identified the nucleotide substitution in the s gene that is unique to the taiwan isolates and was linked to the hong kong index case. sequence comparison of the amoy garden isolates revealed no significant variations within the s1 gene, or across the whole genome, implying that other non-viral factors may contribute to the abnormal transmission and clinical presentation of sars in this cluster of high-rise apartments (98 , 102 ) . in summary, the transmission route of the sars-cov in different countries and areas correlates well with the traditional epidemiological findings, implying the successful application of molecular epidemiological techniques in tracing the virus transmission history.concerning viral evolution, zeng et al (103 ) have performed a linear regression analysis and tried to estimate the last appearance of the sars-cov common ancestor. with such effort, which has been successfully applied in timing of the ancestral sequence of human immunodeficiency virus (hiv; ref. 104 ), the ancestral sequence is believed to have appeared last in late 2002. these preliminary findings provide important information for tracing the origin of the sars-cov and monitoring its spread.current knowledge on coronavirus immunity has mainly been acquired from research on animal coronaviruses. clinical observations have shown that humoral and cell-mediated immune responses may be both necessary against sars-cov infection (105 ) . it was reported that t cell (cd3+, cd4 and cd8+) depletion was observed in early infection, but that levels returned to normal as the disease was improved (106 ) . igg antibody could be detected at the 7th day after the onset of symptoms and kept at high titer at least three months (107 ) . another report indicated that the virus was still detectable in respiratory and stool specimens by rt-pcr diagnosis but could not be cultured more than 40 days after presentation (108 ) , implying that the antibody could be stimulated rapidly and might restrict the virus infection. however it has also been reported in fowl and feline coronaviral diseases that low-level antibody may exacerbate diseases (109 ) . it is therefore important to conduct further investigations into the immune response to sars patients in the future so as to benefit the vaccine development and disease control.concerning the candidate target for vaccine development, the s1 unit of the spike proteins has been identified as the host protective antigen and used as a vaccine candidate in other coronaviruses (110 ) . an extensive structural analysis of the corresponding pro- the branch length shows the genetic distance with reference to the horizontal scale bar. all sample names were hidden for the convenience of display, except the index case isolate hku-33 (gray) and subcluster transition isolates (dark). the locations of these isolates on the tree were pinpointed by dots besides their names. the hypothetical common ancestors of the subclusters were highlighted as described in the right bottom of the figure. tein in sars is thus desirable. with the identification of the sars-cov functional receptor (30 ) and the mapping of the receptor-binding domain on the spike protein (31 ) , subunit vaccine targeting the receptorbinding domain and the preparation of killed or attenuated vaccine using ace2 expression cell line may be promising (30 ) . antiviral drugs represent an alternative anti-sars strategy to vaccination. inhibiting chemicals targeting the sars-cov replication-related proteins were considered as anti-sars-cov drug candidates, e.g. inhibition the enzymatic activity of 3cl pro . an extensive structural analysis of 3cl pro encoded from nsp5 on orf 1a was performed (28 , 111 ) . the 3cl pro structure showed a considerable degree of conservation of the substrate-binding sites, with the evidence that it could retain its proteolytic activity upon tgev (transmissible gastroenteritis virus) main proteinase (111 ) , though another group mentioned that the inactive property of the enzyme might exist in vitro (112 ) . from this result, these authors suggested that the use of rhinovirus 3c pro inhibitor might be useful in anti-sars therapy. two months later, a research group from the us conducted a study on the interaction of two chemicals (kz7088 and the avlqsgfr octapeptide) with 3cl pro (113 ), further highlighting the importance of the main proteinase as a target for anti-viral drug design. fan et al (114 ) provided valuable additional information, and concluded that only the dimeric form of the 3cl pro is active and that the proteinase-substrate interaction can be speeded up if more beta-sheet-like structure is involved in the substrate. recently the crystal structure of 3cl pro was reported by yang et al (115 ) . the 3cl pro crystal underwent conformational changes under different ph conditions while complexing with the specific inhibitor at the same time. a serine-protease fold with a cys-his at the active site was recognized. on the other hand, the modeling of the structure of 20-o-mt domain located at nsp16 was proposed by von grotthuss et al (116 ) using the 3d jury system with high reliability (3d jury score >100). the conservation of the unique tetrad residues k-d-k-e of the domain assigned a proposed mrna cap methylation function of this domain, suggesting an alternative target for anti-viral drug design. in addition to main proteases, blocking the virus entry should be considered as well. structural analysis of the s2 domain of the sars-cov s protein, which plays a role in fusion of the virus with host cell, revealed a conservation of sequence motifs with the wellstudied gp41 protein of hiv-1 and other viruses with class i transmembrane domain (27 ) . such a structure may be another target for drug design.the collaborative efforts of the global scientific community have provided invaluable insights into the molecular biology of the sars-cov. the development of a rapid and accurate method of diagnosis based on the molecular findings has helped to identify sars patients at an early stage of the disease, thereby providing valuable information for national authorities to monitor the spread of the disease and take effective quarantine measures, and contributing to the understanding of the clinical presentations of the syndrome. the elucidation of the molecular biology of the sars-cov has provided a foundation for vaccine design and narrowed down the targets for large-scale high throughput drug screening program for anti-viral therapy. these advances helped the global community to contain the spread of sars within four months since its first identification. however, much remains to be discovered about this novel coronavirus, and it may yet pose a serious threat. unlike other recently identified viral diseases like ebola and west nile virus, it seems the transmission of sars-cov does not need a visible vector for spreading, and that a tiny, invisible, respiratory droplet is sufficient to infect another person (117 ) . the nearly undetectable symptom presented by the recently confirmed sars case in singapore suggests that the virus may continue to circulate undetectably (65 ) . the possibility that common domestic animals are also a virus reservoir for sars further complicates the struggle to contain and ultimately eradicate this disease. in these aspects, sensitive, accurate and rapid diagnosis plays an extremely important role in limiting the disease spread, especially in the developing world and densely populated countries. luckily, the aggressive quarantine measures imposed by the who proved to be effective in containing the outbreak, and the experience gained in the last sars outbreak has prepared us to face another outbreak with some confidence. nevertheless, nobody can predict exactly when an effective vaccine or anti-viral drug will be developed. all that can be said is that, based on our growing knowledge of the molecular epidemiology and evolution of the virus, the successful development of countermeasures to sars is very possible.we wish to thank all groups that responded rapidly by producing these invaluable and essential sequence data. their contributions have enabled an unprecedented, lightning-fast process of scientific discovery---truly an incredible benefit for humanity and for the scientific community. we emphasize that most lab groups with whom we associate specific suspicious alleles are also those who have produced the most sequence data at a time when it was urgently needed. we commend their efforts. we have already contacted each group and many have updated their sequences. our goal with this work is not to highlight potential errors, but to understand the impacts of these and other kinds of highly recurrent mutations so as to identify commonalities among the suspicious examples that can improve sequence quality and analysis going forward.extremely rapid whole genome sequencing has enabled nearly real-time tracing of the evolution of the sars-cov-2 pandemic [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . by leveraging sequence data produced by labs throughout the world, researchers can trace transmission of the virus across human populations [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] . typically, viral evolution is encapsulated by a phylogenetic tree relating all of the virus samples in a large set to one another [5, [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] . however, despite efforts to mitigate the impact of sequencing and assembly errors, and to provide standardized datasets for real-time analysis [20] , inferred phylogenetic histories of the outbreak often differ between analyses of different research groups (results) and these inferred histories sometimes differ between analyses performed by the same group with different data ( e.g., 31 different nextstrain trees produced between 3/23 and 4/30, results). these differences may be created or accentuated when samples that contain unidentified sequencing errors are incorporated into the phylogenetic tree. defining stable and easily referenced major clades of the virus is essential for epidemiological studies of viral population dynamics [17, 18] . an understanding of how errors might be affecting the trees that are being published is essential to achieving that goal ( figure 1 ).pictorial representation of how the evolutionary histories of viral sequences (long black lines adjacent to tree nodes) can be traced on a phylogenetic tree using mutational events (green and blue circles) that occur. in this case, each mutation occurs once independently. (right) the introduction of recurrent errors (gray and brown circles) can obscure the true evolutionary relationship between sequences leading to the creation of artifactual subgroups/clades (green-gray, leaves 2 & 3) and gray-brown, leaves 7 & 8)) and even the incorrect assignment of viral sequences to subgroups (leaf 6 no longer correctly groups with the blue subgroup (leaves 4 & 5) ; large boxes group together subgroups based on inferred first mutation).it can be difficult to distinguish sequencing errors of different types from genuine transmitted and non-transmitted mutations in genome sequences. taking a conservative approach, many researchers remove mutations that are observed only once during the evolution of the virus when constructing a phylogenetic tree, as these may be more likely to be errors [21, 22] , or non-transmitted mutations. however, systematic errors, where the same error from a common source is introduced many times in otherwise distinct viral genome sequences, are not removed by that approach [23, 24] . these are more problematic, as they can appear as if they are genuine transmitted mutations ( figure 1 ). this might result from recurring errors in data generation or processing, or due to contamination among samples. each case induces an apparent mutation that may be challenging to rectify with the real structure of the viral tree. consequently, systematic errors can produce support for erroneous relationships between viral isolates and destabilize tree-building efforts. one possible approach is to mask out specific sites in the genome sequence where recurring errors are suspected, as suggested previously [24] . however, genuine recurrent mutations that may contain important information about properties of viral evolution [6, 8, [25] [26] [27] are sometimes hard to distinguish from recurrent systematic errors, and this could obscure important biology. here, we present data that we hope will help the community make the important decision as to how to treat potential errors in sars-cov-2 genome sequences.in addition to their influence on phylogenetic inference, recurrent systematic errors can also lead to erroneous inferences about viral mutation processes, recombination and selection. for example, artefactual biases in mutational processes could confound signatures of mutational hotspots [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] . the issue of whether or not recombination has occurred during the outbreak is critical to the immunological battle against the virus and is under intense debate [6, [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] . because many tests of recombination assume that all mutations can only occur once at each site, recurrent mutation and systematic errors can confound signatures of recombination [6, 26, 35] . finally, recurrent mutations have been identified as a possible signatures of elevated mutation rates and natural selection in sars-cov-2 [8, 13, [24] [25] [26] 29, 33, 35, 41] , but some of these apparent instances of selection may be due systematic errors in the sequences. confusion about recurrent mutations and recombination affects our understanding of host response and influences our decisions about which viral molecular processes or specific immune epitopes we might want to target in vaccine development. thus, it is essential that we explore the possible extent and impact of systematic errors in the viral genome sequences.another basic problem in current investigations of viral evolution is widespread phylogenetic uncertainty. in part, this has prevented the community from settling on a consensus definition of distinct viral clades ("(sub)types", "groups", "lineages") representing the early divergence events, producing a "tower of babel" problem in the scientific discourse [17, 42] . furthermore, many groups are making phylogenetic trees with widely varying goals, including dissecting patterns of nucleotide substitution, recurrent mutation, local lineage tracing, and large-scale phylogenomics [8, 17, 26] . the resulting topologies vary dramatically in structure, owing to differences in analysis choices and to phylogenetic uncertainty stemming from limited genetic diversity in the expanding viral populations. consistent approaches for identifying commonalities and rectifying differences among trees are therefore foundational to the efforts to characterize viral evolution and epidemiology. a maximally stable topology will be essential for consistent nomenclature and facilitating conversations between analyses [17, 42] .our work takes on these two interrelated considerations: systematic errors and phylogenetic uncertainty. first, we show that hundreds of samples in the current sars-cov-2 sequencing datasets are affected by lab-associated mutations, which are potentially erroneous (see also [24] ). these mutations distort phylogenetic inferences at scales most relevant to local lineage tracing and impact inferred patterns of mutational recurrence and recombination. we demonstrate that many can be identified and removed by cross-referencing patterns of recurrence against the source sequencing lab, and we provide automated methods for detecting suspicious and highly recurrent mutations. second, to facilitate communication and comparison across different sars-cov-2 phylogenies, we develop approaches for efficiently comparing and visualizing differences among trees. all of the tools and functionality that we describe here are publicly available and integrated into the ucsc genome browser to facilitate rapid visualization, data exploration, and cross referencing among datasets and analyses. we anticipate that these methods will fuel more accurate continued discovery during the current pandemic and beyond.nextstrain datasets: our analyses are built in large part on the work of nextstrain [15] . this team has already implemented a number of precautions to remove problematic sites and samples. in particular, they remove samples that are too divergent from others or whose date of sampling is inconsistent with the number of accumulated mutations. additionally, all indels in the resulting multiple alignment are masked. here, we do not consider the impact of alternative multiple alignments, upstream filtering methods, or the possible impacts of indels. each of these factors has the potential to affect downstream analyses and should be considered carefully. for our purposes, we anticipate that nextstrain's filters will minimize idiosyncratic errors and should be retained in the majority of future analyses. here, we use as a primary example, 31 different nextstrain trees from days between 3/23/2020 and 4/30/2020. we focused in particular on the dataset from 4/19/2020 which contains 3246 variants in total (methods). the vast majority of variants are at low frequency, as is expected for a rapidly expanding population.non-random errors can present a fundamental challenge for phylogenetic inference and to the interpretation of viral evolutionary dynamics. there are at least four possible sources of (real or apparent) mutations that recur within independent lineages in a tree, and each makes distinct predictions about the source of recurrent mutations (table 1 ). in particular, recent work has shown a strong bias towards c>u mutation in the sars-cov-2 genome [21, [42] [43] [44] . systematic errors, which usually result from consistent errors in molecular biology techniques or bioinformatic data data processing, need not reflect this bias and are not subject to natural selection. we therefore anticipate that many systematic errors will affect many mutation types, modify protein sequences, and strongly correlate with genome sequences generated in particular labs [24] .heritable many apparently recurrent mutations found in the sars-cov-2 genome to examine patterns of recurrent mutation we employ a simple statistic, the parsimony score, which is the count of the minimum number of unique mutation events consistent with a tree and sample genotypes ( [45, 46] computed using our software from https://github.com/yatisht/strain_phylogenetics , methods). more sophisticated statistics could be employed, but this simple one is effective, is readily interpretable, and can be computed rapidly.we restrict most analysis to bi-allelic sites, i.e. sites that contain one the allele in the reference genome from the root of the tree (here and in nextstrain this is, wuhan-hu-1, obtained in december 2019 in the city of wuhan) and a single alternate allele. across the 4/19/2020 nextstrain tree, we found 2533, 395, 94, 40, and 44 bi-allelic sites with parsimony score one, two, three, four, and five or more, respectively ( figure 2 , figure s1 ). in particular, there is a strong "on diagonal" component of the data that is defined by a linear relationship between the log of the alternate allele count and parsimony score (dashed line in figure 2a , log2-based slope = 3.188). these mutations reoccur across the phylogeny at exceptional rates relative to their allele frequencies. hereafter, we refer to the set of variants in this on-diagonal group as extremal sites (blue, red, and orange in figure 2a ). this relationship suggests that the extreme accumulation of independent clades for the alternate allele is logarithmically related to the number of instances of the alternate allele in the phylogeny ( figure 2b ). this suggests that even the most mutable or error prone sites in the genome will sometimes have alternate alleles grouped into clades during phylogenetic inference thereby appearing to be inherited.the relationship between alternate allele count and parsimony score. point radius indicates how many sites share a single parsimony score and alternate allele count. several noteworthy recurrent mutations are labelled. note that the x-axis is log-scaled. (b) the sizes of independent clades for the same alternate allele arranged in descending order. the number of lineages per clade is shown on logarithmic scale facilitating comparison with panel (a). these data indicate that when alternate allele clade sizes for a given site are sorted in decreasing order, their sizes are reduced going from left to right by a multiplicative factor at each step, consistent with the log-linear relationship displayed in panel (a). mutations with remarkably high recurrence are shown with color reflecting their properties: lab-associated (red), recurrent and associated with a poly-u stretch (blue), and high frequency with many forward and backward mutations (purple). grey lines in the background are the same values but for all other mutations with parsimony score 4 or greater. the values in parentheses in the mutation names indicate the number of unique clades associated with the alternate allele. note that in some cases, this extends beyond the limit of the x-axis and that the y-axis is log-scaled for visibility. (c) an example of the observed patterns of evolution at one highly recurrent site with reference allele u and alternate allele g, site 13402 and parsimony score 14, where 14 alternate allele clades (in red) each represent an apparently independent incidence of the mutation substituting the alternate allele.lab-association is a straightforward indication that we use below to identify highly suspect mutations in the sars-cov-2 genome. however, hypermutable sites might also impact phylogenetic reconstruction for similar reasons as systematic errors. we therefore sought to provide researchers with a method for rapidly identifying and flagging suspiciously recurrent mutations. we therefore developed code to identify the "on diagonal" extremal sites and produce plots of the output similar to figure 2 , that is available at https://github.com/yatisht/strain_phylogenetics . note that depending on the dataset, this component is not always so linear as in figure 2 , but it is associated with highly homoplastic sites regardless ( e.g., figure s1 ). our list of extremal sites includes two that we later show are strongly lab-associated (a4050c and u13402g), three mutations that are adjacent to >5bp poly-u segments in the genome (c11074u, g11083u, and c21575u), as well as two more c>u mutations (c21711u, c28887u). regardless of their proximate causes, highly recurrent mutations can negatively impact the accuracy of inferred tree topologies, and thus should be removed prior to phylogenetic tree construction and for many subsequent analyses.to search for systematic errors associated with a particular lab, we extracted the set of sites with parsimony score 4 or more. we then flagged sites as lab-associated mutations if more than 80% of the samples containing the alternate allele were generated by a single group. using this heuristic approach, we found 16 such sites (table s1 ). we note that this set of sites contains two mutations previously identified as lab-associated mutations [24] , some others identified as highly homoplastic [8, 24, 25, 42] , as well as several identified as evidence for recombination [26] . these mutations in lab-associated sites display a range of base compositions and only one is a c>u transition (c6255u). this rate of c>u mutation is much less than the genome-wide average rate of c>u mutation for non-singleton sites (49%, p = 0.0004914, fisher's exact test), and differs significantly from the rate of c>u mutation among our set of highly recurrent mutations that are not strongly associated with a single sequencing lab (p = 1.005e-07, fisher's exact test). furthermore, our set of lab-associated mutations is weakly enriched for protein altering mutations relative to other highly recurrent mutations (p = 0.09372). collectively, our results suggest that some recurrent mutations among these 16 could be lab-associated systematic errors.the potential causes of lab-associated mutations are numerous. a non-exhaustive list follows. first, primers for reverse transcription or pcr might introduce systematic errors either via errant priming, because they "overwrite" true variation, or because of errors during bioinformatic processing. for example, the commonly used artic primer sets amplify the viral genome from metatranscriptomic cdna by tiling the viral genome with pcr amplicons ( https://artic.network/ ). second, if a portion (perhaps a single amplicon) from a contaminating sample were present in many sequencing reactions from a single lab, this could propagate variants across all genome sequences from a single group. third, contamination from the human transcriptome itself might be inadvertently included in assembled viral genomes.two labs contributed a disproportionate number of lab-associated mutations in our dataset, suggesting a consistent source of these alternate alleles (table s1 ). one lab group is strongly associated with two adjacent high parsimony score mutations a24389c and g24390c. these occur in a 10bp sequence that otherwise closely resembles an oxford nanopore sequencing adapter, cagca cc tt, and is adjacent to an artic primer binding site. here, the differences between the genome sequence and adapter are bolded . see also [24] , where a commenter on that work comes to a similar conclusion regarding the likely source of these mutations. additionally, a4050c, u8022g, u13402g, and a13947u ( figure 2 , table s1 ) are associated with this same lab and either overlap or are within 10bp of artic primer binding sites (14_left_alt4, 26_right, 44_right, and 47_left, respectively), suggesting that a consistent bioinformatics data processing error may be responsible. sequences submitted by another lab group are strongly associated with four additional high parsimony score mutations, g2198a, g3145u, a3778g, and c6255u ( figure 2 , table s1 ). here again, each of these intersects one of the artic primer binding sites (8_left, 11_left, 13_left and 20_right respectively, figure 3 ). in aggregate, our set of lab-associated mutations are significantly closer to artic primer binding sites than would be expected by chance (p = 0.0283, permutation test, figure 3 ). our results therefore suggest that mutations intersecting or immediately surrounding commonly used primer binding sites should be subjected to particular scrutiny. another lab-associated mutation, c22802g, also overlaps an artic primer (76_left , table s1 ), but the ultimate source is unrelated. in this case, that would not be possible because these sars-cov-2 genomes were assembled from whole metatranscriptomic data without pcr selection. instead, the cause appears to be misalignment of a human ribosomal rna sequence that was incorporated into the consensuses for a subset of genomes produced by this group (dr. darrin lemmer, pers. comm. ). this highlights the broad range of possible causes of lab-associated mutations.it is more challenging to identify the specific sources of the other five lab-associated mutations that we observed, but commonalities are informative. three of these mutations are associated with a single group and each is a g>u transversion (g3564u, g8790u, g24933u, table s1 ). even more strikingly, each mutation occurs in a ggu motif, suggesting a common molecular mechanism might underlie this set of lab-associated mutations as well ( i.e., ggu > guu). one possible hint is that this group uses a transposase-based library preparation method, which is relatively uncommon among sars-cov-2 sequencing groups and might explain this unique signature. beyond these, g1149u and u153g are associated with two different sequencing groups, but do not show similar signatures as other variants (table s1 ). more generally, the fact that many recurrent mutations are associated with genome sequences produced by individual lab groups suggests that consistent data processing or generation issues affect many sites. for example, sample contamination, which can be quite challenging to confidently detect, might also contribute to mutational recurrence and might not strongly be lab-associated (text s1). however, we caution that this does not definitively prove that these apparent mutations are errors, but we believe it is prudent to remove these sites for most analyses until additional sequencing corroborates them.to study how systematic errors affect phylogenetic inference and inferred properties of viral evolution, we experimentally introduced errors in replicate experiments. we found that the parsimony score displays a roughly linear relationship with the log of the alternate allele count, as it does for extremal sites in nextstrain trees we examined built on different days in april, but with varying slope (figure 4 ). this is expected because errors will sometimes occur in sample genomes whose positions are close on the real phylogeny and even in sister lineages. tree-building methods could then group these samples into a single clade. importantly, the effect of drawing samples together can cause systematic error, or hypermutable sites for that matter, to appear heritable.additionally, we find that viral genetic background and mutation type is an important contributor to this relationship. when errors are placed randomly across australian samples ( figure 4a ), we see much higher parsimony scores than when errors are placed only in samples from france collected between march 1 and march 17 ( figure 4b ). the difference likely reflects the fact that the samples from france are more closely related. because many of the lab-associated mutations that we identified are derived from a similarly restricted time and geographic region as our samples from france, parsimony scores at those sites closely resemble these sets of simulated error ( figure 4b ). this suggests that the identification of lab-associated mutations will become increasingly straightforward as the viral populations accumulate genetic diversity. we also observe that mutations that truly occur less often during sars-cov-2 evolution ( e.g., c to g) have slightly lower parsimony scores. this is likely due to modelling nucleotide-specific mutation rates during tree-building where mutations consistent with viral mutational processes are less likely to be erroneously grouped. importantly, our results suggest that a simple heuristic based on each site's parsimony score and recurrence is sufficient to identify most lab-associated mutations above very low frequencies. however, extremely infrequent lab-associated error could be challenging to distinguish from more conventional sequencing error.because systematic errors also affect the inferred tree, they can impact inferred patterns of mutational recurrence at other positions in the genome as well. in 50 out of 54 total experiments where we introduced a single recurrent error, we found that the parsimony score increased at other sites (range 2 to 44). this emphasizes the importance of identifying and excluding such mutations prior to inferring the final tree and downstream analyses. corresponding clade sizes arranged in descending order for error simulations in (a-c, respectively, as in figure 2b ).correlated lab-associated mutations have large impacts on phylogenetic inference if infrequent but highly correlated errors were introduced at different sites in many samples, this could cause more samples to be grouped into a clade. we might not easily detect these errors based on recurrence. two lab-associated mutations, a24389c and g24390c, are not just on adjacent genomic locations but are nearly perfectly correlated across samples. these sites have low parsimony scores when compared to other lab-associated mutations (4 and 5, respectively, figure 4c ). when we introduced similar correlated errors, we found that the parsimony scores were lower than in single error introduction experiments. nonetheless, in only two error introduction experiments (out of 9) with 10 affected samples did we see a parsimony score as low as 3. although low frequency and highly correlated error could be challenging to identify in general, we believe this is infrequent in our dataset (see text s2). therefore we have not included tests for correlated errors in our suggested methods for finding lab-associated mutations, but adjacent correlated sites should be carefully scrutinized.to investigate the impacts of lab-specific mutations on phylogenetic inference, we removed ("masked") each of the 16 sites with a lab-associated mutation (table s1 ). importantly, removing lab-associated mutations sometimes impacted phylogenetic patterns at other sites. for example, after removing all lab-associated mutations, the evidence for back-mutations at c14408u is eliminated, while many forward-mutations remain ( e.g. , figure 5 ). in fact, the parsimony score changed for 107 sites and decreased for 53 sites on the tree that we inferred after removing all of the lab-associated mutations relative to the tree inferred including all sites. additionally, we find that many samples containing lab-associated mutations have been repositioned on local topologies ( e.g., figure 5 ). furthermore, in some cases the placement of closely related lineages that are unaffected by lab-associated mutations is also affected ( figure  s2 ). these mutations therefore affect phylogenetic inferences at scales relevant to local lineage tracing, which may obscure dynamics of local transmission.part of the tree we inferred from the 4/19/2020 nextstrain dataset (left) compared to the corresponding part of tree after removal of sites with lab-associated mutation (right). lab-associated mutations (red) can affect the inferred phylogeny and are associated with apparent back-mutation to the ancestral allele (grey in column 14408, left) at other sites (white). when lab-associated mutations are removed, the resulting tree (right) shows no evidence for back-mutation at those sites (now white in column 14408), though several independent forward mutations remain evident.to examine the effect of each lab-associated mutation and the other extremal sites in isolation from one another, we individually masked each site and inferred a phylogeny. as a comparison, we also masked a set of sites that have similar alternate allele frequencies as the lab-associated mutations, but each has a parsimony score of one. the distributions of entropy-weighted total distance (a measure of distance between trees, described below) are remarkably similar when masking individual lab-associated sites, other extremal sites, and our control sites ( figure 6 ). most exceed the distance we observed when we independently inferred two trees from the same input alignment (dashed black line). our results therefore suggest that the lab-associated and extremal sites can impact tree-building approaches on par with real mutations, although the effects are typically small on the scale of whole topologies, as is expected given their typically low allele frequencies ( figure 6 , figure s3 ).phylogenies made after removing two mutations, one control and one lab-associated are outliers for entropy-weighted total distance ( figure 6 , figure s4 ) and other tree distance statistics ( figure s3 ). in each case, however, the likelihood of the tree produced from the full dataset is actually higher (table s5 ), suggesting that our tree-building method discovered a different locally optimal but less favorable topology rather than a dramatic impact of each site individually. these results suggest higher level uncertainty in the tree topology largely independent of the effects of lab-associated mutations. figure 6 : the relationship between alternate allele frequencies of lab-associated mutations and effect of masking on inferred tree topology. entropy-weighted total distances relative to the reference maximum likelihood phylogeny are shown for phylogenies constructed after masking individual sites. blue points correspond to sites with lab-specific alternate alleles, grey points correspond to control sites with parsimony scores of 1 and similar alternate allele frequencies to the sites with lab-specific alternate alleles, and brown points correspond to non-lab-specific extremal sites. the black horizontal line indicates the entropy-weighted total distance value for a maximum likelihood phylogeny constructed from an alignment identical to that of the reference phylogeny. two outliers, c21590u (control) and g1149u (lab-associated) have outsize effects on inferred tree topology.hypermutation rather than positive selection may explain many remaining highly recurrent sites. previous analyses showed that the rate of c>u mutation is exceptionally high relative to other mutation types in the viral genome [10, 25, 43, 47] . this class of mutations should show increased evidence of recurring multiple times because they experience elevated mutation rates [25] . indeed, parsimony scores at sites containing c>u mutations are significantly higher than those for all other mutation types (p < 2.2e-16, wilcoxon test, figure 7) . furthermore, parsimony scores at c>u sites also significantly exceed those at g>a (p = 5.993e-12) as well as u>c (p = 1.407e-10) sites. this mutational bias might be driven by apobec editing of the viral genome [25, 43, 44, [47] [48] [49] . consistent with previous results [43, 44, [47] [48] [49] , we find that 5'-[u|a]c>u mutation more frequently than 5'-[c|g]c>u (p = 0.0501), but we do not see a similar effect for 3' flanking sites at 5'-c>u[u|a] relative to 5'-c>u[g|c] mutations (p = 0.378). the highly biased spectrum of c>u mutations and the correlation with local sequence context implies that the plus-stranded virus biology may be leading to recurrent c>u mutations [47] .of the 83 highly recurrent mutations with parsimony greater than three, 50 are bi-allelic, not strongly lab-associated, and have an alternate allele frequency less than 0.01. of these, 42 are c>u mutations. this is a significant excess of c>u mutations relative to the rate among non-singleton bi-allelic sites with parsimony score three or fewer (p = 3.658e-07, fisher's exact test). additionally, c>u mutations that do not affect the underlying amino acid sequences display higher parsimony scores than do c>u mutations that do affect amino acid sequences (p = 0.0553, wilcoxon test, figure 7 ). this suggests that negative selection has played a role in shaping the distribution of highly recurrent mutations by purging strongly deleterious alleles.evidence suggests that any contribution of sequencing error to the excess of c>u mutation is small. alternate alleles at 81.4% of sites with parsimony greater than 3 are corroborated by more than one sequencing technology. of those, 77% of bi-allelic sites are c>u transitions (table s2) . illumina c>t errors in raw sequence reads are typically enriched in the contexts of flanking g regions [50, 51] , but here we do not see this pattern. similarly, nanopore sequencing typically creates errors in homopolymer stretches [52] , but we only see a few recurrent mutations associated with such regions. notable exceptions are the extremal sites c11074u, and c 21575u, which abut poly-u stretches in the genome and might result from replication slippage (see also g11083u). it is possible that the excess of c>u mutations are driven in part by high error rates during reverse transcription [53] [54] [55] [56] , which is required for cdna sequencing. however, c>u mutation is overrepresented in high frequency mutations as well (9/20 frequency > 0.025 mutations are c>u, table s3 ), indicating that this bias likely reflects a true mutational process. additionally, these mutations are approximately as distant from artic primer binding sites as we would expect by chance (p = 0.7851, permutation test, table s2 ). collectively, our results suggest that neither library preparation or sequencing error is not the major driving force behind biased c>u mutation observed at highly recurrent mutations that are not strongly associated with a single lab. however, even if real, the existence of these highly recurrent mutations does not require that they are heritable (it must be that many viral mutations are never transmitted), in which case their phylogenetic behavior should be the same as systematic errors. we proposed a simple heuristic approach to detect lab-associated mutations. to briefly reiterate here, first we identify sites that experience mutations on at least four independent branches of the sars-cov-2 tree, and then we extract the set where 80% or more of the alternate allele comes from sequences produced by a single lab. these are classified as lab-associated recurrent mutations. then for all sites we plot parsimony score versus log2 of alternate allele count and determine a set of extremal sites as described in methods. we recommend that lab-associated and most extremal mutations be masked for the purposes of constructing a phylogenetic tree to be used in downstream analyses. one exception here is extremal site 11083, which is sufficiently high frequency that it affects inference of the deepest branches of the tree. we suggest that it should be included during phylogenetic inference. however, alternative masking strategies that remove small clades containing apparent forward and backwards mutations at high frequency sites might also be effective and will be investigated going forward. many downstream analyses following tree-building should consider masking 11083 as well. after masking the set of lab-associated and extremal sites, the samples which previously contained them can be retained in phylogenetic inference and downstream analyses. tracks identifying these sites are available on the ucsc genome browser and in table s1 .though not a focus here, we emphasize that filtering for genomic regions that are difficult to assemble or align ( e.g., those used by nextstrain to filter the ends of chromosomes as defined here https://github.com/nextstrain/ncov ) should also be rigorously employed. in fact, in light of our discovery of a possible lab-associated mutation at position 153, which is just within the usual filtering range, we suggest that it may be preferable to simply mask the full 5' and 3' utr regions, which are typically harder to assemble and align confidently.to examine the aggregate effect of lab-associated and extremal mutations, we inferred a tree for the full dataset, and another after masking all lab-associated and extremal mutations except 11083 using iq-tree 2 with 1000 ultrafast bootstraps [57, 58] . we then collapsed all branches that do not contain a mutation into a polytomy. in contrast to the single site masking experiments above, here the topologies of the two maximum likelihood consensus trees differ significantly. the symmetric entropy-weighted total distance between the two topologies is not large, 9.4 , but the fit to the multiple alignment having masked these sites improved by 189 log-likelihood units relative to the tree inferred without lab-associated and extremal mutations. below, we show that confident relationships at higher branches in the topology are minimally affected relative to other widely-used phylogenies, which were inferred including lab-associated and extremal mutations. our phylogeny produced following these masking recommendations is available from the ucsc genome browser (figure 8) , and we will update and maintain this resource as we add new data, as other suspicious mutations are identified, and as improved masking recommendations are developed.many of the most intriguing and evolutionarily relevant biological phenomena, such as viral recombination and recurrent mutation, explicitly require inferences based on homoplastic mutations. special caution is clearly warranted. for these analyses, it is still necessary to mask lab-associated mutations and extremal sites because they can destabilize phylogenetic inference, but clearly one could not exclude all homoplasies. in light of significant phylogenetic uncertainty, which we address below, we recommend that each analysis be repeated across alternative possible tree topologies to confirm the robustness of biological inferences. however, this is not without significant challenges and the most general solution for confirming recurrent mutation or recombination is heritability. if a mutant or recombinant lineage grows sufficiently large and is corroborated by many labs, we can be much more confident [26] . we therefore suggest that evidence of heritability and independent sequence confirmation should be required to support inferences of either recurrent mutation or recombination.exploring data quality and mutational recurrence using our tools sars-cov-2 sequence data is growing at an incredible pace. here we developed tools to enable investigations of similar patterns in updated and additional datasets. to summarize: (1) we provide a method for rapidly computing parsimony scores to identify highly recurrent positions; (2) we provide an approach for identification of unusually recurrent sites relative to their allele frequencies (here, termed extremal); (3) we provide an approach for semi-automated metadata correction (see methods), which improved detection of lab-associated mutations; and (4) we provide a method for identifying the set of highly homoplastic mutations that are strongly associated with individual sequencing labs. our heuristic cutoffs appear to perform well in the datasets we examined, but the program is designed to empower users to explore other datasets and other filters as well. software to perform each analysis are provided via github ( https://github.com/lgozasht/covid-19-lab-specific-bias-filter and https://github.com/yatisht/strain_phylogenetics ).visualizing data quality, genetic variation and correlation via the ucsc sars-cov-2 genome browser data visualization remains one of the most powerful mechanisms for identifying unusual patterns and possible errors in genome sequence data ( e.g., figure 3 , above). therefore, as an integral part of this work, we provide powerful data exploration and visualization tools that can be applied to future variation datasets as well. output from our programs for computing parsimony scores and detecting lab-association mutations can be imported directly into the ucsc sars-cov-2 genome browser [59] as custom tracks to facilitate visual exploration of suspect mutations with a user defined vcf file and tree. this is a very useful visualization framework for data quality control and for investigating the root causes of highly recurrent mutation. for example, it is straightforward to explore the relationships between phylogeny, genetic variation, and functional genomic annotations (figure 8 ). figure 8 . ucsc genome browser view of all lab-associated mutations in the context of parsimony scores, alternate allele frequencies, the full genetic variation dataset with phylogenetic tree constructed after removing lab-associated and extremal mutations. this genetic variation data can be cross-referenced against many other diverse datasets available in the ucsc sars-cov-2 genome browser. interactive view: http://genome.ucsc.edu/s/sars_cov2/labassocmutsall researchers can upload their own aligned sars-cov-2 genome samples and phylogenetic trees to the sars-cov-2 genome browser in order to compare their phylogenetic analysis to those from nextstrain and cog-uk, and also to look at the specific molecular features of the clades that their phylogenetic analysis identifies (text s4). these molecular features include widely used primer pairs (as in figure 3 ) as well as crispr guides, predicted and validated epitopes for cd4+ and cd8+ t-cells, key functional sites on the viral genome including cleavage sites for viral proteases pl-pro and 3cl-pro as well as cleavage sites for host proteases, locations of important rna secondary structures, the locations of the transcriptional regulatory sequences, locations of protein phosphorylation and glycosylation sites, identification of sites in the virus that are highly conserved or rapidly evolving in closely related viruses in bats and other mammals, as well as a lively "crowd-sourced annotation" set where any researcher can point out additional sites on the viral genome of special functional, diagnostic, or therapeutic significance [59] . this helps researchers to quickly determine if alternate alleles they believe characterize a new viral clade may be significant beyond their role as epidemiological markers. instructions for producing custom genome-browser tracks for a given phylogeny and variation dataset are provided in text s4.in the second part of this work, we address concerns arising from phylogenetic uncertainty. as expected for a relatively slowly-evolving and rapidly expanding viral population [60] , there is substantial uncertainty in the sars-cov-2 phylogeny. this extends well beyond the typically localized impacts of lab-associated and highly recurrent mutations, and instead derives from the fact that most branches in the sars-cov-2 phylogeny are supported by few mutations. undoubtedly, thousands of unique phylogenies will be produced by groups studying this viral outbreak and these may sometimes support conflicting evolutionary relationships. we therefore sought to provide tools to facilitate interpretation of commonalities and differences among such large phylogenies.a tree comparison algorithm using entropy-weighted matching splits there are many metrics for measuring the total distance between two or more phylogenetic trees [61] [62] [63] [64] [65] [66] . one popular metric (maximum cluster distance (mcdist)) also identifies the best-matching clades between the two trees. a clade in a rooted tree splits the leaf nodes of that tree into two sets: those inside the clade and those outside the clade. given a clade c in tree t and a clade c' in tree t', the split distance between c and c' is the number of leaves that have to be moved so that the split for c in t becomes equal to the split for c' in t'. the (nonsymmetric) correspondence between the clades of t and the clades of t' established by minimizing the split distance is referred to as the "maximum cluster alignment" or "best split alignment" from t to t', [61] . this is particularly appealing here because we aim to facilitate comparisons across phylogenetic trees both globally and at individual clades.we implemented a modified version of mcdist in https://github.com/yatisht/strain_phylogenetics to compare two trees, t and t', both restricted to the same set of samples, with two improvements. first, we proportionally weighted the split distance between each clade c of t to the best matching clade in t' by the entropy of c, i.e., by h(p) = -p log 2 (p) -(1-p) log 2 (1-p) where p is the fraction of leaves from t that are in c (see methods, figure 9 ). the entropy-weighted matching split distance emphasizes the importance of the clades in t in terms of how much information about the leaves they carry, which helps highlight clades where the most dramatic changes have occured. the sum, over all clades in t, of the entropy-weighted matching split distance to the best-matching clade in t' is referred to as entropy-weighted total distance from t to t'. second, we label all internal branches in t and t', and identify the most similar branches in both trees based on the clades they define. when multiple branches in t' match the branch b in t with the same best split distance, we report all best-matching branches (methods).additionally, we confirmed that our statistic is a robust measure of tree distance, judging by the strong correlation with other frequently used tree distance metrics (text s3). our implementation can compute this statistic for two trees of size 10,000 leaves in just 20 minutes on a single cpu, so it scales to the large trees required for sars-cov-2 phylogenetics.the split distance statistic for each t node (see methods for notation). split distance of each t split (branch) from all t' splits plus a "garbage node" (ɸ) containing a null set of leaves, with the matching split distance and its corresponding t' split (branch) for each t split (branch) highlighted in red. multiple t' splits can match a t split but the garbage node is given precedence (as is the case in t branch 4). (c) table showing the entropy, best-matching t' branch(es), matching split distance and entropy-weighted matching split distance for each branch in t, as well as the entropy-weighted total distance d(t,t') between t and t'.a tanglegram is the most often used method of visualizing the topological difference between two rooted phylogenetic trees defined on the same set of leaf taxa (here, termed samples) [67] . we expect that tanglegrams will have a wide use for analyzing and comparing different sars-cov-2 phylogenies. tanglegrams plot two trees side-by-side with their common leaves connected by straight lines ( e.g., figure s5 ). for visually appealing and informative tanglegrams, clades in both trees are arranged in a similar vertical order (given the tree topology constraints) with minimum crossing of connecting lines with each other. while there are a number of tree node "rotation" algorithms that optimize tanglegrams for visual appeal [67, 68] , we found none of the available implementations that we tested [68, 69] worked reasonably for phylogenies as large as sars-cov-2 phylogenies, either producing unacceptable results or not able to finish the computation. we therefore developed a fast heuristic approach that produces vastly improved tanglegrams (methods, figure s5 , https://github.com/yatisht/strain_phylogenetics ). our approach takes approximately one minute for the tanglegrams we show here, and we use this heuristic for displaying tanglegrams throughout the text.nextstrain phylogenies vary significantly over time we next explored differences among trees made by the same group from slightly different sample sets with the goal of understanding phylogenetic stability as new samples are incorporated. for the purposes of comparison, we restricted 31 nextstrain trees produced between march 23, 2020 and april 30, 2020 to just the 468 samples they all have in common. comparing topologies, we found that a number of these 468 samples moved back and forth between different clade designations during the month ( figure s5 ), including samples in the specific clades (a1a, a2, a2a, a6, a7, b, b1, b2, b4) named and analyzed by the nexstrain consortium during this period ( e.g. , table s6 ). note that the nextstrain clade id system was updated while we were finalizing this work [70] . we then measured all pairwise tree distances between restricted trees and found that they varied widely (normalized entropy-weighted total distances ranged from 0.089 to 0.352, figure 10 ). there is therefore substantial variation in nextstrain phylogenies over time. each topology is labelled with its date and dates are depicted in a color gradient from 3/23 (red) to 4/30 (blue). coordinates 1 and 2 are plotted here and each contributes 34% and 15% of the total variance explained, respectively. (b) relationships between nextstrain phylogenies are shown in a tree-of-trees, "meta-tree" [64] we constructed, which displays the distances among topologies of the constitutive trees. .multidimensional scaling (mds) of the pairwise distances among each topology, as well as meta-tree analysis [64] reveals a strong relationship between topologies and the date that each tree was produced ( figure 10 ). in particular, the first mds coordinate is strongly correlated with the release date of the tree (spearman's rho = 0.688, p = 3.087e-05). this effect is expected and likely driven, at least in part, by the impact of the sample set used to produce the resulting tree, which necessarily changes as new data are incorporated. indeed, the proportion of overlapping samples used in constructing each pair of trees is strongly negatively correlated with the normalized entropy-weighted total distance between their topologies (r = -0.384, p = 4e-05, mantel test), while the set of 468 samples for which we analyze topology is held fixed for all trees. these tools provide the research community a method for tracking the phylogenies of sars-cov-2 as the pandemic progresses and phylogenies are produced for larger and larger sample sets. the tools can detect when older clades are confirmed as new samples accumulate, stabilizing inference of these clades, as well as track new subclades as they grow. if inconsistent data is causing persistent clade instability, which may result from lab-associated sequencing errors or actual recombination, it should be visible in this analysis.even if it was possible to obtain error-free data and multiple alignments as well as have all groups use that same data, different tree inference approaches can produce different topologies. furthermore, there is substantial uncertainty inherent to sars-cov-2 evolution because there are few mutations that uniquely mark each branch. nonetheless, it is essential that epidemiologists studying the pandemic be able to communicate phylogenetically informed observations [17, 42] . as discussed above, the clade placements of individual samples, even when inferred by the same group, can vary as different datasets are incorporated into the tree construction process ( e.g. table s4 , figure 10 ). differences between groups are expected to be even more pronounced. this threatens to leave the community with a "tower of babel" problem in clade characterization and naming from various different phylogenetic trees. indeed, the names used for nextstrain consortium clades (a1a, a2, a2a, a6, a7, b, b1, b2, b4) have nothing whatsoever to do with the clades names (a, b, a.1, a.2, b.1, b.2, a.1.1, etc. ) suggested by the cog-uk consortium [17, 18] , and without a 1-1 correspondence between the topologically defined clades in their respective phylogenetic trees, it is difficult to translate nomenclature in order to conduct precise scientific discourse pertaining to the evolutionary conclusions reached by these groups. adding further difficulty to this situation, clade naming approaches based on phylogenies must themselves be subject to change as the pandemic spreads and as the evolution of new genotypes requires naming new clades and modifying existing clades. as clade based comparisons are an essential part of consistent scientific discourse, tools are needed to ameliorate these difficulties.the cog-uk clades (which they term "lineages") having the highest jaccard similarity coefficient (j) with each nextstrain (ns) named clade and vice versa, where the jaccard similarity coefficient is computed using the set of samples from the root of that clade. clades with more than 200 samples are shown in bold font and called "big", the others "small". while the naming schemes differ, for each big nexstrain clade there is a closely corresponding cog-uk clade, and vice-versa.to explore the differences among available phylogenies and to provide guidelines for clade-based comparisons across possible evolutionary histories, we used our approach to identify the correspondence between the nextstrain phylogeny produced on april 19, 2020 and the cog-uk phylogeny produced on april 24, 2020 ( figure 11a ). we observe good agreement between the big nextstrain named clades and their corresponding best matching named clades in the cog-uk tree and vice versa ( e.g., "a2a" clade in nextstrain, "b.1" clade in cog-uk, etc, figure 11b ), suggesting that these clades are reasonably stable across different analyses. however, in small named subclades within those big clades, there are many noteworthy differences between the two topologies, and the overall congruence is significantly reduced ( figure 11a ). in addition to differences in methodology, this reflects a difference in the time when clades were originally named and the intents of each nomenclature system. nextstrain named clades much earlier and many did not increase in size subsequently, others have since emerged and were named by cog-uk later. additionally, the cog-uk system is intentionally dynamic and clades that have become inactive are removed. as a consequence, some clades do not have an obvious named analog in the two systems resulting in low similarities ( figure  11b ).perhaps the most obvious difference between the topologies is that the cog-uk tree has many more large polytomies ( figure 11a ). this reflects the decisions motivating their analysis [17, 71] , where the authors' goal is to provide a well-supported and stable topology to facilitate lucid communication about viral lineages for evolutionary as well as epidemiological studies. this contrasts with the nextstrain consortium's primary goal of up-to-date transmission tracing. as is typical in phylogenetics, topological stability comes as a tradeoff against the cost of articulation in the branches. because of the many different motivations for constructing phylogenetic trees, it is a certainty that many independent trees will be used to study the evolution of sars-cov-2. comparisons using our approaches can enable communication about evolving viral lineages across disparate analyses by facilitating the identification and visualization of the most closely matching clades. higher branches in our tree closely mirror a nextstrain "consensus" tree and the cog-uk tree to identify stable nodes across analyses we compared a nextstrain "consensus tree" and the cog-uk tree. to do this, we produced a majority rule clade consensus tree [72] for the 422 common samples in 31 nextstrain releases between 3/23 to 4/30, and restricted the cog-uk tree to these same samples. we find exceptionally good congruence between our nextstrain consensus and the cog-uk phylogenies ( figure 12a ), even though the inference methods differed substantially. specifically, the cog-uk tree is built using a more typical bootstrapping approach [58] whereas our approach for building a nextstrain "consensus" from trees produced on subsequent days would resemble a kind of "bootstrapping by samples" approach. this congruence reaffirms the idea that the cog-uk tree provides a stable "backbone" to enable direct conversations in epidemiology. nonetheless, we still observe several small rearrangements between the two topologies, suggesting that both will likely be subject to clade refinements in the future.we also observed good overall congruence between the tree that we produced after removing lab-associated and extremal mutations (except 11083, see above) and the cog-uk tree ( figure 12c) . here, the sample size is much larger, 4172, allowing for a much more quantitative comparison. the correspondence between the two trees is very high with normalized entropy weighted total distance of just 0.12. because lab-associated and extremal mutations were used in the cog-uk tree but not in our tree, this consistency among topologies supports our assertion that the effect of lab-associated and extremal mutations will typically not result in large-scale reorganizations of large clades across the phylogeny. each tree including our nextstrain "consensus" is available for visualization through the ucsc genome browser ( figure  8 , s6).powerful tools for visualizing, interpreting differences among phylogenies different analysis goals require varying levels of phylogenetic resolution and certainty, and it is very likely that hundreds of partially independent phylogenies will be produced studying sars-cov-2 evolution. for that reason, we have sought to provide the community with effective methods for tree-based comparisons. in particular, here we provide (1) improved methods for quantitative comparison among trees at the level of whole topologies and at individual nodes; (2) an extremely rapid tanglegram clade rotation method for visualization of differences among tree topologies; and (3) dynamic tree visualization capabilities within the sars-cov-2 genome browser. importantly, each method that we present scales well to thousands of samples, and is integrated into the sars-cov-2 genome browser to facilitate rapid comparison with existing phylogenetic datasets, and to cross-reference sites to molecular information relevant to basic biology, diagnostics, and therapy. software to run each analysis is available from https://github.com/yatisht/strain_phylogenetics .the sars-cov-2 pandemic has driven an impressive global community response providing real-time sequencing data to trace the viral outbreak [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . because these efforts are both decentralized and urgent, there is potential for systematic differences in data generation and processing to inject inappropriate biases and signal into these data [24] . similarly, thousands of distinct and differing phylogenies will be made from these data. in this work, we sought to provide tools to detect and interpret sources of conflict and uncertainty in local and global phylogenies. we integrate these into powerful visualization systems to facilitate continued global analysis of viral population dynamics.we have downloaded genomic variation data from http://nextstrain.org/ncov , which is ultimately processed and derived from the gisaid database [73] , and transformed it into variant call format (vcf, [74] ) file with genotypes for all samples as assigned by nextstrain, a newick tree file, and associated files for display in the ucsc sars-cov-2 genome browser. software to perform this is described here ( https://github.com/ucscgenomebrowser/kent/blob/master/src/hg/utils/otto/nextstrainncov/nextst rain.py ).we obtained the gisaid metadata table in bulk from gisaid [75] . before we were able to search for lab-associated mutations, we identified various errors in gisaid metadata files, most of which appear to be due to misspellings and inconsistent naming conventions of "originating" and "submitting" labs across separate sample submissions. we therefore developed a simple approach to detect these errors systematically based on the character content and length of "originating" and "submitting" lab names ( https://github.com/lgozasht/covid-19-lab-specific-bias-filter ). we merge coincident metadata under consistent lab names if "originating" or "submitting" lab names share 70% length similarity and 90% character similarity or 70% length similarity and 80% identical character positions, and output a revised metadata file. we checked all merged names by hand to ensure accuracy, and we maintain a log of each merger event and annotate low confidence mergers. our updated metadata table is available from https://github.com/lgozasht/covid-19-lab-specific-bias-filter .to detect mutations that reoccur many times through viral evolution, we computed the parsimony score [45, 46] for each polymorphic site (our program is available from https://github.com/yatisht/strain_phylogenetics ). briefly, conditional on a tree, we compute the minimum number of branches that have experienced a mutation at a single site to accommodate the phylogenetic distribution of the mutant and reference allele. these are candidate highly recurrent mutations, but we note that these mutations, or others elsewhere on the chromosome, might also impact the process of tree building itself, and the score should be interpreted with caution if counting the specific rate of occurrence at a given site is of interest.after computing the parsimony score for each polymorphic site, we identified a set of extremal sites that displayed exceptional parsimony scores relative to their allele frequencies as follows. first, we excluded sites with rare alternate alleles, i.e. sites whose alternate allele frequency was found to be lower than a certain threshold k, where k is the maximum alternate allele frequency at which at least two sites had saturated parsimony scores ( i.e. parsimony score equals alternate allele count). second, we extracted sites whose parsimony score was found to be the highest among sites with the same or smaller alternate allele frequency. finally, we also required that extremal sites have an alternate allele frequency that is lowest among all sites with its parsimony score or higher. a program to perform this search is available at https://github.com/yatisht/strain_phylogenetics . this program also optionally allows for extremal sites to be identified without including c>u mutations as these are particularly abundant in sars-cov-2 genomes.we systematically flagged possible variants resulting from lab-specific biases based on the proportion of lab-specific alternate allele calls and respective alternate allele frequency ( https://github.com/lgozasht/covid-19-lab-specific-bias-filter ). to do this, we first filtered variants with parsimony score greater than 4 using concurrent nextstrain tree and vcf files from 4/19/2020. next, we obtained metadata for all covid-19 genomes on gisaid (accessed 4/28/2020) and computed the proportion of alternate allele calls contributed by each "originating lab" and "submitting lab" for each filtered variant. we then employed a fisher's exact test associating the number of major and alternate alleles attributed to each specific "originating" and "submitting" lab and the respective global major and alternate allele counts. we flagged variants for which one lab accounts for more than 80% of the total alternate allele calls and for which a fisher's exact test suggests a strong correlation (at the p < 0.01 level) between that lab and samples containing the alternate allele. we note that these cutoffs are somewhat arbitrary, and may require modification in the future, but the subdivision of the data is consistent with our expectations as described in results. because samples are not independent and identically distributed, p-values may not reflect error but rather relatedness among samples sequenced at a single facility. for example, if a single lab sampled a transmission chain, many mutations could be strongly associated with that facility. these should be interpreted cautiously, however, there is no obvious reason why unrelated samples sequenced at the same facility should share an excess of homoplasious mutations.to compare our highly recurrent mutations to the artic primer set, we downloaded the positions of the artic primer binding sites from ( https://github.com/artic-network/artic-ncov2019/blob/master/primer_schemes/ncov-2019/v3/n cov-2019.bed , last accessed 5/6/2020). we computed the number of mutation in each category that overlapped primer binding sites, and we computed the mean distance between each variant and the nearest primer binding site. to test for enrichment for overlap and proximity to primer binding sites, we performed a permutation test where we selected positions at random without replacement across the viral genome to compare to our observed distribution for the real mutations. each permutation was performed 10,000 times.comparison of clades is made using a symmetric notion of a clade that are called splits as defined in treecmp [61] . in a rooted tree, the branches are directed to point away from the root, and a directed branch defining a clade divides all the leaves (lineages) into 2 categories: those in the clade (reachable by following additional directed edges forward from the branch; we call this being "inside" the branch) and the rest, i.e. those not in the clade ("outside" the branch, we might say these samples are in the "unclade"). it is the root of the tree that polarizes each split by providing a direction for the branch; i.e. providing a concept of "inside" versus "outside", or equivalently "clade" versus "unclade". these two sets, say a and b, define the split. the split is denoted as a|b.two phylogenetic trees are similar if their branches produce a similar set of splits. when comparing two phylogenetic trees, we begin by finding the common leaf set. that is, the set of leaves (lineages) that are included in both trees. then for each tree and each branch in that tree, the reduced split is obtained from the split by removing all samples not in the common leaf set for the two trees being compared. to compare two reduced splits, a|b and x|y, we first compute the size of the set-theoretic symmetric difference between the clades a and x, i.e. , the number of samples that are in a but not in x (denoted by |a\x|), plus the number of samples that are in x but not in a (denoted by |x\a|). this number is denoted by s(a|b,x|y) and is called the split distance between the reduced splits a|b and x|y. symbolically since the above metric scales with the size of trees being compared, we also define a normalized version using the expected distance [76] , which is computed using trees t p and t p ' that randomly permute the leaves of t and t', respectively, while maintaining the tree structure, as code for computing these distance measures can be found at https://github.com/yatisht/strain_phylogenetics . this code has additional features, such as the ability to replace the shannon entropy -p log 2 (p) -(1-p) log 2 (1-p) with related weighting functions such as 2 min{p,1-p}. we find that the method is robust to such replacements (data not shown).while node rotation algorithms in the context of tanglegram visualization have been implemented in the cophylo and dendroscope3 tools [67, 68] , we found these algorithms to be either too slow or inadequate for the large sars-cov-2 phylogenies that we compared. we implemented a simple node rotation heuristic, rottrees, that works well and completes in reasonable time (~1 min) for sars-cov-2 trees with ~5k leaves. the algorithm rottrees accepts two trees, t and t', each pruned to only contain the shared set of leaves, as input. first, while maintaining the leaf order of t, rottrees makes a breadth-first traversal in t', rotating the children of each traversed node based on its average rank ( i.e. child with a lower average rank appears higher), which is the average of the positions of the appearance of that child node's leaves in t. second, rottrees repeats the above to rotate the leaves of t while maintaining the leaf order of t'. the previous two steps are repeated until convergence (no new rotations in that iteration) and the final tree rotations for t and t' are returned. we made this routine available in https://github.com/yatisht/strain_phylogenetics . this may not be optimal for all tree co-visualization purposes, but here we find that this approach is sufficient to produce vastly improved tree visualizations than many available packages.we obtained the phylogenetic tree hosted by nextstrain (accessed 4/19/2020) and used this in our comparisons of clades among trees and as our primary data object for examining apparently recurrent mutation on the tree. we did separately confirm that most apparently recurrent mutations are recovered on the trees produced on different days by nextstrain.for comparison of clades among different tree-building approaches, we obtained variant datasets, and phylogenies from nextstrain ( https://nextstrain.org/ncov accessed 4/19/2020-4/26/2020), and from cog-uk ( https://cog-uk.s3.climb.ac.uk/20200424/cog_2020-04-24_tree.newick , accessed 4/24/2020)from the 04/19 nextstrain release, we created a "reference phylogeny" using iq-tree-2 [57, 77] to build phylogenies from each of these alignments using the gtr+g nucleotide substitution model. for all other phylogenies, we altered the input by removing or "masking" individual sites, then produced phylogenies from these altered alignments using the same iq-tree-2 parameters.the likelihood of a tree given the alignment from which it was constructed was automatically calculated by the iq-tree command used above ( iqtree -s <alignment.phy> -m gtr+g ). however, to compute the likelihood of a particular alignment given a different tree, we used the command iqtree -s <alignment.phy> -te <phylogeny.nh> -m gtr+g .to generate our final tree having masked lab-associated and extremal mutations, we used the same command but also included the ultrafast bootstrapping option "-bb 1000" to assist with quantifying uncertainty in our final phylogeny [58] . we used the same command but included the full multiple alignment to compare the tree obtained to one obtained from the full dataset using identical methodology. finally we collapsed all branches that were not supported by at least one mutation using parsimony to identify nodes that experienced a mutation.to investigate the effects of lab-specific alleles on phylogenetic topology, we also introduced artificial errors at control sites. we chose three sites at which to introduce these errors: a11991g, c22214g, and c10029u. to introduce an error, we manually changed a reference allele to an alternate allele for a given sample at a given site. for each of these sites, we chose 10, 25, and 50 samples for which we introduced errors. to mimic the effects of a lab-specific allele, we ensured that each set of samples with artificial errors must come from the same country. we chose australia due to its high representation in the nextstrain data, as 372 samples in the 04/19 nextstrain release came from australia. to further mimic lab-specific behavior, we separately introduced errors at the same sites for 10, 25, and 50 randomly selected french samples collected between march 1 and march 17. after introducing these errors, we constructed phylogenies from the modified alignments using iq-tree 2 [57, 77] , as described above. in total, we produced 54 phylogenies in this experiment, introducing errors at three sets of random samples for each of the three sites, at 10, 25, and 50 samples each, for australian and french samples.we also repeated this experiment, but introducing errors at pairs of sites simultaneously rather than at individual sites (i.e. a11991g and c22214g, a11991g and c10029u, and c10029u and c22214g). we used the same randomly chosen sets of french samples for this aspect of the experiment, and produced phylogenies by the same methods. in total, we produced 27 phylogenies in this experiment, introducing errors at three sets of randomly chosen samples, at 10, 25 and 50 samples each, for each of the three pairs of sites.to understand commonalities in tree structure over time, we used multidimensional scaling of a distance matrix of normalized entropy-weighted total distances among nextstrain releases (pruned to 468 shared samples) spanning from march 23 to april 30. to do this, we used the cmdscale() function in base r ( https://www.r-project.org/ ), and we retained the first six coordinates because they accounted for the vast majority of the total variance explained (approximately 80%). we computed the correlation between our distance matrix and the proportion of samples shared among topologies produced each day using a mantel test implemented within the ade4 package in r.to produce a nextstrain consensus tree we first pruned all nextstrain trees to a common set of samples included in each tree. we then used the sumtrees script within the dendropy package [69] to produce a majority rule consensus tree out of each tree requiring at least 50% of trees support a clade for inclusion in the final consensus tree. specifically, we used the sumtrees function to perform this task. in our cases, that is equivalent to requiring at least 16 of 31 trees contain a given clade to include it.although much of this work is focused on detecting and characterizing the impacts of low-frequency highly recurrent and lab-associated alleles, cross-contamination among samples is also a potential source of widespread phylogenetically discordant sites that warrants mentioning. the majority of labs performing viral genome sequencing are processing multiple samples. there is therefore a significant possibility for contamination to drive the apparent recurrence of high frequency mutations.unfortunately, contamination, short recombination tracts, and high frequency recurrent mutations create largely similar predictions about the distributions of recurrent alleles (table 1 ). yet there are some distinctions one might expect. both recombination and contamination require a sample or lineage to encounter another of a different allele to be observable. therefore, high frequency alleles should typically be involved in both recombination and contamination events. additionally, all else being equal, we expect that we would observe equal numbers of forward and backward mutations across the tree for recombination and contamination, but not for recurrent mutation which can be quite biased (see above). consistent with this idea, six out of eleven sites with alternate allele frequency above 10% show evidence of additional forward and backward mutation even after removing lab-associated mutations ( figure 2 , table s3 ). hence, even if we could remove all systematic errors, contamination should be considered as a possible source of homoplasious mutation before confident conclusions are drawn about natural selection or the presence of viral recombination.to investigate the potential for highly correlated lab-associated mutations in the real data, we extracted the set of mutations with alternate allele counts of 10 or more and where at least 80% of samples containing alternate alleles were derived from a single lab (table s4 ). this set of alleles shares many features with sites that we believe to be sites of real variation, suggesting that many are indeed true variants. in aggregate, these mutations are not enriched for proximity to artic primer binding sites (p = 0.9502, permutation test), the c>u mutation fraction is similar to that observed in high frequency sites (p = 0.5307, fisher's exact test), they affect amino acids at similar rates to those of high frequency alleles (p = 0.7643), and they have low parsimony scores even relative to our "two-error" experiments (1-2, table s4 ). our results therefore suggest that highly correlated lab-associated mutations are relatively rare.it is noteworthy that there is overlap with some of the lab groups who contributed high parsimony lab-associated alleles (nine out of 24, table s1 ). however, these are also groups who contributed the most genome sequences in our dataset and they are therefore the most likely to be associated with low frequency variation or lab-associated mutations for that matter. most such mutations do not overlap in samples with other lab-associated mutation sites indicating that if they were independent mutations we would likely see their placement vary across the tree. nonetheless, in one extreme case, g11417u, u14073c, and a23947g co-occur in a single clade across many samples suggesting that these sites could impact tree-building algorithms even more substantially than those in our two-error simulations.however, samples containing these mutations are not unusually divergent relative to the clade size (the average pairwise nucleotide diversity is 1.18 sites/genome) as would be expected if they were incorrectly grouped. moreover, we emphasize that real variants should be correlated on the viral phylogeny and that these do not constitute sequencing errors. we believe that our approach has likely identified the majority of lab-associated recurrent mutations in this dataset that occur in more than a handful of samples.to confirm that our distance measure will be robust and consistent with expectations, we compared the set of all pairwise distances between trees produced by nextstrain from march 23 to april 30 across a range of tree distance statistics. in particular, we find that entropy-weighted total distance is strongly correlated with quartet, robinson-foulds and matching-split tree distance measures (p < 1e-5, in all cases, mantel test). this strongly suggests that our approach yields robust and interpretable tree distances.we provide researchers the ability to upload their own set of aligned sars-cov-2 genomes and an accompanying phylogenetic tree. this allows the researcher to compare their tree to trees from nextstrain and cog-uk, and to map alleles characteristic of particular clades to sites in the virus genome of functional, diagnostic or therapeutic significance. alignment files built by most tools are too large to transfer when the number of viral samples gets large, so we require they be converted to the more compact vcf format with sample genotypes before upload (the msa2vcf tool produces vcf with sample genotypes).. once the vcf file for the alignment is created, one does the following: figure s1 . alternate allele count versus parsimony score for the nextstrain 4/20/2020 dataset and tree. each point is labeled as in figure 2a with additional extremal points annotated. the dashed line is fit to the extremal points and has log2-base slope 3.518. figure s2 : lab-associated mutations influence tree topology. phylogenies created using the variants from 04/19 nextstrain release without modification (left) and with lab-associated mutations completely masked (right) demonstrate movement of multiple samples between sub-clades. those samples with the greatest changes in placement between the phylogenies are bolded. this includes many samples containing lab-associated mutations that we masked, which are colored in red.: comparisons between the reference phylogeny, built from the 04/19/2020 release of nextstrain, to phylogenies built by entirely masking lab-associated mutations (blue), control sites (grey), and extremal sites (brown) are shown for robinson-foulds (a), quartet (b), path difference (c), and triples (d) scores as calculated by treecmp [61] . horizontal lines indicate scores for phylogenies constructed after masking all lab-associated sites (blue), all control sites (grey), all extremal sites (brown), or using an unaltered nextstrain 04/19/2020 dataset (black). figure s4 : the entropy-weighted total distance values between the reference phylogeny and phylogenies constructed after entirely masking all samples with an alternate allele at a given site are shown. the sites used here are the same sites corresponding to lab-specific shown in figure 5 . figure s5 : tanglegrams for the two nextstrain trees released on 04/19/2020 (left) and 04/20/2020 (right). ( a ) without tree rotation, the tanglegram has a large mesh of connecting lines, making it hard to see the tree correspondence. ( b ) with trees rotated using rottrees, the tanglegram is more visually appealing and the tree correspondence is a lot clearer. the sequences of the s proteins of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov were aligned and the full-length alignment is shown. accession numbers of sequences used in the analysis are found in the methods section.supplementary figure 2. sequence alignment of the s1/s2 region of sars-cov-2 with representatives of betacoronavirus lineages. the s protein sequence of 15 isolates of sars-cov-2 were aligned with representatives of all four betacoronavirus lineages (lineages are denoted by the letters a, b, c, and d). the sequence for the alphacoronavirus hcov-229e is also included in the alignment. displayed is the region corresponding to the s1/s2 cleavage site. red border indicates the insert of basic arginines identified for sars-cov-2 sequences. α: alphacoronavirus; β: betacoronavirus. accession numbers of sequences used in the analyses are found in the methods section. coronaviruses are zoonotic pathogens that are well known to evolve environmentally and infect many mammalian and avian species [1] . these diverse viruses often have effective transmission and immune evasion strategies, especially when outbreaks occur within dense human populations. in the past two decades, coronavirus outbreaks have arisen in human populations around the world, each with unique features but also sharing several similarities. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) emerged in 2002 in guangdong province, china, causing an outbreak that spread to 26 countries, with more than 8000 infections and 774 deaths and a case fatality rate of 9.5% [2] . more recently, the ongoing middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) outbreak that originated in 2012 in saudi arabia has spread to 27 countries with 2494 infections and 858 deaths, with a case fatality rate of 34.4% [3] . the recent surfacing of the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 (first identified on december 12th, 2019) was initially detected in wuhan, hubei province, china, and has now spread globally via travelers and breached the boundaries of 182 countries/regions [4, 5] . on march 11th, 2020, the world health organization officially declared a global pandemic. the rapidly evolving situation has prompted most affected countries to impose tight restrictions on border movements and unprecedented statewide lockdown measures. at the time of writing (april 06th, 2020), over 1.2 million cases and approximately 70,000 fatalities have been reported globally [5] . similar to sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 infections in the early stages of the outbreak were observed in family clusters and hospital personnel [4, [6] [7] [8] . the outbreak occurring during the winter is another commonality between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 [9] . currently, sustained community-based spread is occurring, which would make sars-cov-2 a community-acquired respiratory coronavirus, along with the other less pathogenic human community-acquired respiratory coronaviruses 229e, oc43, hku-1, and nl63 [10] .clinical signs associated with sars-cov-2 include pneumonia, fever, dry cough, headache, and dyspnea, which may progress to respiratory failure and death [7, 9, 11] . the incubation period for sars-cov-2 seems to be longer than for sars-cov and mers-cov, which have a mean incubation time of 5 to 7 days leading to challenges in contact tracing [12] . preexisting conditions and comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, or kidney disease affect the severity of pathogenesis attributed to sars-cov and mers-cov, and thus far, similar patterns seem to exist with sars-cov-2 [7, 11] . sars-cov and mers-cov seem to exhibit deleterious morbidity and mortality on the elderly population (n 60 years of age), with most deaths occurring in this age group, and sars-cov-2 is currently portraying a comparable trend [7] .the coronaviruses belong to the coronaviridae family and the orthocoronaviridae subfamily, which is divided in four genera: alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, gammacoronavirus, and deltacoronavirus. sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2 are all betacoronaviruses, a genus that includes many viruses that infect humans, bats, and other domesticated and wild animals [13] . betacoronaviruses have many similarities within the orf1ab polyprotein and most structural proteins; however, the spike protein and accessory proteins portray significant diversity [14] . mers-cov has maintained a stable genome since its emergence in 2012, unlike other coronaviruses that readily evolve and can undergo notable recombination events [15] .alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses including sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2, and other human coronaviruses like hcov-nl63 are thought to have originated in bats [14] [15] [16] . gammacoronaviruses and deltacoronaviruses are reported to have an avian origin but are known to infect both mammals and avian species [17] . human infections of bat-origin viruses typically occur through intermediate hosts. for sars-cov, these hosts are palm civets (paguma larvata) and racoon dogs (nyctereutes procyonoides). for mers-cov, the known host is the dromedary camel (camelus dromedarius) [14, 18] . sars-cov antibodies were first detected in palm civets and the animal handlers in wet markets [14] . mers-cov is thought to have been circulating for at least 30 years within the dromedary camel population based on retrospective antibody testing of serum from 1983 [14] . the source of the sars-cov-2 outbreak has been linked to the huanan seafood wholesale market in wuhan, where it was initially confirmed that the majority of cases with onset prior to january 1st, 2020, were linked to the market [19] . the market sells many species including seafood, birds, snakes, marmots, and bats [7] . the market was closed on january 1st, 2020, and sampling and decontamination have occurred in order to find the source of the infection. origination of sars-cov-2 from bats has been strongly supported, but the presumed intermediate host remains to be identified. recent reports have suggested the malayan pangolins (manis javanica) as a possible intermediate host for sars-cov-2, with putative recombination signals found between pangolin, bat, and human coronavirus sequences [7, 9, [20] [21] [22] . however, the direct precursor sequence to the currently circulating human sars-cov-2 and putative intermediate host remain to be identified.the coronavirus spike protein (s) is the primary determinant of viral tropism and is responsible for receptor binding and membrane fusion. it is a large (approx. 180 kda) glycoprotein that is present on the viral surface as a prominent trimer, and it is composed of two domains, s1 and s2 [23] . the s1 domain mediates receptor binding and is divided into two sub-domains, with the n-terminal subdomain (ntd) often binding sialic acid and the c-terminal subdomain (also known as c-domain) binding a specific proteinaceous receptor [24] . the receptor for sars-cov has been identified as angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ace2), similar to what has been recently identified with sars-cov-2 [9, 14, 25] . hela cells transfected to express or not the ace2 receptor from either human, chinese horseshoe bat, mouse, civet, and pig were infected with sars-cov-2, and it was reported that the virus was able to use all receptors except mouse ace2 [9] . sars-cov-2 was not found to use dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4), the receptor for mers-cov [9, 14, 25] . following receptor binding, the s2 domain mediates viralmembrane fusion through the exposure of a highly conserved fusion peptide [26, 27] . the fusion peptide is activated through proteolytic cleavage at a site found immediately upstream (s2′), which is common to all coronaviruses. in many (but not all) coronaviruses, additional proteolytic priming occurs at a second site located at the interface of the s1 and s2 domains (s1/s2) [28] . the use of proteases in priming and activation, combined with receptor binding and ionic interactions (e.g. h + and ca 2+ ) together control viral stability and transmission, and modulate the conformational changes in the s protein that dictate the viral entry process into host cells [23, 26, 29] . specifically, sars-cov and mers-cov both infect type ii pneumocytes in vivo; however, they individually infect ciliated bronchial epithelial cells and non-ciliated bronchial epithelial cells, respectively [14] . sars-cov-2 can infect ex vivo with the same range of cell culture lines as sars-cov and mers-cov, e.g. vero e6, huh-7 cells, though primary human airway epithelial cells have been reported to be its preferential cell type [15, 25, 30] . overall, how cell tropism of sars-cov-2 reflects a balance of receptor binding, endosomal environment, and protease activation, and the specifics of these mechanisms remain to be determined.the rapid dissemination and sharing of information during the sars-cov-2 pandemic has surpassed that of both mers-cov and sars-cov, where the latter virus was only identified after several months and with a genome available a month later [7] . the sars-cov-2 was identified and a genome sequence was available within a month from the initial surfacing of the agent in patients [7] . initial reports identified that sars-cov-2 contains six major open-reading frames in the viral genome and various accessory proteins [9] . the sars-like (sl) virus batcov-ratg13 (also named bat-sl-ratg13) was observed to have a remarkably high degree of genomic sequence identity with that of sars-cov-2 at over 96% overall sequence identity, and with two other bat sars-like viruses (bat-sl-cov-zc45 and bat-sl-cov-zxc21), both having around 88% sequence identity compared with sars-cov-2 on a genome-wide level [9] . when sars-cov-2 is compared to the clinically relevant human coronaviruses sars-cov and mers-cov, pairwise percent identities fall to around 79.6% and 50% on a genomic level, respectively [4, 9] . the s protein of sars-cov-2 was found to be approximately 75% homologous to the sars-cov spike [7, 9] .in this study, we perform phylogenetic, bioinformatic, and homology structural modeling analyses of sars-cov-2 s, in comparison with closely related viruses. we identify a distinct four residue insert (featuring two arginine residues) that maps to the s1/s2 priming loop of sars-cov-2, which is missing from all other sars-cov-related viruses but present in mers-cov s and in many other coronaviruses. we discuss the importance of this extended basic loop for s protein-mediated membrane fusion and its implications for virus transmission.comparison of amino acid identity of the spike (s) protein of sars-cov-2 with human sars-covto obtain an initial assessment of shared and/or specific features of the sars-cov-2 spike (s) envelope glycoprotein, a protein sequence alignment was performed to compare the sequence of the wuhan-hu-1 strain of the novel coronavirus with that of the closely related human sars-cov s strain tor2 sequence (supplementary figure 1) . the overall percent protein sequence identity found by the alignment was 76% (figure 1(a) ). a breakdown of the functional domains of the s protein, based on the sars-cov s sequence, reveals that the s1 receptor-binding domain was less conserved (64% identity) than the s2 fusion domain (90% identity). within s1, the ntd was found to be less conserved (51% identity) compared to the receptor binding domain (rbd; 74% identity), which is part of the cterminal subdomain (figure 1(a) ). the relatively high degree of sequence identity for the rbd is consistent with the view that sars-cov-2, like sars-cov, may use ace2 as its host cell receptor [9, 25, 31] . interestingly, when the more defined receptor binding motif (rbm) was analyzed (i.e. the region of sars-cov s containing residues that were shown to directly contact the ace2 receptor) the identity between the two sequences drops to 50% (figure 1(a) ), in this case hinting at possible differences in binding residues involved in the interaction with the receptor and/or binding affinities [31] [32] [33] . as expected, within the well-conserved s2 domain, subdomain identities were high for the fusion peptide region (fp, 93% identity), high for the heptad-repeat 1 region (hr1, 88% identity), identical for hr2 (100% identity) and high for both the transmembrane and the c-terminal endodomain (tm, 93% identity; e, 97% identity) (figure 1(a) ).early phylogenetic studies on sars-cov-2 genomic sequences revealed that it clustered closely with sequences originating from sars-like sequences from bats, within lineage b of the betacoronavirus genus. lineage a groups prototypical coronaviruses such as murine hepatitis virus (mhv) and human coronaviruses hcov-hku1 and hcov-oc43. the other highly pathogenic coronavirus, mers-cov is found within lineage c, along with related camelderived mers-cov. lineage c also groups viruses from bats and other mammals such as hedgehogs. lineage d contains viral species infecting bats. to gain a better understanding of both shared and specific features of sars-cov-2 s protein, a phylogenetic analysis centered on s protein sequences of representatives of the four betacoronavirus lineages was carried out (figure 1(b) ). fifteen sequences of sars-cov-2 s sequences obtained from ncbi and gisaid from china and various export locations worldwide were analyzed along with representative members of lineages a-d betacoronaviruses. the analysis confirmed that all sars-cov-2 s sequences clustered very closely with bat sars-like sequences, with the closest matching sequence corresponding to a bat coronavirus (bat-cov) strain named bat-sl-ratg13. other closely related sequences found were from bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21. the sub-clade that groups sars-cov-2, bat-sl-ratg13, bat-sl-covzc45, and bat-sl-covzxc21 is distinct from the one grouping human and civet sars-cov along with other related bat sars-like viruses, such as bat-sl-lyra3.while bat coronaviruses are the established reservoir for sars-cov-2, the presumed intermediate host remains to be determined. based on the high degree of sequence identity in the rbd of sequences found in malayan pangolins (m. javanica), it was proposed that these mammals could be intermediate hosts [20] [21] [22] . subsequent wholegenome analysis revealed 85.5%-92.% identity to sars-cov-2, which is less than what is observed for bat-sl-ratg13 (96.3%) [34] . to explore the relationship of pangolin covs to sars-cov-2, we performed a phylogenetic analysis of the spike gene of pangolin covs isolated from animals smuggled into china in 2017 (guangxi province, gx) and 2019 (guangdong province, gd), compared to sars-cov-2, batcov-ratg13, and other betacoronaviruses (figure 2 ). pairwise comparison between sars-cov-2 s protein and that of batcov-ratg13 and representative sequences from guangxi pangolin (2017, abbreviated gx here) and guangdong pangolin (2019, abbreviated gd) confirm that overall batcov-ratg13 had the highest identity: 97% overall, 96% and 100% for s1 and s2, respectively (figure 2(a) ). the analysis reveals that pangolin s protein sequences are more divergent overall (92% identity for gx and 89% identity for gd), with most of the divergence concentrating in the s1 domain. notably, while the ntd domain of both gx and gd pangolin sequences fell to 88% and 67% identity, respectively, the rbd domain of the gd domain was confirmed to be remarkably well conserved compared to sars-cov-2 (97% identity compared to 87% identity for gx pangolin and 89% for batcov-ratg13). these observations are in line with previously reported putative recombination events occurring between pangolin, bat, and human betacoronavirus sequences [22] . phylogenetically, pangolin spike sequences from 2017 (gx) form a subclade that groups with ratg13 (figure 2(b) ). interestingly, the 2019 pangolin (gd) sequence appears to branch off early (i.e. it could represent an s protein sequence that diverged earlier) and forms its own subclade, distinct from the ratg13/2017pangolin and sars-cov-2/environmental subclades.an s protein sequence alignment focusing on the rbd region of sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and bat-sars-related viruses reveals that the n-terminal half of the rbd is relatively well conserved, whereas the c-terminal half, which contains the rbm, exhibits more variation (figure 3(a) ). notably, bat-sl-cov-zc45 and bat-sl-cov-zxc21 both have two deletions of 5 and 14 residues within the rbd. the composition of residues found at the two known coronavirus s cleavage sites was performed using alignment data (figure 3(b) and (c)). the region around arginine 667 (r667) of sars-cov s, the s1/s2 cleavage site, aligned well with sars-cov-2 and the bat sarsrelated sequences [56] . notably, an arginine at the position corresponding to sars-cov r667 is conserved for the other five sequences analyzed. the alignment shows that sars-cov-2 contains a four amino acid insertion 681 prra 684 that is not found in any other sequences analyzed, including the closely related bat-sl-ratg13 (figure 3(b) ). together with the conserved r685 amino acid found in sars-cov-2 at the putative s1/s2 cleavage site, the insertion introduces a stretch of three basic arginine residues that could potentially be recognized by members of the pro-protein convertase family of proteases [35, 36] . this insertion was conserved for all 15 sars-cov-2 sequences analyzed (supplementary figure 2) . within the betacoronavirus genus, the presence of a basic stretch of residues at the s1/s2 site is found for a number of species from lineages a (hcov-hku1, mhv, hcov-oc43) and c (mers-cov, batcov-hku5). the four-amino-acid insertion feature appears unique among lineage b viruses, as all other species analyzed in the extended alignment, none contained the stretch of basic residues identified in sars-cov-2 s (supplementary figure 2) . as expected from previous analyses, the s2′ cleavage site, located immediately upstream of the fusion peptide and corresponding to the residue position r797 in the case of sars-cov, was strictly conserved for sars-cov-2 and closely related bat sars-related sequences (figure 3(c) ). of note, the leucine (l) residue found at position 792 of the sars-cov sequence is substituted to serine (s) residue for sars-cov-2 s as well as the bat sars-related sequences. the fusion peptide sequence was found to be well conserved for all sequences analyzed.notably, protein alignment analyses show that pangolin sequences (as for other viruses in betacoronaviruses lineage b) do not show the presence of the predicted proteolytically sensitive s1/s2 fusion activation site present in sars-cov-2 ( figure 4 ). only environmental samples taken from the huanan seafood market appear to also harbor the s1/s2 insert. interestingly, the 2019 pangolin sequence shares the same motif immediately upstream of the s1/s2 insert found in sars-cov-2 s, 675 qtqtns 680 (sars-cov-2 numbering). this is also shared with batcov-ratg13, but not with the other pangolin sequences from 2017, which harbor a distinct motif, 673 hsmssl/f 678 (betacov/pangolin/guangxi/p4l/ 2017 | epi_isl_410538 numbering).to gain a deeper understanding of common and possibly distinguishing structural features found in sars-cov-2 s protein, homology modeling was undertaken. the analysis of modeled proteins provides a powerful tool to identify predicted structural characteristics, which can translate into structure-function changes in the studied protein. our laboratory has previously taken advantage of these tools, for structure-function studies of other covs s proteins [23, 37, 38] . to perform the modeling, it is first necessary to identify a suitable protein structure to be used as template, which will determine the accuracy of the predicted model. the s protein structure of several covs including the following have been reported previously: alphacoronavirus: hcov-nl63 and feline coronavirus uu4 (fcov-uu4); betacoronavirus: hcov-hku1, mhv, sars-cov, and mers-cov; gammacoronavirus: infectious bronchitis virus (ibv); and deltacoronavirus: porcine deltacoronavirus (pdcov) [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] [44] [45] . considering that genome and s protein alignments have showed that the sars-cov-2 belongs to the betacoronavirus genus, we focused our analysis on the s structures from viruses belonging to this genus. to select the template structure, the s figure 4 . amino acid composition of the s1/s2 region of sars-cov-2 and related sequences from bats, pangolins, and environmental samples. s protein sequences from sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and closely related environmental, pangolin, and bat coronaviruses were aligned using mafft. the region corresponding to the s1/s2 cleavage site (red arrow) is shown. accession numbers of sequences used in the analyses are found in the materials and methods section. protein amino acid sequences from four representative betacoronaviruses (hcov-hku1, mhv, sars-cov, and mers-cov) were aligned and the solved s protein structures were compared to determine their amino acid identity and the overall structural organization similarities among these proteins (supplementary figure 3a) . we observed an average of~30% identity among the four viral s proteins at the amino acid level, with the exception of hcov-hku1 and mhv, which share an amino acid identity of 59% at the s protein (supplementary figure 3a) . despite the differences at the amino acid level, the overall structure of the four betacoronavirus s proteins showed a similar folding pattern (supplementary figure 3b) , and major differences can only be spotted at specific sections of the functional domains where flexible loops are abundant (e.g. rbd and cleavage sites). considering this, we used modeller (v. 9.23, university of california) to build a first set of models for the sars-cov-2 s protein based on each of the above-mentioned structures (supplementary figure 4) . interestingly, we found no major differences at the secondary structures among the sars-cov-2 s protein-predicted models depending on the s structure that was used as template for the modeling construction. however, extended flexible loops at the rbd and/or clashes between s monomers at the s2 domain level were observed in the sars-cov-2 s models based on hcov-hku1, mhv, and mers-cov (supplementary figure 4 , first three panels). in contrast, the predicted sars-cov-2 s model based on the sars-cov s structure displayed a much better organized folding and no major clashes were observed between the s monomers (supplementary figure 4 , last panel).as we described previously, the identity between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov at the s protein amino acid level was 76%, and phylogenetic analyses grouped sars-cov-2 in the lineage b of the betacoronavirus genus, closely related to sars-cov, as well as to other covs originating in bats (figure 1(b) ). these two considerations, in addition to our preliminary modeling results, suggested sars-cov s as the most suitable template for modeling the sars-cov-2 s protein. taking an alternative approach, the s protein sequence of sars-cov-2 was submitted to two structure homology modeling servers phyre 2 and raptorx [46, 47] . for both cases, the structural models with highest homology scores were based on the sars-cov s template structure (pdb id 5x58, data not shown), confirming the choice of using sars-cov s as template for generating structural models of sars-cov-2.to better compare the predicted structural characteristics of the sars-cov-2, we also performed homology modeling of four s proteins from bat-covs belonging to lineage b in our phylogenetic analysis, which are closely related to sars-cov-2. the modeled s proteins from the bat-covs ratg13, covzc45, covzxc21, and lyra3 were compared to the predicted structure of sars-cov-2 s and to the template structure of sars-cov ( figure 5 ). the amino acid homology of the modeled s proteins in comparison to the template sars-cov s was~71% for all the bat-cov s, with the exception of the lyra3 s, which shares a homology of 84.7% with the template s. overall, all the modeled s proteins shared a similar folding pattern in comparison to sars-cov s and both s1 and s2 domains showed a uniform organization ( figure 5 ). as expected, differences were mostly observed at the flexible loops forming the "head" of the s1 domain, especially at the ntd region (rbd region), where most of the amino acid variation was observed (figures 3(a) and 5) . the s protein amino acid identity among the bat-cov (including sars-cov-2) ranged between 75.3% and 96.7%, with lyra3 and ratg13 s proteins having the lowest and highest identity to sars-cov-2, respectively. despite amino acid variability, no major changes in the secondary structures and the overall folding of the proteins were observed among the modeled s structures of these viruses, suggesting a conserved organization for all the s proteins of the lineage b including sars-cov-2. nevertheless, differences at the flexible loops in both domains were observed, and their impact in the sars-cov-2 s protein function must be further studied.it was recently reported that the sars-cov-2 binds ace2 as a receptor to infect target cells [9, 25, 33, 48] . this finding appears to agree with previous reports describing the ability of bat-covs to successfully bind and use ace2 as a cellular receptor for infection [49] [50] [51] . this conservation in the receptor usage among sars-cov and sarslike bat-covs, contrasts with the high variability that are observed at the amino acid sequence of the rbm (figure 3(a) ). considering this high variability, we compared the predicted rbm structure of the sars-cov-2 and bat-covs to the one of sars-cov. interestingly, despite the variability, the modeled sars-cov-2-predicted rbm displayed a similar organization to sars-cov ( figure 6, top panel) . this was also observed in the ratg3 and lyra3predicted rbm structures (figure 6 , middle left and bottom right panels), suggesting that the rbm organization is well conserved among these viruses. in contrast, the predicted rbm of the covzc45 and covzxc21 viruses showed a different folding at this region in comparison to sars-cov ( figure 6 , middle right and bottom left panels). these two last viruses showed a 5-and a 14-amino-acid deletion, respectively, in the rbm sequence (figure 3(a) ), which can explain the differential folding in the modeled proteins.the alignment in figure 3 (b) shows a four-aminoacid insertion 681 prra 684 , as well as a conserved arginine corresponding to r685 at the s1/s2 site of the sars-cov-2. this insertion, which appears to be unique among lineage b betacoronaviruses, suggests a differential mechanism of activation for the sars-cov-2 compared to other sars-cov and sars-like batcov. at the structural level, the s1/s2 site has been shown to be difficult to solve for most covs structures, resulting in either incomplete structures (missing the complete s1/s2 site) or structures with an altered (i.e. mutated) s1/s2 site [42, 44, 45] . solving the structure of the s1/s2 site was also found to be an issue in the sars-cov s structure we used for our modeling analyses. we have previously shown that the s1/s2 site can be modeled in other cov s proteins, and it appears to be organized as a flexible exposed loop that extends from the s structure and suggest it could be easily accessible for proteolytic activation [37] .to better study the s1/s2 site structural organization, we modeled the sars-cov s protein based on the s structure of mhv (s1/s2 site mutated in the structure), and mers-cov and sars-cov (s1/s2 site missing in the structure) to see if the predicted structure of the s1/s2 site was similar despite the template structure. we observed no differences in the modeled sars-cov s protein at the s1/s2 site, predicting an exposed flexible loop in all the three models (data not shown). based on this, we proceeded to compare the s1/s2 site, as well as other major functional elements of the s2 domain (i.e. s2′ site and fusion peptide), in the predicted structure in our sars-cov, sars-cov-2, and bat-cov s models (figure 7) . remarkably, two features appear to exhibit distinctive characteristics in the sars-cov-2 s model: the fusion peptide, which is predicted to be organized in a more compact conformation for sars-cov-2 s than in sars-cov s (figure 7 , surface models), and the region corresponding to the s1/s2 cleavage site, which contains r667 in the case of sars-cov (figure 7 , s1/s2 alignment box and ribbon models). for sars-cov and the bat-cov proteins, the s1/s2 site forms a short loop that appears flanking closely to the side of the trimeric structure. in the case of sars-cov-2 s, the s1/s2 site is predicted to form an extended loop that protrudes to the exterior of the trimer (figure 7) . this feature suggests that the s1/s2 loop in sars-cov-2 s could be more exposed for proteolytic processing by host cell proteases. as mentioned before, solving the structure of the s1/s2 site appears to present difficulties for most of the reported cov s structures (figure 8, top panel) . however, the exposed loop feature has been demonstrated in both modeled and cryo-em cov s structures with similar amino acid sequences at the s1/s2 site (i.e. fcov and ibv, respectively) (figure 8, top panel) . interestingly, fcov viruses do not always display a s1/s2 site (figure 8 , figure 5 . sars-cov-2 and bat-covs s protein models. the modeled s protein of sars-cov-2, ratg13, covzc45, covczxc21, and lyra3 is compared to sars-cov s structure. the amino acid homology between the modeled proteins and sars-cov s is noted in red and amino acid differences in blue in both models and identity scale. the s amino acid identity between sars-cov-2 and bat-covs is also noted (black identity scale). figure 6 . sars-cov-2 and bat-covs modeled rbm. surface view of sars-cov s structure and sars-cov-2, ratg13, covzc45, covczxc21, and lyra3 s models. sars-cov rbm (red) and flanking residues (yellow) are noted. rbm in the modeled structures is also noted according to their amino acid homology (red) and differences (blue) to sars-cov. top panel), which results in distinct cell entry mechanisms. we also performed an analysis of the s2′ site of the sars-cov-2 in comparison to sars-cov and bat-cov s proteins. as expected, differences in the modeled s2′ site structure were not predicted in any of the studied spikes (figure 7 , s2′ ribbon models). this agrees with the fact that the s2′ site appears to be conserved in the studied sequences (figure 7 , s2′ alignment box) and as we described previously, the sars-cov functional r797 residue at the cleavage position 1 (p1) as well as the serine at position 798 (cleavage position p1′) are conserved in the sars-cov-2 and among the compared bat-covs. this feature also appears to be conserved in other covs (figure 8, bottom panel) ; however, mutations in the residues immediately upstream of the sars-cov r797 residue (or equivalent in each virus) have been shown to result in changes in the proteolytical requirements in other covs [28] . we observed mutations l to s and t to s, which are located upstream of the p1 arginine at positions p3 and p6 in the s2′ site of the sars-cov-2 in comparison to sars-cov. these mutations are not predicted to alter the structure of the s2′ in the sars-cov-2 ( figure 7 , s2′ ribbon models).the current covid-19 pandemic caused by sars-cov-2 is evidence of the potential of coronaviruses to continuously evolve in wild reservoirs and jump to new species. our study aims to contribute to our understanding of the sars-cov-2 from a phylogenetic and structural point of view, focusing on the functional and the proteolytically sensitive sites of the s protein. using phylogenetic analysis, we showed that the sars-cov-2 s protein is closely related to other sars-like viruses figure 7 . sars-cov-2 s1/s2 and s2′ activation sites. the s1/s2 and s2′ activation sites of sars-cov and sarscov-2 s models are shown in surface and ribbon views. s1/s2 and s2′ sites of bat-covs are shown in ribbon view. amino acid homology to sars-cov is noted as follows: s1/s2 site: homology (red) and differences (blue); s2′ site: homology (yellow) and differences (magenta). amino acid alignments of the s1/s2 and s2′ sites are shown, and homology is also noted.sars-cov-2 spike protein distinct activation loop originating in bats (figure 1(b) ), which agrees with early similar reports [34] . the identity of the s protein of batcov-ratg13 strain of bat coronavirus was shown to be 96.65%, suggesting this virus as the closest relative to sars-cov-2. while the origin of the novel coronavirus appears to be in bat reservoirs, there is still no definitive evidence of the possible intermediate host that could transmit the virus to humans. recent reports have suggested the malayan pangolins as an intermediate host for the sars-cov-2. in our analysis, we found that the pangolin spike sequences grouped in a subclade branching from ratg13. we additionally observed that the 2019 (guangdong) pangolin sequence appeared to branch off early in a distinct subclade from ratg13. based on these findings, we hypothesize that despite of having a common origin in bats, the phylogenetic relationship between pangolin covs and sars-cov-2 is not sufficient to support the claim that pangolins harbor the direct precursor to the currently circulating human sars-cov-2. in fact, our analysis suggests that both humans and pangolins could be considered final hosts of their respective coronavirus.in this study, we show the presence of a distinct insert that maps to the s1/s2 priming loop of the sars-cov-2 spike protein and is not shared with sars-cov or any sars-related viruses in betacoronavirus lineage b. during the preparation of this manuscript, the cryo-electron microscopy structures of sars-cov-2 s have recently been determined [33, 52, 53] . these studies have revealed in detail the structure of the sars-cov-2 spike rbd and how it contacts the ace2 host cell receptor with notable differences compared to sars-cov [54] . it has been described that the sars-cov rbm "down" conformation packs more closely to the ntd of the s protein [33] . in the same report, the sars-cov-2 rbd was shown to be angled to the center of the trimmer in its down conformation, which differs to the sars-cov rbm structure. interestingly, we observed in our models that the rbd is predicted to pack similarly to sars-cov and the rbm is also predicted to organize as a flexible loop with similar structure despite the lower amino acid identity between these two proteins ( figure 6 ). in a more recent report, it has been shown that ace2-binding mode of both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 rbds is nearly identical, which supports the claim that the flexibility in the rbm is key to compensate the amino acid differences between the two covs proteins and agrees with our predicted models [54] .one of the common difficulties of the covs s protein cryo-em studies is the difficulty to solve proteolytically sensitive regions in the protein [39, 55] . since the s1/s2 region is proteolytically sensitive, it is common to introduce mutations in this site to prevent proteolytic priming and to allow efficient heterologous expression and purification [42] . this has resulted in a difficulty to solve the s1/s2 region in most of the available cov s protein structures, with a few exceptions for the s figure 8 . covs s1/s2 and s2′ site. the s1/s2 and s2′ activation sites of fcov, mers-cov and ibv. s models are shown ribbon views. amino acid homology to sars-cov is noted as follows: s1/s2 site: homology (red) and differences (blue); s2′ site: homology (yellow) and differences (magenta). amino acid sequences of the s1/s2 and s2′ sites are shown.proteins of viruses belonging to the alphacoronavirus and gammacoronavirus genera [40, 44] . considering that this region is proteolytically sensitive and has been shown to play a major role in the s protein function in other covs, the use of in silico modeling tools has become a useful alternative to study this region in the context of the structural organization of the protein [37, 38] . the sars-cov-2 s protein is not an exception to this issue and the recently reported structures do not allow resolution of the s1/s2 priming loop and/ or have the loop mutated. we used the structural modeling approach to better understand the organization of this region, which is not only suggested to be functionally active, but has been reported as one of the major differences between the sars-cov-2 and its closest relative ratg13 [25, 33] . we observed that the sars-cov-2 s1/s2 site is predicted to be organized as an exposed flexible loop, suggesting that the site is easily available for protease cleavage and suggesting a major role in sars-cov-2 s function ( figure 7) .the significance of the sars-cov-2 spike protein s1/s2 priming loop is yet to be explored experimentally, but we consider it may fundamentally change the entry pathway of this virus compared to other known viruses in betacoronavirus lineage b. the presence of the extended s1/s2 priming loop containing paired basic residues predicts that sars-cov-2 s would most likely be cleaved by golgi-resident proprotein convertases such as furin during virus assembly and delivery to the cell surface. indeed, analysis of western blots of vsvpseudoparticles containing sars-cov-2 s have shown the presence of cleaved s, in contrast to pseudoparticles containing sars-cov s [25] . in the case of mers-cov, but not sars-cov, it is known that priming of s by "pre-cleavage" occurs at the s1/ s2 site, giving sars-cov-2 cleavage activation properties more in line with mers-cov than sars-cov [25, [56] [57] [58] . the extended structural loop may also allow enhanced priming by trypsin-like proteases (ttsps) or even cathepsins. sars-cov-2 is currently believed to be highly sars-cov-like with respect to its receptor binding, and the modeling studies reported here are broadly in line with this finding despite the relatively low amino acid identity in the rbm. however, it is important to remember that changes in protease usage may allow coronaviruses to undergo receptor-independent entry (virus-cell fusion) as well as affect syncytia formation (cell-cell fusion) and tissue pathology [59] [60] [61] .our study provides a structural context to the s1/s2 insert, which has also been reported by others [52, 62] . the presence of a distinct insert containing paired basic residues in the s1/s2 priming loop is common in many coronaviruses in betacoronavirus lineage c (e.g. mers-cov), as well as in lineage a (e.g. mouse hepatitis virus, mhv) and lineage d, and is universally found in gammacoronavirus s (e.g. ibv) [40] . it is noticeably absent in most alphacoronaviruses, with the clear exception of type i canine and feline coronaviruses [28, 37] . one feature of the distinct insert for of sars-cov-2 that warrants attention relates to potential changes as the virus evolves. an equivalent loop is present in influenza ha (in this case adjacent to the fusion peptide), and insertions of basic residues into the loop are a primary marker of conversion from low pathogenicity to highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (e.g. h5n1) [63] . in coronaviruses, such loop modifications are known to affect mhv pathogenesis and to modulate neurovirulence and neuroinvasiveness of hcov-oc43 [64, 65] . the fcov is another example where s1/s2 loop modifications appear to lead directly to changes in viral pathogenesis [37, 66, 67] . in the case of fcov, the equivalent proteolytically sensitive structural loop is within a hypervariable region of the spike gene, suggesting that this region of spike is a significant driver of virus evolution [67] .at present, sars-cov-2 is behaving in a distinct manner compared to sars-cov. we believe our findings are of special importance considering that the available data indicates ace2 as a suitable cellular receptor for sars-cov-2 entry [48, 68] . in our modeling analysis, we observed that the rbm of the sars-cov-2 predicted a similar organization as sars-cov and that deletions at this rbm region in other bat-covs are reported to not impact its ability to bind ace2 [49] [50] [51] . this suggests that instead of receptor binding, the s1/s2 loop is a distinctive feature relevant to sars-cov-2 pathogenesis and marks a unique similarity to mers-cov. we would predict that the distinct insert in sars-cov-2 s would give the virus biological properties more in line with mers-cov and not sars-cov, especially with regard to its cell entry pathway. however, it may also impact virus spread and transmission. while many epidemiological features of sars-cov-2 still need to be resolved, there are many features of transmission that appear to align more with mers-cov than sars-cov. one component of transmission is the reproductive number (r 0 ), which is currently thought to be approximately 2.0-3.0 for sars-cov-2, broadly in line with than for sars-cov, and while mers-cov has a low r 0 in humans (b 1), it is high in camels and in outbreak situations (n 3) [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] . another study has reported that the serial interval (time from the disease onset in a patient to the onset of the disease in secondary case) can be estimated to be below 4 days, suggesting that transmission can occur before the onset of clinical signs [74] . these two parameters highlight the high transmissibility of the sars-cov-2. one notable feature of the s protein s1/s2 cleavage site was first observed during the purification of the mhv s protein for structural analysis [42] . mhv with an intact cleavage loop was unstable when expressed, and so we consider that the s1/s2 loop controls virus stability, likely via access to the down-stream s2′ site that regulates fusion peptide exposure and activity. as such, it will interesting to monitor the effects of s1/s2 loop insertions and proteolytic cleavability in the context of virus transmission, in addition to virus entry, pathogenesis, and evolution.sequenceswe are currently faced with a potential global epidemic of a new coronavirus that has infected thousands of people in china and is spreading rapidly around the world. this week the who has declared it an global emergency (who, 2020) . the wuhan novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) has already caused more infections than the previous severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak of 2002 and 2003. the virus is a sars related coronavirus (sarsr-cov), and it is genetically associated with sarsr-cov strains that infect bats in china . it causes severe respiratory illness, has high fatality rate , can be transmitted from person to person and has spread to over 15 countries in less than two months (who, 2020) .this coronavirus outbreak has been unprecedented; so too is the way that the scientific community has responded to it. they have openly and rapidly shared genomic and clinical data as never seen before allowing research results to be released almost instantaneously. this has helped the understanding of the transmission dynamics, the development of rapid diagnostic and has informed public health response. here, we present a new contribution that can speed up this communal effort. the genome detective coronavirus typing tool is a free-of-charge web-based bioinformatics pipeline that can accurately and quickly identify, assemble and classify coronaviruses genomes. the tool also identifies changes at nucleotides, coding regions and proteins using a novel dynamic aligner to allow tracking new viral mutations (figure 1 ). to this reference dataset, we added 47 whole genomes of the current coronavirus 2019 (2019-ncov) outbreak that originated in wuhan, china, in december 2019. the 2019-ncov sequences were downloaded from the gisaid database (https://www.gisaid.org) together with annotation of its original location, collection date and originating and submitting laboratory. the 2019-ncov data generators are properly acknowledged in the acknowledgements section of this paper and detailed information is provided in supplementary table 1. the 431 reference wgs were aligned with muscle (edgar 2004) . the alignment was manually edited until a codon alignment was attained in all coding sequences (cds). a maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree, 1000 bootstrap replicates was constructed in phyml (guidon & gascuel 2003; lemoine et al., 2018) and a bayesian tree using mrbayes (ronquist & huelsenbeck 2003) were constructed. the trees were visualized in figtree (rambaut 2018). we selected 25 reference sequences that represent the diversity of each well-defined phylogenetic cluster (with bootstrap support of 100% and posterior probability of 1). we identified five well supported phylogenetic clusters with more than two sequences of sarsr-cov and used them to set up our automated phylogenetic classification tool. cluster 1 included sars strains from the 2002 and 2003 asian outbreaks. in our tool, we named this cluster sars-cov outbreak 2000s but may rename it as sars-a if a new proposed naming system for sarsr-cov is adopted in the near future (rambaut 2020). cluster 2 (provisionally named as sars related cov) includes 7 sequences from bats which did not cause large human outbreaks. cluster 3 (named as bat sars-cov hku3) includes three wgs sampled from rhinolophus sinicus (i.e. chinese rufous horseshoe bats). cluster 4 (bat sars-cov zxc21/zc45) includes two sarsr-cov sampled from rhinolophus sinicus bats in zhoushan, china. cluster 5 (provisionally named as wuhan 2019-ncov, which may be renamed as sars-b) includes one public sequence from the outbreak in wuhan, china. we identified this cluster with many sequences from gisaid but kept only this one as this is the only genbank sequence, accession number mn908947, which was kindly shared by prof. yong-zhen zhang and colleagues in the virological.org website. detailed information about the phylogenetic reference datasets are available in supplementary table 2. the phylogenetic reference dataset was used to create an automated coronavirus typing tool using the genome detective framework (vilsker et al., 2019 . to determine the accuracy of this tool, each of the 431 test wgs was considered for evaluation (i.e. 384 reference sequences from vipr and 47 public 2019-ncov sequences). the sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of our method was calculated for both species assignment and phylogenetic clustering of sarsr-cov. sensitivity was computed by the formula classifying query sequences in an automated fashion involves two steps. the first step enables virus species assignments and the second, which is restricted to sarsr-cov, includes phylogenetic analysis. the first classification analysis subjects a query sequence to blast and aga analysi. aga is a novel alignment method for nucleic acid sequences against annotated genomes from ncbi refseq virus database. aga (deforche 2017) expands the optimal alignment algorithms of smith-waterman (smith & waterman 1981) and gotoh (gotoh 1982) based on an induction state with additional parameters. the result is a more accurate aligner, as it takes into account both nucleotide and protein scores and identifies all of the polymorphisms at nucleotide and amino acid levels. in the second step, a query sequence is aligned against the phylogenetic reference dataset using -add alignment option in the mafft software (katoh & standley 2013) . in addition, a neighbor joining phylogenetic tree is constructed using the hky distance metric with gamma among-site rate variation with 1,000 bootstrap replicates using paup* (swofford) . the query sequence is assigned to a particular phylogenetic cluster if it clusters monophyletically with that clade or a subset of it with bootstrap support >70%. if the bootstrap support is <70%, the genotype is reported to be unassigned.the result of the phylogenetic and mutational analysis performed by aga is available in a detailed report. this report contains an interactive phylogenetic tree and genome mapper (supplementary figure 1) . it also presents the virus species and cluster assignments and a detailed table that provides information about open reading frames (orfs), cds and proteins. this table can be expanded to show nucleotide and amino acid mutations that differentiate a query sequence from their species refseq or from a sequence in the phylogenetic reference dataset. all results can be exported to a variety of file formats (xml, csv, excel, nexus or fasta).the genome detective coronavirus typing tool correctly classified all of the 175 sarsr-cov sequences at species level, i.e. specificity, sensitivity and accuracy of 100%. furthermore, all of the 47 2019-ncov wgs that were isolated in china (n=36), usa (n=5), france (n=2), thailand (n=2), japan (n=1) and taiwan (n=1) were correctly classified at phylogenetic cluster level as 2019-ncov, which may be renamed as sars-b. in addition, we classified with very high specificity, sensitivity and accuracy (i.e. 100%) all of the 112 sars outbreak wgs of 2002 and 2003. we also achieved perfect classification (i.e. specificity, sensitivity and accuracy of 100%) for all of beta coronavirus, human_coronavirus_hku1, mers-cov, rousettus_bat_coronavirus_hku9 and tylonycteris_bat_coronavirus_hku4 at species level. for a detailed overview of assignment performance, please refer to the supplementary table 3. our tool also allows detailed analysis of coding regions and proteins for each of the coronavirus species. for example, the analysis of the first released 2019-ncov sequence, the wh_human1_china_2019dec (genbank: mn908947) demonstrated at genome level , the nucleotide (nt) identity was 79.0% to the reference strain of sarsr-cov (accession: nc_004718.3) and that the envelop small membrane protein (protein e) is the most similar protein. in total, 94.8% (73/77) of the amino acids were identical; the four amino acid differences were located at positions 55 (t55s), 56 (v56f), 69 (69deletion) and 70 (g70r). the spike protein (protein s), which can be associated with virulence, was 76.2% identical to the reference strain of sarsr-cov (supplementary table 4a ). interestingly there were four amino acid insertions at position 237 (a237_f238inshrsy, genome nt position 22202_22203inscatagaagttat)), which is just upstream from a cleavage site. the most diverse coding regions were the cds sars8a and sars8b. in these two regions, only 30% of the amino acids were identical. sars8b protein was truncated early and its cds had four stop codons (supplementary table 4sa ).our coronavirus typing tool also allows a query sequence to be analysed against a sequence in the phylogenetic reference dataset. for example, the wh_human1_china_2019dec (genbank: mn908947) the identity was 87.5% to the bat sequence bat_sl_covzxc21 (genbank: mg772934). this was one of the bat-cov sequences that were most related to n2019-cov . the envelop small membrane protein (protein e) was 100% identical (supplementary  table  4b ). when the 2019-ncov isolated from france (betacov/france/idf0373/2020) was analysed with our tool and compared with the 2019-ncov wh_human1_china_2019dec strain (accession: mn908947), this sequence was 99.9% identical and had only two nt mutations (supplementary table 4c ). these two differences were located on positions: 22551g>t & 26016g>t), which caused three amino acid mutations (e2 glycoprotein protein mutation: v354f (22551g>t) , sars3a protein mutations: g250v (26016g>t) and sars3b protein mutations: v110f (26016g>t)) (detailed in supplementary  table 4c -ii). the analysis of a wgs in fasta format takes approximately 60 seconds.we developed and released the genome detective coronavirus typing tool as a free-of-charge resource in the third week of january 2020 in order to help the rapid characterization of ncov-2019 infections. this tool allows the analysis of whole or partial viral genomes within minutes. it accepts assembled genomes in fasta format or raw ngs data in fastq format from illumina, ion torrent, pacbio or oxford nanopore technologies (ont) can be submitted to the genome detective virus tool (vilsker et al., 2019) to automatically assemble the consensus genome prior to executing the coronavirus typing tool. user effort is minimal, and a user can submit multiple fasta sequences at once.the tool uses a novel and dynamic aligner, aga, to allow submitted sequences to be queried against reference genomes, using both nucleotide and amino acid similarity scores. this allows accurate identification of other coronavirus species and the tracking of new viral mutations as the outbreak expands globally. it also performs detailed analysis of the coding regions and proteins. moreover, it can easily be updated to add new phylogenetic clusters if new outbreaks arise or if the classification nomenclature changes. the tool has been able to correctly classify all the recently released ncov-2019 genomes, as well as all the 2002-2003 sars outbreak sequencesin conclusion, the genome detective coronavirus typing tool is a web-based and user-friendly software application that allows the identification and characterization of novel coronavirus genomes.we are currently faced with a potential global epidemic of a new coronavirus that has infected thousands of people in china and is spreading rapidly around the world. this week the who has declared it an global emergency (who, 2020) . the wuhan novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) has already caused more infections than the previous severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak of 2002 and 2003. the virus is a sars related coronavirus (sarsr-cov), and it is genetically associated with sarsr-cov strains that infect bats in china . it causes severe respiratory illness, has high fatality rate , can be transmitted from person to person and has spread to over 15 countries in less than two months (who, 2020) .this coronavirus outbreak has been unprecedented; so too is the way that the scientific community has responded to it. they have openly and rapidly shared genomic and clinical data as never seen before allowing research results to be released almost instantaneously. this has helped the understanding of the transmission dynamics, the development of rapid diagnostic and has informed public health response. here, we present a new contribution that can speed up this communal effort. the genome detective coronavirus typing tool is a free-of-charge web-based bioinformatics pipeline that can accurately and quickly identify, assemble and classify coronaviruses genomes. the tool also identifies changes at nucleotides, coding regions and proteins using a novel dynamic aligner to allow tracking new viral mutations (figure 1 ). to this reference dataset, we added 47 whole genomes of the current coronavirus 2019 (2019-ncov) outbreak that originated in wuhan, china, in december 2019. the 2019-ncov sequences were downloaded from the gisaid database (https://www.gisaid.org) together with annotation of its original location, collection date and originating and submitting laboratory. the 2019-ncov data generators are properly acknowledged in the acknowledgements section of this paper and detailed information is provided in supplementary table 1. the 431 reference wgs were aligned with muscle (edgar 2004) . the alignment was manually edited until a codon alignment was attained in all coding sequences (cds). a maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree, 1000 bootstrap replicates was constructed in phyml (guidon & gascuel 2003; lemoine et al., 2018) and a bayesian tree using mrbayes (ronquist & huelsenbeck 2003) were constructed. the trees were visualized in figtree (rambaut 2018). we selected 25 reference sequences that represent the diversity of each well-defined phylogenetic cluster (with bootstrap support of 100% and posterior probability of 1). we identified five well supported phylogenetic clusters with more than two sequences of sarsr-cov and used them to set up our automated phylogenetic classification tool. cluster 1 included sars strains from the 2002 and 2003 asian outbreaks. in our tool, we named this cluster sars-cov outbreak 2000s but may rename it as sars-a if a new proposed naming system for sarsr-cov is adopted in the near future (rambaut 2020). cluster 2 (provisionally named as sars related cov) includes 7 sequences from bats which did not cause large human outbreaks. cluster 3 (named as bat sars-cov hku3) includes three wgs sampled from rhinolophus sinicus (i.e. chinese rufous horseshoe bats). cluster 4 (bat sars-cov zxc21/zc45) includes two sarsr-cov sampled from rhinolophus sinicus bats in zhoushan, china. cluster 5 (provisionally named as wuhan 2019-ncov, which may be renamed as sars-b) includes one public sequence from the outbreak in wuhan, china. we identified this cluster with many sequences from gisaid but kept only this one as this is the only genbank sequence, accession number mn908947, which was kindly shared by prof. yong-zhen zhang and colleagues in the virological.org website. detailed information about the phylogenetic reference datasets are available in supplementary table 2. the phylogenetic reference dataset was used to create an automated coronavirus typing tool using the genome detective framework (vilsker et al., 2019 . to determine the accuracy of this tool, each of the 431 test wgs was considered for evaluation (i.e. 384 reference sequences from vipr and 47 public 2019-ncov sequences). the sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of our method was calculated for both species assignment and phylogenetic clustering of sarsr-cov. sensitivity was computed by the formula classifying query sequences in an automated fashion involves two steps. the first step enables virus species assignments and the second, which is restricted to sarsr-cov, includes phylogenetic analysis. the first classification analysis subjects a query sequence to blast and aga analysi. aga is a novel alignment method for nucleic acid sequences against annotated genomes from ncbi refseq virus database. aga (deforche 2017) expands the optimal alignment algorithms of smith-waterman (smith & waterman 1981) and gotoh (gotoh 1982) based on an induction state with additional parameters. the result is a more accurate aligner, as it takes into account both nucleotide and protein scores and identifies all of the polymorphisms at nucleotide and amino acid levels. in the second step, a query sequence is aligned against the phylogenetic reference dataset using -add alignment option in the mafft software (katoh & standley 2013) . in addition, a neighbor joining phylogenetic tree is constructed using the hky distance metric with gamma among-site rate variation with 1,000 bootstrap replicates using paup* (swofford) . the query sequence is assigned to a particular phylogenetic cluster if it clusters monophyletically with that clade or a subset of it with bootstrap support >70%. if the bootstrap support is <70%, the genotype is reported to be unassigned.the result of the phylogenetic and mutational analysis performed by aga is available in a detailed report. this report contains an interactive phylogenetic tree and genome mapper (supplementary figure 1) . it also presents the virus species and cluster assignments and a detailed table that provides information about open reading frames (orfs), cds and proteins. this table can be expanded to show nucleotide and amino acid mutations that differentiate a query sequence from their species refseq or from a sequence in the phylogenetic reference dataset. all results can be exported to a variety of file formats (xml, csv, excel, nexus or fasta).the genome detective coronavirus typing tool correctly classified all of the 175 sarsr-cov sequences at species level, i.e. specificity, sensitivity and accuracy of 100%. furthermore, all of the 47 2019-ncov wgs that were isolated in china (n=36), usa (n=5), france (n=2), thailand (n=2), japan (n=1) and taiwan (n=1) were correctly classified at phylogenetic cluster level as 2019-ncov, which may be renamed as sars-b. in addition, we classified with very high specificity, sensitivity and accuracy (i.e. 100%) all of the 112 sars outbreak wgs of 2002 and 2003. we also achieved perfect classification (i.e. specificity, sensitivity and accuracy of 100%) for all of beta coronavirus, human_coronavirus_hku1, mers-cov, rousettus_bat_coronavirus_hku9 and tylonycteris_bat_coronavirus_hku4 at species level. for a detailed overview of assignment performance, please refer to the supplementary table 3. our tool also allows detailed analysis of coding regions and proteins for each of the coronavirus species. for example, the analysis of the first released 2019-ncov sequence, the wh_human1_china_2019dec (genbank: mn908947) demonstrated at genome level , the nucleotide (nt) identity was 79.0% to the reference strain of sarsr-cov (accession: nc_004718.3) and that the envelop small membrane protein (protein e) is the most similar protein. in total, 94.8% (73/77) of the amino acids were identical; the four amino acid differences were located at positions 55 (t55s), 56 (v56f), 69 (69deletion) and 70 (g70r). the spike protein (protein s), which can be associated with virulence, was 76.2% identical to the reference strain of sarsr-cov (supplementary table 4a ). interestingly there were four amino acid insertions at position 237 (a237_f238inshrsy, genome nt position 22202_22203inscatagaagttat)), which is just upstream from a cleavage site. the most diverse coding regions were the cds sars8a and sars8b. in these two regions, only 30% of the amino acids were identical. sars8b protein was truncated early and its cds had four stop codons (supplementary table 4sa ).our coronavirus typing tool also allows a query sequence to be analysed against a sequence in the phylogenetic reference dataset. for example, the wh_human1_china_2019dec (genbank: mn908947) the identity was 87.5% to the bat sequence bat_sl_covzxc21 (genbank: mg772934). this was one of the bat-cov sequences that were most related to n2019-cov . the envelop small membrane protein (protein e) was 100% identical (supplementary  table  4b ). when the 2019-ncov isolated from france (betacov/france/idf0373/2020) was analysed with our tool and compared with the 2019-ncov wh_human1_china_2019dec strain (accession: mn908947), this sequence was 99.9% identical and had only two nt mutations (supplementary table 4c ). these two differences were located on positions: 22551g>t & 26016g>t), which caused three amino acid mutations (e2 glycoprotein protein mutation: v354f (22551g>t) , sars3a protein mutations: g250v (26016g>t) and sars3b protein mutations: v110f (26016g>t)) (detailed in supplementary  table 4c -ii). the analysis of a wgs in fasta format takes approximately 60 seconds.we developed and released the genome detective coronavirus typing tool as a free-of-charge resource in the third week of january 2020 in order to help the rapid characterization of ncov-2019 infections. this tool allows the analysis of whole or partial viral genomes within minutes. it accepts assembled genomes in fasta format or raw ngs data in fastq format from illumina, ion torrent, pacbio or oxford nanopore technologies (ont) can be submitted to the genome detective virus tool (vilsker et al., 2019) to automatically assemble the consensus genome prior to executing the coronavirus typing tool. user effort is minimal, and a user can submit multiple fasta sequences at once.the tool uses a novel and dynamic aligner, aga, to allow submitted sequences to be queried against reference genomes, using both nucleotide and amino acid similarity scores. this allows accurate identification of other coronavirus species and the tracking of new viral mutations as the outbreak expands globally. it also performs detailed analysis of the coding regions and proteins. moreover, it can easily be updated to add new phylogenetic clusters if new outbreaks arise or if the classification nomenclature changes. the tool has been able to correctly classify all the recently released ncov-2019 genomes, as well as all the 2002-2003 sars outbreak sequencesin conclusion, the genome detective coronavirus typing tool is a web-based and user-friendly software application that allows the identification and characterization of novel coronavirus genomes.we are currently faced with a potential global epidemic of a new coronavirus that has infected thousands of people in china and is spreading rapidly around the world. this week the who has declared it an global emergency (who, 2020) . the wuhan novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) has already caused more infections than the previous severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak of 2002 and 2003. the virus is a sars related coronavirus (sarsr-cov), and it is genetically associated with sarsr-cov strains that infect bats in china . it causes severe respiratory illness, has high fatality rate , can be transmitted from person to person and has spread to over 15 countries in less than two months (who, 2020) .this coronavirus outbreak has been unprecedented; so too is the way that the scientific community has responded to it. they have openly and rapidly shared genomic and clinical data as never seen before allowing research results to be released almost instantaneously. this has helped the understanding of the transmission dynamics, the development of rapid diagnostic and has informed public health response. here, we present a new contribution that can speed up this communal effort. the genome detective coronavirus typing tool is a free-of-charge web-based bioinformatics pipeline that can accurately and quickly identify, assemble and classify coronaviruses genomes. the tool also identifies changes at nucleotides, coding regions and proteins using a novel dynamic aligner to allow tracking new viral mutations (figure 1 ). to this reference dataset, we added 47 whole genomes of the current coronavirus 2019 (2019-ncov) outbreak that originated in wuhan, china, in december 2019. the 2019-ncov sequences were downloaded from the gisaid database (https://www.gisaid.org) together with annotation of its original location, collection date and originating and submitting laboratory. the 2019-ncov data generators are properly acknowledged in the acknowledgements section of this paper and detailed information is provided in supplementary table 1. the 431 reference wgs were aligned with muscle (edgar 2004) . the alignment was manually edited until a codon alignment was attained in all coding sequences (cds). a maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree, 1000 bootstrap replicates was constructed in phyml (guidon & gascuel 2003; lemoine et al., 2018) and a bayesian tree using mrbayes (ronquist & huelsenbeck 2003) were constructed. the trees were visualized in figtree (rambaut 2018). we selected 25 reference sequences that represent the diversity of each well-defined phylogenetic cluster (with bootstrap support of 100% and posterior probability of 1). we identified five well supported phylogenetic clusters with more than two sequences of sarsr-cov and used them to set up our automated phylogenetic classification tool. cluster 1 included sars strains from the 2002 and 2003 asian outbreaks. in our tool, we named this cluster sars-cov outbreak 2000s but may rename it as sars-a if a new proposed naming system for sarsr-cov is adopted in the near future (rambaut 2020). cluster 2 (provisionally named as sars related cov) includes 7 sequences from bats which did not cause large human outbreaks. cluster 3 (named as bat sars-cov hku3) includes three wgs sampled from rhinolophus sinicus (i.e. chinese rufous horseshoe bats). cluster 4 (bat sars-cov zxc21/zc45) includes two sarsr-cov sampled from rhinolophus sinicus bats in zhoushan, china. cluster 5 (provisionally named as wuhan 2019-ncov, which may be renamed as sars-b) includes one public sequence from the outbreak in wuhan, china. we identified this cluster with many sequences from gisaid but kept only this one as this is the only genbank sequence, accession number mn908947, which was kindly shared by prof. yong-zhen zhang and colleagues in the virological.org website. detailed information about the phylogenetic reference datasets are available in supplementary table 2. the phylogenetic reference dataset was used to create an automated coronavirus typing tool using the genome detective framework (vilsker et al., 2019 . to determine the accuracy of this tool, each of the 431 test wgs was considered for evaluation (i.e. 384 reference sequences from vipr and 47 public 2019-ncov sequences). the sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of our method was calculated for both species assignment and phylogenetic clustering of sarsr-cov. sensitivity was computed by the formula classifying query sequences in an automated fashion involves two steps. the first step enables virus species assignments and the second, which is restricted to sarsr-cov, includes phylogenetic analysis. the first classification analysis subjects a query sequence to blast and aga analysi. aga is a novel alignment method for nucleic acid sequences against annotated genomes from ncbi refseq virus database. aga (deforche 2017 ) expands the optimal alignment algorithms of smith-waterman (smith & waterman 1981) and gotoh (gotoh 1982) based on an induction state with additional parameters. the result is a more accurate aligner, as it takes into account both nucleotide and protein scores and identifies all of the polymorphisms at nucleotide and amino acid levels. in the second step, a query sequence is aligned against the phylogenetic reference dataset using -add alignment option in the mafft software (katoh & standley 2013) . in addition, a neighbor joining phylogenetic tree is constructed using the hky distance metric with gamma among-site rate variation with 1,000 bootstrap replicates using paup* (swofford) . the query sequence is assigned to a particular phylogenetic cluster if it clusters monophyletically with that clade or a subset of it with bootstrap support >70%. if the bootstrap support is <70%, the genotype is reported to be unassigned.the result of the phylogenetic and mutational analysis performed by aga is available in a detailed report. this report contains an interactive phylogenetic tree and genome mapper (supplementary figure 1) . it also presents the virus species and cluster assignments and a detailed table that provides information about open reading frames (orfs), cds and proteins. this table can be expanded to show nucleotide and amino acid mutations that differentiate a query sequence from their species refseq or from a sequence in the phylogenetic reference dataset. all results can be exported to a variety of file formats (xml, csv, excel, nexus or fasta).the genome detective coronavirus typing tool correctly classified all of the 175 sarsr-cov sequences at species level, i.e. specificity, sensitivity and accuracy of 100%. furthermore, all of the 47 2019-ncov wgs that were isolated in china (n=36), usa (n=5), france (n=2), thailand . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this this version posted february 2, 2020. .(n=2), japan (n=1) and taiwan (n=1) were correctly classified at phylogenetic cluster level as 2019-ncov, which may be renamed as sars-b. in addition, we classified with very high specificity, sensitivity and accuracy (i.e. 100%) all of the 112 sars outbreak wgs of 2002 and 2003. we also achieved perfect classification (i.e. specificity, sensitivity and accuracy of 100%) for all of beta coronavirus, human_coronavirus_hku1, mers-cov, rousettus_bat_coronavirus_hku9 and tylonycteris_bat_coronavirus_hku4 at species level. for a detailed overview of assignment performance, please refer to the supplementary table 3. our tool also allows detailed analysis of coding regions and proteins for each of the coronavirus species. for example, the analysis of the first released 2019-ncov sequence, the wh_human1_china_2019dec (genbank: mn908947) demonstrated at genome level , the nucleotide (nt) identity was 79.0% to the reference strain of sarsr-cov (accession: nc_004718.3) and that the envelop small membrane protein (protein e) is the most similar protein. in total, 94.8% (73/77) of the amino acids were identical; the four amino acid differences were located at positions 55 (t55s), 56 (v56f), 69 (69deletion) and 70 (g70r). the spike protein (protein s), which can be associated with virulence, was 76.2% identical to the reference strain of sarsr-cov (supplementary table 4a ). interestingly there were four amino acid insertions at position 237 (a237_f238inshrsy, genome nt position 22202_22203inscatagaagttat)), which is just upstream from a cleavage site. the most diverse coding regions were the cds sars8a and sars8b. in these two regions, only 30% of the amino acids were identical. sars8b protein was truncated early and its cds had four stop codons (supplementary table 4sa ).our coronavirus typing tool also allows a query sequence to be analysed against a sequence in the phylogenetic reference dataset. for example, the wh_human1_china_2019dec (genbank: mn908947) the identity was 87.5% to the bat sequence bat_sl_covzxc21 (genbank: mg772934). this was one of the bat-cov sequences that were most related to n2019-cov . the envelop small membrane protein (protein e) was 100% identical (supplementary  table  4b ). when the 2019-ncov isolated from france (betacov/france/idf0373/2020) was analysed with our tool and compared with the 2019-ncov wh_human1_china_2019dec strain (accession: mn908947), this sequence was 99.9% identical and had only two nt mutations (supplementary table 4c ). these two differences were located on positions: 22551g>t & 26016g>t), which caused three amino acid mutations (e2 glycoprotein protein mutation: v354f (22551g>t) , sars3a protein mutations: g250v (26016g>t) and sars3b protein mutations: v110f (26016g>t)) (detailed in supplementary  table 4c -ii). the analysis of a wgs in fasta format takes approximately 60 seconds.we developed and released the genome detective coronavirus typing tool as a free-of-charge resource in the third week of january 2020 in order to help the rapid characterization of ncov-2019 infections. this tool allows the analysis of whole or partial viral genomes within minutes. it accepts assembled genomes in fasta format or raw ngs data in fastq format from illumina, ion torrent, pacbio or oxford nanopore technologies (ont) can be submitted to the genome detective virus tool (vilsker et al., 2019) to automatically assemble the consensus genome prior to executing the coronavirus typing tool. user effort is minimal, and a user can submit multiple fasta sequences at once.the tool uses a novel and dynamic aligner, aga, to allow submitted sequences to be queried against reference genomes, using both nucleotide and amino acid similarity scores. this allows accurate identification of other coronavirus species and the tracking of new viral mutations as the outbreak expands globally. it also performs detailed analysis of the coding regions and proteins. moreover, it can easily be updated to add new phylogenetic clusters if new outbreaks arise or if the classification nomenclature changes. the tool has been able to correctly classify all the recently released ncov-2019 genomes, as well as all the 2002-2003 sars outbreak sequences . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this this version posted february 2, 2020. .in conclusion, the genome detective coronavirus typing tool is a web-based and user-friendly software application that allows the identification and characterization of novel coronavirus genomes.a novel coronavirus outbreak took place in wuhan, hubei province, china in december 2019 (wang et al. 2020 ). this novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) causes pneumonia in patients (zhu et al. 2020 ) and it has rapidly spread to other provinces in china and other countries (who 2020) . this novel coronavirus outbreak had raised global concern but current knowledge on the origin and transmission route of the pathogen is still limited. the sars-cov-2 belongs to the genus betacoronavirus, which also includes two highly virulent human coronaviruses, sars-cov and mers-cov. apart from human, many animal species, such as bat, rat, camel, swine, and hedgehog, can be infected by different types of coronaviruses. further sequence analyses of this novel and other betacoronaviruses might provide additional information to better understand the evolution of sars-cov-2. preferential codon usage is commonly seen in different organisms, and it has been evident that the uneven codon usage is not neutral but related to gene expression or other selection pressures (akashi and eyre-walker 1998; percudani and ottonello 1999; pepin, domsic, and mckenna 2008) . there are two levels of codon usage biases, one is at amino acid level and the other is at synonymous codon level. the first one mainly originates from preferential usage of certain amino acids, for example integral membrane proteins maybe enriched in hydrophobic amino acids and respective codons (perriere 2002) . the synonymous codon usage bias in viruses can be driven by selective pressures from the host cells (wong et al. 2010; fan et al. 2015; gu et al. 2019) , and studies on different viruses have shown that selection pressures can be dominant in the evolution of codon usage patterns of the virus (liu et al. 2011; fan et al. 2015;  v c the author(s) 2020. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution non-commercial license (http://creativecommons.org/ licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com kumar et al. 2016; wang et al. 2016) . correspondence analysis (ca) is a tool for visualization high dimension discrete-state data, which has been applied in many codon usage studies (perriere 2002; charif et al. 2005; wong et al. 2010; lobry 2018; ) . the recently developed within-group ca (wca) and betweengroup ca (bca) are derivatives to the conventional ca (lobry 2018) , and the application of block structure in these methods allows separating the codon usage bias at amino acid and synonymous codon levels. as the natural history of the sars-cov-2 remains largely unknown, an in-depth codon usage analysis of this newly emerging virus might provide some novel insights.in this study, we used both ca, bca, and wca to analyses codon usage patterns of 3,076 betacoronavirus sequences. we found sars-cov-2 and bat sarsr-cov have similar amino acid usage. however, our analyses suggested that the spike and membrane genes of sars-cov-2 have relatively distinct synonymous codon usage patterns to the orf1ab or nucleocapsid genes.to construct a reference sequence dataset, available full-length complete genome sequences of coronavirus were collected through virus pathogen resource database (https://www. viprbrc.org/brc/home.spg?decorator¼corona, accessed 13 july 2019, ticket 958868915368). the sequences were filtered by the following steps: 1, remove sequences without protein annotation; 2, keep only sequences with complete set of desired replicase and structural proteins (sequences coding for orf1ab, spike, membrane, and nucleocapsid); 3, filter out sequences that are unusually long and short (>130% or <70% of the median length for each group of gene sequences); 4, limit our analysis to genus betacoronavirus; and 5, concatenate orf1a and orf1b sequences to form orf1ab if necessary.the final dataset comprised 769 individual strains (3,076 individual gene sequences) that contain complete sets of coding regions for orf1ab, spike, membrane, and nucleocapsid genes. the sequences for envelope gene were not included in the analysis because of the short length and potential bias in codon usage. corresponding metadata for the sequences were extracted by the sequence name field. twenty-four complete genome sequences of the newly identified sars-cov-2 and its phylogenetically close relatives were retrieved from genbank and gisaid (accessed 22 jan 2020). six genomes in this study were used as references (betacov/bat/yunnan/ratg13/2013j epi_isl_402131;betacov/pangolin/guangxi/p1e/2017jepi_isl_ 410539; mg772934.1_bat_sars-like_coronavirus_isolate_bat-sl-covzxc21;mg772933.1_bat_sars-like_coronavirus_isolate_ bat-sl-covzc45; ky352407.1_severe_acute_respiratory_syndrome-related_coronavirus_strain_btky72 and gu190215.1_bat_ coronavirus_bm48-31/bgr/2008), as they have previously been reported to have close phylogenetic relationship with sars-cov-2 (lam et al. 2020; lu et al. 2020; zhou et al. 2020) . detailed accession id for the above data are provided in supplementary table s1 .the codon count for every gene sequence input for the ca was calculated by the synmut (gu and poon 2019) package. the implementation of the different correspondence analyses in this study was performed by functions in the package ade4 (dray and dufour 2007) . three stop codons (taa, tag, and tga) were excluded in the ca.correspondence analysis (ca) is a dimension reduction method applied to a contingency table that is well suited for amino acid and codon usage analysis. the concept in ca is similar to pearson's v 2 test (i.e., the expected counts are calculated under the hypothesis of independence, based on the observed contingency table). with the deduced expected count table, the v 2 distance (supplementary method) can be used to evaluate the difference between two observations. the total inertia calculated from the v 2 distance is proportional to the statistic used in pearson's v 2 test (lobry 2018) . the pearson residuals were applied in the ca as input for singular value decomposition (suzuki et al. 2008) , and resulted eigenvalues were visualized and interpreted in the study. k-means clustering (k ¼ 7) was performed based on the results from ca analysis to provide quantitative measurement on the proximity between data points.all the correspondence analyses in this study were performed individually for each gene, to achieve better resolution on gene specific codon usage pattern.in contrast to the previous global ca, the within-block ca (benzé cri 1983) (wca) can segregate the effects of different codon compositions in different amino acids, by introducing a block structure into the analysis. wca becomes 'model of choice' for analysing synonymous codon usage in recent years, as it is more robust than other traditional methods (e.g. ca with relative codon frequency or ca with relative synonymous codon usage values) (perriere 2002; suzuki et al. 2008) . wca focuses on the within-amino acid variability, and it technically excludes the variation of amino acid usage differences. the implementation of wca was based on the existing global ca, with additional information for factoring (details included in supplementary method).between-group ca (bca) is complementary to wca and it focuses on the between-group variability. bca can be interpreted as the ca on amino acid usage. we used bca in this study to investigate the amino acid usage pattern in different coronaviruses.the grand average of hydropathy (gravy) score provides an easy way to estimate the hydropathy character of a protein (kyte and doolittle 1982) . it was used in this study as a proxy to identify proteins that are likely to be membrane-bound proteins. the gravy score was calculated in a linear form on codon frequencies as:where a i is the coefficient for a particular amino acid (provided by data exp in seqinr package (charif and lobry 2007) ) encoded by codon i, f i correspond to the relative frequency of codon i.a total of 3,076 individual gene sequences passed the filtering criteria and were included in this study. viral sequences from three different species (middle east respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (mersr-cov), betacoronavirus 1, sars-related coronavirus (sarsr-cov)) were the three most dominant species (see supplementary fig. s1 ) in the filtered dataset. four conserved protein sequence encoding regions of betacoronavirus were analysed separately. the median lengths of the studied sequence regions were 21,237 nt for orf1ab gene, 4,062 nt for spike gene, 660 nt for membrane gene, and 1,242 nt for nucleocapsid gene. spike gene has the lowest average and median g þ c contents among these four genes (median: 37.45%, 37.31%, 42.60%, and 47.22% for orf1ab, spike, membrane, and nucleocapsid, respectively). the gþc contents of the orf1ab and spike genes were found distributed in bi-modal patterns, and the g þ c contents of sars-cov-2 were found located at the lesser half of the data of these two genes. the g þ c contents for membrane and nucleocapsid genes of studied viral sequences were distributed in unimodal pattern (fig. 1a) .the overall amino acid and codon usage of the dataset are plotted in an ascending order (fig. 2) . we observed that leucine and valine were the two most frequently used amino acids in the four studied genes, while tryptophan, histidine, and methionine were the three least used ones. we also found that codons ending with cytosine or guanine were generally less frequent than the codons ending with adenine or thymine. this pattern of uneven usage in synonymous codons is in accordance with the g þ c content distribution results (codons ending with guanine or cytosine were less frequently observed).we found a substantial bias in amino acid usage among these four genes, and this bias is well explained by the hydropathy of the encoded proteins (collectively results from global ca on all the four genes, data not shown). we discovered that the nucleocapsid protein sequences had significantly lower gravy scores when compared with those from other genes, while the membrane protein sequences had highest gravy scores (fig. 1b) .3.2 the overall codon usage of sars-cov-2 in orf1ab, spike, and membrane genes are similar to those of bat and pangolin covs of all the four global correspondence analyses for the four genes, the extracted first factors explained more than 50 per cent of the total variance (see supplementary fig. s2 ). the first two factors in orf1ab global ca represented 67.7 and 16.8 per cent of total inertia. similarly, the first two factors of the spike, membrane, and nucleocapsid global ca represented 51.0 and 18.5 per cent, 52.6 and 20.2 per cent, and 54.8 and 14.2 per cent, respectively, of total inertia. with only these two factors, we could extract 70 per cent of the variability of the overall codon usage for each studied gene. these levels of representations were higher than or similar to those deduced from other codon usage analyses (zhou et al. 2005; suzuki et al. 2008; lobry 2018) .the data points in global ca analysis are shown in different colours that represent different features of the sequences (e.g. viral host or viral species). there were no neighbouring human viruses in the same k-means cluster around sars-cov-2 in ca results of orf1ab, spike, and membrane ( fig. 3 ; supplementary  fig. 3a) , suggesting that the overall codon usage of sars-cov-2 in the orf1ab, spike, or membrane gene was significantly different from those of human betacoronaviruses. in contrast, the nucleocapsid genes of sars coronavirus and sars-cov-2 are found to be relatively similar ( supplementary fig. s3a) . except for the nucleocapsid gene, virus sequences adjacent to the sars-cov-2 were all from bat coronaviruses (coloured in purple in fig. 3) . the five groups of viral sequences (sars-cov-2, betacoronavirus 1, human coronavirus hku 1, mers-cov, and sars-cov) were well separated from each other in three genes, except that in nucleocapsid, sars-cov-2, and sars-cov have similar overall codon usage. we also found that sars-cov codon usage processed more similarity to sars-cov-2 compared with the other three types of human coronaviruses (i.e. yellow point always closest to sars-cov-2 in supplementary fig. s3a ).compared with human coronavirus sequences, the bat coronavirus sequences have more scattered codon usage, even within the same viral species (supplementary fig. s3b ). some viral species in bats formed their own clusters in all four genes (e.g. sarsr-cov). sarsr-cov is a group of coronavirus that can be found in both humans and bats. the codon usage of sars-cov-2 in orf1ab, spike, and membrane were slightly different from the sars-cov clusters and these data points are located in between sarsr-cov and other coronavirus species (e.g. mersr-cov and bat coronavirus hku9, etc.)the global codon usages of bat ratg13 virus were found most similar to sars-cov-2 in orf1ab, spike, and nucleocapsid genes, but not in membrane gene (fig. 3) . in membrane protein, pangolin p1e virus had a more similar codon usage to sars-cov-2 than all the other viruses. we found the similarity in codon usage between pangolin p1e and sars-cov-2 were also high in orf1ab, where p1e was the second closest data point to sars-cov-2. but this is not the case for spike and nucleocapsid genes.we also observed that the codon usage pattern in spike gene was more complex than in other genes. for example, we found that the p1e virus was in different k-means cluster with sars-cov-2, which was not observed in the other three genes. moreover, data points adjacent to the spike gene of sars-cov-2 were coronaviruses not only from bat and human but also from rodent hosts, which is unseen in the other three genes ( fig. 3;  supplementary fig. s4b ). although the ca results suggested relatively novel codon usage pattern, it captured a large proportion of the variance between hosts or virus species. this was supported by significant differences between the ca distances in both host (anosim statistic r: 0.085, p ¼ 0.001) and virus species groups (anosim statistic r: 0.506, p ¼ 0.001).the codon usage from camel, swine, and other coronaviruses were found to be well clustered and relatively distant to sars-cov-2 (see supplementary fig. s4a , c, and d).wca and bca were used to further differentiate codon usage of these betacoronaviruses at synonymous codon usage and amino acid usage levels, respectively. we found that most of the variability in codon usage can be explained at synonymous codon usage level (90.36% for orf1ab gene, 85.29% for spike gene, 83.71% for member gene, and 84.07% for nucleocapsid gene) ( table 1) .results from the bca suggested that the amino acid usage of sars-cov-2 is closely related to bat and human sarsr-covs in all four genes (figs 4b and 5b) . specifically, we discovered that the sars-cov-2 had amino acid usage pattern most similar to bat ratg13 virus, followed by pangolin p1e, bat covvzc45 and bat covzxc21. the sequences of btky72 and bm48-31 were from a more phylogenetically distant clade, and, accordingly, they had relatively distinct amino acid usage to sars-cov-2 as expected in all four studied genes. this result agrees with the result in the full-genome phylogenetic analysis ( supplementary  fig. s5) .the difference between sars-cov-2 and ratg13 at synonymous codon usage level was marginal in orf1ab and nucleocapsid sequences. however, our results suggest the synonymous codon usage patterns in the spike and membrane gene of sars-cov-2 are different from those of its genetically related viruses (i.e. ratg13 and other reference relatives). for example, the pangolin p1e virus was not grouped in the same k-means cluster with sars-cov-2 in spike, and the synonymous codon usage pattern of sars-cov-2 was found to be closer to a cluster of rodent murine coronaviruses at the first two factorial levels (figs 4a and 5a) .further analysis on spike gene, however, suggested that the codon usage of sars-cov-2 and rodent murine coronaviruses were distinct at the third factorial level (supplementary fig.  s6a ). the results show that although ratg13 became the most adjacent to sars-cov-2 when adding the third dimension wca values. our results suggest a complex genomic background in the spike gene of sars-cov-2, which made its synonymous codon usage harder to differentiate from other genomic sequences in our wca analysis (the distances between k-means clusters are smaller). despite the relative proximity between ratg13 and sars-cov-2 at three-dimensional level, they were still at significantly different positions (supplementary fig.  s6a ). it is evident that the synonymous codon usage pattern of sars-cov-2 is distinct from other bat origin coronaviruses. the difference in synonymous codon usage is largely explained by the first factor (more than 50%), and our analysis on codon usages suggest that the first factor maybe highly related to the preferential usage of codons ending with cytosine ( supplementary fig. s7) . we also had similar observation for the membrane gene. our three-dimensional analysis revealed that the synonymous codon usage of sars-cov-2 in membrane was most similar to p1e and covzxc21 (supplementary fig. s6b ). it is worth noting that comparing to ratg13, p1e, and covzxc21 had lower synonymous codon usage similarity to sars-cov-2 in the other three genes.overall, our wca results support a more complex synonymous codon usage background on spike and membrane genes, though we identified unique codon usage patterns of sars-cov-2 on these two genes.codon usage can be affected by many sequence features, including nucleotide composition, dinucleotide composition, amino acid preference, host adaption, etc. (hershberg and petrov 2008; suzuki et al. 2008; gu et al. 2019 ). the codon usages of viral sequences can vary by genes and host origins (jenkins and holmes 2003; wong et al. 2010; cristina et al. 2015) . the bias in codon usage is a unique and distinctive characteristic that can reflect the 'signature' of a genomic sequence. codon usage analyses are often complementary to ordinary sequence alignment-based analyses that focus on the genetic distance at nucleotide level, whereas codon usage analyses enable capturing signals at different sequence parameters. therefore, codon usage bias can be another good proxy for identifying unique traits (e.g. virus origin, host origin, or some functions of proteins) of a genome. the goal of this study was to investigate the codon usage bias of betacoronaviruses. by studying the codon usages of these viruses in a systematic manner, we identified viral sequences carrying traits similar to those of sars-cov-2, which provided useful information for studying the host origin and evolutionary history of sars-cov-2. the codon usage of different genes in betacoronaviruses is very different. the g þ c content, especially the gc3 content is known to be influential to the codon usage of some bacteria and viruses (perriere 2002; gu et al. 2004; woo et al. 2010 ). the gc3 content has pronounced effects on our wca analysis of the orf1ab and spike genes. the gc3 content was found correlated with high wca values on the first factor of orf1ab. in contrast, codons ending with cytosine had lower factorial values in the spike gene analysis ( supplementary fig. s7 ). the g þ c contents in membrane and nucleocapsid genes were less suppressed (fig. 1a) . this can be partly explained by the fact that membrane and nucleocapsid are two genes with shorter lengths which may limit the flexibilities for mutation or codon usage adaptation. in addition to global ca analysis, the application of wca and bca can eliminate the effects caused by amino acid compositions and synonymous codon usage, respectively. these alternative analytical tools were important because the amino acid sequences are expected to be more conserved such that they can preserve biological functions of the translated genes. in contrast, mutations at synonymous level tend to be more frequent, as most of these codon alternatives do not affect the biological function of a protein.of all the existing genomes in the dataset, ratg13 best matched the overall codon usage pattern of the sars-cov-2. although the sars-cov-2 had amino acid usage similar to bat and human sarsr-covs, the synonymous codon usages between them were relatively different, which indicates similar protein characteristics but maybe different evolutionary histories. the codon usage of bat coronaviruses is more scattered than coronaviruses of other hosts. this result agrees with the fact that bat is a major host reservoir of coronavirus (calisher et al. 2006) , thus it harbours coronaviruses with more complex genomic backgrounds.sars-cov-2 was first identified in human, but its codon usage pattern is very different from those of other human betacoroanviruses ( supplementary fig. s3a ). in fact, the codon usage at both the amino acid level and synonymous level denote that the orf1ab gene in sars-cov-2 had closest relationship to sarsr-cov, especially ratg13. the covzx45 and covzxc21 had similar amino acid usage but relatively different synonymous codon usage to sars-cov-2 (fig. 4) . besides bat-origin sarsr-cov, the pangolin p1e also had similar codon usage to sars-cov-2 both at amino acid and synonymous codon levels. the result in orf1ab is in accordance with the full-genome phylogenetic analysis ( supplementary fig. s5) , showing a close relationship between sars-cov-2 and ratg13 by the overall backbone of the genome.the s protein is responsible for receptor binding which is important for viral entry. the genetic variability is extreme in spike gene (gallagher and buchmeier 2001) , and this highly mutable gene may possess more information about recent evolution history. in our results, the synonymous codon usage of sars-cov-2 in spike gene was distinct from those of p1e and other phylogenetic relatives (fig. 4a) , which was not observed in orf1ab or nucleocapsid gene. although the codon usage in spike of sars-cov-2, ratg13, and p1e were similar at amino acid level, the difference at synonymous codon usage level indicates that they are unlikely to share a very recent common ancestor. it is more likely that sars-cov-2, ratg13, and p1e might have undergone different evolution pathways for a certain period of time. the amino acid usage of sars-cov-2 in membrane was clustered with bat sarsr-cov, however, the synonymous codon usage of sars-cov-2 was still distinct to these bat coronaviruses. notably, in membrane gene, pangolin p1e had a more similar synonymous codon usage to sars-cov-2 than ratg13. these findings suggest that there may be different selection forces between genes. our result supports different evolutionary background or currently unknown host adaption history in sars-cov-2. the codon usage of sars-cov-2 in nucleocapsid gene was similar to bat sarsr-cov both at amino acid level and synonymous level, suggesting that no highly significant mutation happened in this gene.codon usage can be shaped by many different selection forces, including the influence from host factors. some researchers have hypothesized that the codon usage in sars-cov-2 maybe directly correlated to the codon usage of its host (ji et al. 2020) . however, our recent study on influenza a viruses implied that these may not be the most influential factors shaping the codon usage of a viral genome (gu et al. 2019 ). our analysis took advantage of the existing genomes of betacoronavirus to study the complex host effect on codon usage, which warrants more accurate but relatively conserved estimation. however, we also understand that the results from codon usage analysis cannot be deterministic or direct evidence revealing the origin of the virus. as the number of available genomic data is currently limited, and virus with high (>99%) genetic similarity to sars-cov-2 was yet to be identified, we cannot draw a conclusion on the origin of sars-cov-2 at this stage. another potential limitation of the study maybe from the ca method itself. although ca have been widely applied in codon usage studies in many different organisms, the codon usage data are usually not independent observations. the phylogenetic relationship among observations make it hard to differentiate source of the codon usage bias, as the codon usage bias may both affected by selective pressures and descent relationships. unfortunately, there is currently no established method for adjusting phylogenetic relationships in ca analysis in codon usage data, an alternative method addressing the above concern is needed.supplementary data are available at virus evolution online.10 distance in ca 11 the χ distance 1 between sequences (rows) was calculated as: where codons all encode for the same amino acid . since the emergence of the outbreak in the chinese city of wuhan in late 2019, the novel coronavirus disease has spread widely to become a global pandemic, with over 5,000,000 individuals infected worldwide and resulting in the death of over 300,000 individuals (as of 26 may 2020). 1 the causative virus, sars-cov-2, is a member of the genus betacoronavirus. during its transmission, the virus has differentiated into at least 10 clades globally and is continuously evolving. 2 this has implications in genetic epidemiology, surveillance, contact tracing and the development of long term strategies for mitigation of this disease. 3 the recent availability of whole-genome sequences of the sars-cov-2 from across the world deposited in public databases provides an unprecedented opportunity to understand the dynamics and evolution of the pathogen. the availability of genomic data in a public repository like gisaid 4 also provides wider access to the resources and enables researchers across the globe to address pertinent hypotheses. likewise, this gave us a unique scope to understand the introduction, evolution, and spread of the virus in india and understand it in the context of global clades circulating across the world.in this manuscript, we report the sequences of sars-cov-2 isolates predominantly sampled from the state of telangana. further, we systematically analysed the phylogenetic clusters of genomes from india and characterised a unique cluster of sequences (clade i/a3i), which could not be classified into any of the previously annotated global clades. isolates forming this cluster were predominant in a number of states and potentially characterized by a shared set of four genetic variants. the cluster potentially arose from a single outbreak followed by a rapid spread across the country. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive report of the novel and predominant cluster of sequences from india and suggests its distribution beyond india in many countries in the middle east, south asia, and oceania.sample collection and rna purification samples were collected and processed as per the guidelines of the institutional ethics committee. nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal swabs collected in viral transport media were used for rna isolation. samples were anonymised by removing all patient identifiers except for gender, age, collection date, and symptoms where applicable. sars-cov-2 nucleic acids were isolated from 300 µl viral transport media using the qiaamp viral rna mini kit (qiagen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. samples were eluted in 50 µl nuclease-free water and stored in -80°c until further use.shotgun rna sequencing 100ng of rna was taken as input for rrna depletion using truseq ribozero gold kit (illumina). following rrna depletion and fragmentation, rna was converted to cdna and processed for ngs library prep using truseq stranded total rna library prep kit (illumina). library profiles were analyzed using bioanalyzer and sequenced on illumina novaseq 6000 at a depth of 30 million reads per sample.a modified version of the ncov-2019 sequencing protocol as described by josh quick, 2020 was used to amplify the viral genome. 5 briefly, a combination of random hexamers, anchored oligo(dt)23, and the 98r primer from ncov-2019/v3 primer set were used to synthesize the first strand according to the reaction conditions mentioned in the protocol. next, a 3-step multiplex pcr was carried out to amplify the viral genome using ncov-2019/v3 primer pools 1 and 2. the~400 bp amplicons thus obtained in two pools were combined, purified using agencourt ampure xp beads (beckman coulter) and eluted in 30 µl elution buffer (qiagen). around 100 ng of purified amplicons were used for library preparation. dna libraries were prepared using either the qiaseq fx dna library kit (qiagen) or nextera dna flex library prep kit (illumina) according to the manufacturer's protocol. paired-end sequencing (2x150bp) was performed on the novaseq 6000 (illumina) with a targeted depth of 2 million reads per sample (~20,000x coverage).raw image data was basecalled using bcl2fastq v2.20 with --no-lane-splitting option enabled. qc of the fastq files was performed using fastqc v0.11.7, and adaptors/poor quality bases were trimmed using trimmomatic. 6 , 7 reads were aligned to the reference genome mn908947.3 using hisat2. 8 consensus sequence from the bam file was derived using seqtk and bcftools. 9 samtools depth command was used to calculate the coverage across the genome, with the options -a and -d 50000. 10 the sequences were deposited in gisaid. the complete list of accessions is detailed in supplementary data 1.the datasets of indian sars-cov-2 genomes deposited in gisaid (till 25 may 2020) were used for the analysis. the samples, sample annotations, originating, and submitting institutions are listed in supplementary data 2. further 10 high-quality genomes from each of the 10 clades respectively as annotated by nextstrain were retrieved from gisaid and used in the analysis.a stringent quality criteria was employed for considering the genomes for evaluation of the nucleotide substitution rates, molecular clock, and phylogenetic clustering, as these would be sensitive to the quality of genomes. for this, the individual samples were systematically aligned to the wuhan-hu-1 reference genome (nc_045512) using emboss needle. 11 samples which had ns > 1% and/or gaps > 1% of the sequence length and/or degenerate bases were removed from the analysis. similarly, if a submitting laboratory had >90% samples annotated as low quality, all the data from the laboratory was removed from the analysis. samples having an ambiguous date of collection were also removed from the analysis. after the initial high-quality analysis, all genomes originating from india irrespective of the quality criteria were considered for computation of the proportions of clades in each of the states.a compendium of problematic genomic loci was compiled from a previous study and from the protocol specified by nextstrain. 12, 13 these positions were masked in all the genomes. this compendium included 36 variants and is available as supplementary data 3.phylogenetic analysis of the samples was performed as detailed previously following the standard protocol for analysis of sars-cov-2 genomes provided by nextstrain. 13 , 14 the sequences were clustered using augur, the phylodynamic pipeline provided by nextstrain. 15 the sequences were aligned against the wh1 reference genome using mafft and spurious variant positions were masked from the alignment. 16 the initial phylogenetic tree was constructed using iqtree following the augur tree implementation. 17 the raw tree was further processed with augur to construct a timetree, annotate ancestral traits, infer mutations, and identify clades. the resulting tree was viewed using nextstrain.most recent common ancestor the substitution rate of ncov-2 was estimated using beast v1.10.4 following a methodology described previously. 18, 19 the masked alignment file was used as input to estimate a strict molecular clock and a coalescent growth rate model (exponential growth). mcmc was run for 50 million steps and burn-in was adjusted to attain a suitable effective sample size (ess).times to the most recent common ancestor (tmrca) for the individual clusters were also computed by bayesian coalescent analysis using beast. all runs were executed using the hky+γ substitution model with gamma-distributed rate variation (gamma categories=4), a strict molecular clock and a coalescent growth rate model. mcmc was run for steps as described above. the log output of each mcmc run was analysed in tracer v1.7.1. 20 the priors used for each parameter in the analysis are given in supplementary data 4.the variants were also evaluated for the functional consequences using the sorting intolerant from tolerant (sift). 21 sift prediction database for sars-cov-2 was built using the genome annotations for the wh1 reference genome (nc_045512). a sift score of 0.0 to 0.05 was interpreted to have a deleterious effect while scores in the range 0.05 to 1.0 were predicted to be tolerated. the functional effects of protein variants identified in the clades were assessed using the provean web server, using the protein sequences of the wuhan-hu-1 genome as reference and a default threshold value of -2.5. 22 additionally, phylop conservation scores and base-wise gerp rejected substitutions scores (rs scores) for the variants were also computed. 23, 24 sites having positive phylop scores are predicted to be conserved, while negative scores are indicative of fast-evolving sites. positive gerp scores were considered indicative of a site under evolutionary constraint, while negative scores indicate neutrally evolving sites. the variants were also checked for overlaps with immune epitope predictions as given on ucsc genome browser for sars-cov-2.the samples sequenced encompass 64 genomes in total, majorly collected from the state of telangana. the age of the patients ranged from 10-73 years, with >80% (54 out of 64) within the age bracket of 20-60 years (fig s1a) . a total of 61 samples were sequenced using an amplicon-based approach with a target of~2 million paired-end reads per sample. we could achieve an average coverage of >1000x in all cases, with a uniform representation from all amplicons (fig s1b top, s1c ). 3 samples were sequenced using a shotgun sequencing approach and had an average coverage of approximately 100x, however, the coverage across the genome was uniform (fig s1b, bottom) . the samples and metadata for the isolates sequenced and deposited in the public domain are summarised in supplementary data 1a total of 361 genome sequences of the sars-cov-2 were available for analysis as of 25th may 2020 from india including the genomes sequenced by our group. after stringent analysis of the sequence quality and removal of all sequences which did not meet the quality criteria, the dataset resulted in a total of 213 genomes submitted from 7 institutions (including 55 out of our 64 genomes). supplementary data 2 summarises the genomic data considered for the analysis, submitting institutions, quality criteria used for inclusion/exclusion, and the acknowledgements.the genomes isolated from india were found to be classified under 5 clusters. 4 of these clusters are known clades identified by nextstrain: a2a, a3, b, and b4. 13 the first and the major cluster encompassed 133 (62%) of genomes which fell into the a2a clade of the sars-cov-2 genome. the clade was represented by samples derived from multiple states across the country including gujarat, west bengal, maharashtra, tamil nadu, and telangana.the second-largest cluster consisted of 62 genomes (29%). this cluster of sequences could not be classified into any of the 10 clade sequences defined by nextstrain. 13 we further evaluated the nucleotide compositions which define each of the 10 clusters/clades worldwide and compared this to the nucleotide composition of the clade in question. our analysis suggests that the nucleotide compositions which define the 10 clades were absent in the clade of question. this cluster was found to have diverged from the a1a and a3 clades and most, but not all of the sequences shared a variant (l3606f in orf1a) with members of the a3 and a1a clades. we propose to call this the a3i clade in cognisance of this fact. to avoid potential conflict with the nomenclature followed by nextstrain, we, therefore, define this cluster of sequences as clade i/a3i, for the unique occurrence as a dominant cluster amongst sars-cov-2 genome sequences from india and also since this clade is largely formed by sequences from india.the other clusters encompassed the a3, b4, and b clades with 13, 3, and 1 genomes each falling into the respective clusters. figure 1 summarises the different phylogenetic clusters of the genomes from india. systematic analysis of members of the cluster revealed that a set of unique genetic variants defined the core cluster. a discriminant analysis was performed for all variants in any genome defined by the cluster of sequences. a unique combination of four variants, c6312a, c13730t, c23929t, and c28311t was found to be shared by a majority of members of the cluster. a total of 60 genomes of the 62 genomes (96.8%) in the cluster shared the combination of variants. this unique combination of variants was shared by none of the other genomes which were assigned to any other clade. we further analysed the global datasets for identifying the genomes which displayed matches for 4/4 variants which defined the clade i/a3i. our prospective search retrieved a total of 21 high-quality genomes ( supplementary data 5 ). of the retrieved genomes, the largest number of genomes originated from singapore which had 5 genomes and constituted 8% of the high-quality genomes from singapore. the other genomes originated from a number of countries including australia, brazil, brunei, canada, china, gambia, guam, philippines, saudi arabia, slovenia, and taiwan. the members in the cluster, however, contributed to a much smaller proportion of the clades/clusters identified in the respective countries.of these, 4 were sampled from a date earlier than the earliest sample of this cluster from india and were from australia, brazil, canada, and saudi arabia.mutation rates were calculated for the indian sequences using beast, with the wh1 genome as the root. our analysis suggests that the substitution rate is 1.64 × 10 -3 (95% hpd 1.41 × 10 -3 -1.88 × 10 -3 ) substitutions per site per year for the entire indian sars-cov-2 genomes put together. this also confirms the estimates previously made. 25 the substitution rate was also computed for the individual clades. the gene-wise substitution rates were also similarly calculated for the major clusters. the analysis suggests that the i/a3i clade has a nucleotide substitution rate of 1.4 x 10 -3 variants per site per year compared to the estimate of 1.65 x 10 -3 variants per site per year for the prevalent a2a clade and 1.64 x 10 -3 variants per site per year for all the high quality genomes from india analysed.the nucleotide substitution rate suggests that the evolution of the i/a3i clade is largely determined by changes in the structural proteins -nucleocapsid (n) and envelope (e) genes, compared to the a2a, the globally predominant clade, which is determined by changes in the spike (s) and membrane (m) genes (table 1) . table 1 nucleotide substitution rates of the different structural protein genes and genome-wide across the different clusters and clades in india. the estimates for b and b4 were not computed since the clades had only 3 and 1 genomes respectively from india.the date of the most recent ancestor for the dataset of all indian sars-cov-2 genomes, with wh1 genome sequence included, was computed using beast. the median tmrca was found to be 11 december 2019 (95% hpd 26 november to 25 december), confirming the previous estimates of the origin of the epidemic in wuhan city of china. 26 tmrca for the i/a3i clade, as well as the a2a clade, which constituted the majority of samples, was also computed. the clade a2a, which is the predominant clade in india had a tmrca of 2nd jan 2020 (95% hpd interval 13 dec 2019 -22 jan 2020), while the clade i/a3i had a tmrca of 8 feb 2020 (95% hpd interval 17 jan 2020 -25 feb 2020).of the four variants which characterise the clade i/a3i, three of the variants caused an amino acid change (non-synonymous). additionally, all variants which defined the other clades were compiled. the nonsynonymous variants were analysed for potential functional consequences using the sorting intolerant from tolerant (sift) and protein variant effect analyser (provean). 21 , 22 sift prediction database for sars-cov-2 was built using the genome annotations for the wh1 reference genome (nc_045512). additionally, phylop and gerp conservation scores were also computed for the variants. 23, 24 the variants and their respective predictions are summarised in table 2 .majority of the variants which defined other clades were predicted to be neutral by provean, with the exception of g251v which defines the a1a clade. three variants which define clade i/a3i, c6312a, c13730t and c28311t resulted in amino acid changes with potentially deleterious functional consequences as predicted by sift and mapped to quite conserved genomic loci in the sars-cov-2 genome ( table 2 ) . one of these variants, a97v in the rdrp protein (corresponds to a88v in orf1b) is located in its niran domain, which is suggested to be important in rna binding and nucleotidylation activity. 27 both sift and provean analyses (table 2) suggest that the effect of this mutation is deleterious in nature, however, as both alanine and valine are hydrophobic amino acids, the exact effect of the mutation needs to be experimentally validated. of notable significance is the p13l variant (c28311t) in the nucleocapsid protein which is required for the viral entry into the cells. the variant maps to the idr domain of the n protein and sift predicts the variant to be deleterious, though the provean analysis categorized it as a neutral mutation ( table 2) .two of the variants c6312a in orf1a and c13730t in orf1b also mapped to immune epitope predictions (hla-a0201 binding peptides) from netmhc 4.0 available on ucsc genome browser and as listed on ucsc genome browser for sars-cov-2. 28 the potential consequences of the variants in the immune response could not be ascertained. the presence of a short tree of clade i/a3i with divergence from a single point suggests a single point of introduction. 29 the single point of divergence also suggests that the origin and spread of the cluster were possibly from a single outbreak (figure 3 ) . the clustering of samples in feb 2020 suggests a rapid spread spanning multiple regions across the country. the first sequence from the cluster in india was gmc-kn443/2020 (accession id  epi_isl_431103 genomic evolution coupled with the appropriate tools like genome sequencing provides a unique opportunity to understand the spread and evolution of pathogens. 30, 31 the recent emergence of covid-19 as a global pandemic and the emergence of the open data for sars-cov-2 genomes from across the globe facilitated by genomic databases like genbank and gisaid has truly opened up new opportunities to understand the pathogen and its spread and evolution at an unprecedented rate. 4, 32 whole-genome sequencing of sars-cov-2 has also been extensively used in understanding epidemics at a macro-level as well as at micro-levels, at hospitals. 33 in this report, we describe a distinct cluster of sequences from genomes of sars-cov-2 sequenced and deposited from multiple laboratories across india, which we classify as the i/a3i clade. this distinct cluster could not be classified into any of the 10 clade annotations as described by nextstrain, and was characterized by a unique combination of four variants which was shared by over 92% of the isolates falling in the cluster. the cluster was predominantly found in genomes from india; though additional members could also be found from genomes deposited in other countries, they form a minor proportion of the genomes from the respective countries. the indian genomes constituted~63% of the global genomes for this cluster.in-depth analysis of the genome cluster suggests a comparable rate of nucleotide substitutions with other predominant clades, though a gene-wise estimate of substitution suggests a distinct mode of evolution, driven by the nucleocapsid (n) and envelope (e) genes, and sparing of the spike (s) gene in contrast to predominant diversity in the spike (s) and membrane protein (m) genes in a2a clade, the globally predominant clade. 34 however, it has not escaped our attention that host genetic factors could modulate the evolution of the virus genome, and without large-scale host-genomic studies, the causal relationships cannot be conclusively established.the cluster suggests a potential single introduction in february, followed by a country-wide spread, mostly affecting the south indian states as evidenced by the tmrca as well as the short cluster. our analysis suggests that the clade i/a3i was represented in almost all states from which genomes are available, barring a few. members of the clade i/a3i formed the predominant class of isolates from the states of tamil nadu, telangana, maharashtra, and delhi and the second largest in membership in bihar, karnataka, uttar pradesh, west bengal, gujarat, and madhya pradesh.put together, the cluster of genomes (clade i/a3i) forms a distinct cluster, predominantly found amongst indian sars-cov-2 genomes, with limited representation outside the region.to the best of our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive study characterizing the distinct and predominant cluster of sars-cov-2 in india. this report also exemplifies the fact that timely and open access to genomic data can provide unique insights into the genetic epidemiology of pathogens.rkm, dts and vs conceptualized and designed the study. sb and pm processed the sequencing data. sb, pm, and ps performed sequence data analysis and visualization. bj performed the analysis for phylogenetic clustering, molecular characterization and quantification of relatedness. sk, lz, ss and ng conducted the experiments. dts, vs and bj prepared the manuscript with inputs from rkm. all authors read and approved the manuscript.authors declare no conflict of interest.an online and updated resource for sars-cov-2 genomes from india, their clade assignments and distribution across the country is available at http://clingen.igib.res.in/genepi/phylovis/objectives severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) emerged in wuhan, china, in december 2019 and has been rapidly spreading worldwide although the causal relationship among mutations and the features of sars-cov-2 such as rapid transmission, pathogenicity, and tropism, remains unclear, our results of genomic mutations in sars-cov-2 may help to interpret the interaction between genomic characterization in sars-cov-2 and infectivity with the host methods a total of 4,254 genomic sequences of sars-cov-2 were collected from the global initiative on sharing all influenza data (gisaid) multiple sequence alignment for phylogenetic analysis and comparative genomic approach for mutation analysis were conducted using molecular evolutionary genetics analysis (mega), and an in-house program based on perl language, respectively results phylogenetic analysis of sars-cov-2 strains indicated that there were 3 major clades including s, v, and g, and 2 subclades (g 1 and g 2) there were 767 types of synonymous and 1,352 types of non-synonymous mutation orf1a, orf1b, s, and n genes were detected at high frequency, whereas orf7b and e genes exhibited low frequency in the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of the s gene, 11 non-synonymous mutations were observed in the region adjacent to the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) binding site conclusion it has been reported that the rapid infectivity and transmission of sars-cov-2 associated with host receptor affinity are derived from several mutations in its genes without these genetic mutations to enhance evolutionary adaptation, species recognition, host receptor affinity, and pathogenicity, it would not survive it is expected that our results could provide an important clue in understanding the genomic characteristics of sars-cov-2genome-wide identification and characterization of point mutations in the sars-cov-2 genomesevere acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) emerged in wuhan, china, in late december 2019.since then, it has rapidly spread across the world, and was finally declared as a public health emergency of international determining host tropism and transmission capacity [3] [4] [5] . the s protein is cleaved into 2 subunits (s1 and s2). the s1 subunit directly recognizes and attaches to human receptor ace2, while s2 fuses the host cell membrane with viral membranes allowing entry of sars-cov-2 [6] . in general, rna viruses like sars-cov-2 undergo rapid mutation, enabling evolutionary and genetic diversity which result in alterations such as viral transmissibility, receptor affinity, host tropism, and pathogenicity.in recent years, several studies based on mutation analysis of sars-cov-2 genome have attempted to understand phylogenetic relationships, host infectivity, human-to-human transmission, viral tropism, and pathogenicity of sars-cov in humans. firstly, the comparative evolutionary diversity in point mutations (synonymous-non-synonymous mutations) are suggestive that sars-cov-2 should to be classified into 3 major clades (s, g, and v) and other clades according to amino acid changes [7] [8] [9] . secondly, the high affinity and stable structure of rbd/ace2 have been associated with amino acid variations in the rbd such as the high affinity group (n354d, d364y, v367f, and w436r) [10] , and the high ace2-binding affinity and stability group (484-ngvegfn-490, q496n, and q496y) [11] . thirdly, the deletion of 382 nucleotides towards the 3' end of the viral genome may have an impact on viral phenotype [12] , and the qtqtn motif adjacent to the polybasic cleavage site (rrar, chain of amino acids) at the bridge between s1 and s2 may be related to host adaptation [13] . in addition, insertion of the rrar which has been well known to determine high or low pathogenicity in avian influenza virus may be important in determining transmissibility and pathogenesis of sars-cov-2 [14] . finally, primer-template mismatch has been known to affect the stability and functionality of polymerase.in particular, the primer-template mismatch located in the primer 3' end region can interfere with polymerase active sites, and this may have a significant impact on the accuracy of the molecular diagnosis using primers or probes [15] . therefore, we analyzed the mutations of the sars- the set of 4,254 sars-cov-2 genome sequences and acknowledgment files were downloaded from the epicov browser (https://epicov.org/epi3) of the gisaid [16] . the https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/realtime-rt-pcr-assays-for-the-detection-of-sars-cov-2-institutpasteur-paris.pdf of the institut pasteur in paris (table 1) .phylogenetic analysis was carried out with 178 representative that a clade can be also determined by one or more mutations.to figure 3 ) (figures 4 and 5 ).orf1a and orf1b encode replicase polyproteins essential component of the viral rna replication. therefore, conserved structure of them have been the focus of antiviral drugs [18] .orf1a and orf1b is an important component for application and translation and has a functionally conserved region known as high sequence similarity [19] . the conserved region of although it is not understood how these mismatches affect the stability of primer-template complexes, it is necessary to determine the interrelationships. on the other hand, the rrar, which is located between s1 and s2 (681-685 amino acid position of the s gene), may be related to the pathogenicity of sars-cov-2. therefore, it is might be inferred from the mutations in the rbd and the polybasic cleavage site in the s gene that the mutations will provide important clues to understanding immunity and pathogenicity of sars-cov-2. we identified 109 types of synonymous and 182 types of non-synonymous mutation in the s gene ( figure   7 ). d614g is a major non-synonymous mutation in g clade and accounts for 1,764 (13.0%) in a total of 13,537 non-synonymous mutations. above all, it is located in the s1-s2 junction region near the polybasic cleavage site, but its biochemical and structural relationships with ace2 has been unclear so far. in [4] , and the reference [14] , respectivity.non-synonymous synonymous within the zone (443-510 amino acid position of the s gene) adjacent to ace2. in particular, the v483a and g476s mutations have previously been reported to be related to human receptorbinding affinity in mers and sars-cov research [20, 21] . we detected a r682q mutation from the rrar, where arginine residue was replaced by glutamine residue. the arginine residue is not only electrically charged but also strongly basic, while the glutamine residue is polar uncharged. therefore, it is necessary to study how this biochemical difference may affect functional and structural changes of the proteins of s1 or s2. according to a recent study, the fact that a deletion of the qtqtn amino acid motif near the polybasic cleavage site is related to adaptation of sars-cov-2 has been reported.hence, we tried to confirm whether some deletions occurred in this region (675-679 amino acid position of the s gene). we in the e gene known to be involved in viral budding along with the m gene, we confirmed a relatively small number of mutations in it. this means that there are high conserved regions, so it seems reasonable to infer that the preserved sequence is important to encode protein participating in viral reproduction. like the region of rdrp, the e gene has been also used to design primers and probes for the diagnosis of sars-cov-2. we identified 10 types of synonymous and 12 types of non-synonymous mutation in the e gene ( figure 8 ).of these mutations, 7 primer-template mismatch mutations from the non-synonymous mutation is overall more frequent to avoid the variable hotspot regions as much as possible.our results about genomic mutations of sars-cov-2 strains may be helpful for interpreting the potential relationships of pathogenicity, infectivity, and transmission between sars-cov-2 and human host.a novel corona virus (sars-cov-2) causes acute respiratory disease (coronavirus disease 2019; , which was initially found in china but now it is spread all over the world (guo et al., 2020) . the total number of covid-19 cases diagnosed so far exceeds 2.7 million worldwide as on 24 th april, 2020 with the number almost reaching 24,700 in india while the genome sequence of sars-cov-2 is 96.2% identical to a batcov ratg13, it shares with 79.5% similarity to sars-cov. based on this virus genome sequence analysis and evolutionary analysis, bat has been suspected to be the natural host of the virus origin.since bats are not available at seafood markets of wuhan, it is suspected that virus spread might have occurred through alternative intermediate hosts like turtles, and snakes (guo et al., 2020) .since then, a total of 10,478 viral isolates have been sequenced and deposited online (https://www.gisaid.org/). genome sequence analysis of viral genome between countries would help to understand the origin and also the severity of the disease process itself. there are only two reports of sequencing of very few numbers of indian isolates of sars-cov-2 (yadav et al., 2020; sardar et al., 2020) . the diagnosis of covid-19 is largely overseen by indian council of medical research (icmr), government of india with diagnosis being carried out using commercial diagnostic kits in icmr approved government and private facilities (https://www.icmr.nic.in/).to identify the origin of indian isolates of sar-cov-2 virus, we examined the phylogenetic data from database features of global initiative on sharing all influenza data (gisaid; https://www.gisaid.org/). although the sequence information is available from 11,919 sars-cov-2 isolates from all continents, the phylogenetic data from 3123 samples, which included 4 indian isolates, is only available at gisaid website because of limitation with respect to single view performance and legibility reasons (figure 1; supplementary   figure 1 ). it is of our interest to note that there are two major clusters-asian cluster represented by purple and related colours and european cluster represented by greenish yellow. the indian samples, represented by arrows (black and white) cluster with both asian cluster and european clusters. it is interesting to note that while the indian samples with black arrows were isolated during january 2020, the other two samples with white arrows were isolated during march 2020 (see more details later).further to precisely map the origin of indian sars-cov-2 isolates, we carried out an independent phylogenetic analysis using a selected set of samples representing most regions and countries where covid-19 infection rate is high. our selection criteria also considered the fact that more genomes are sequenced in usa, europe, east asia and oceania compared to other parts of the world. hence, we chose a set of 449 samples derived from usa (75), europe (80), china (75), east asia (64), south asia (41), oceania (75), middle east (11) andindia (28). the analysis shows interesting features about the possible source of indian sars-cov-2 samples (figure 2; supplementary figure 2 ). in particular, the indian samples are . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. (yadav et al., 2020) .the date of sample collection probably coincides with the time of disease occurrence.the collection dates of different indian samples provide some hint at the origin and spread of virus. the first two indian viral isolates that were detected during january 2020 from patients who travelled from wuhan, china showed more similarity with china/east asia viral isolates.this conclusion is well supported by the fact that the initial outbreak of sars-cov-2 virus in wuhan happened during december 2019 (zhou et al., 2020) . the remaining twenty-six indian viral isolates, which were collected during march 2020, show more similarity with samples from europe, middle east, south asia and oceania regions. the one month delay in the occurrence of majority of indian covid-19 cases probably indicate the time taken for the virus . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 to spread from china to other countries from where the indian travellers would have contracted the virus.it is interesting to note that two samples (epi_isl_420551 and epi_isl_420555), that are seen with european cluster in figure 1 , grouped with the cluster b, which is enriched with european and few numbers of middle east/south asian samples as per figure 2 . similarly, other two samples (epi-isl_413522 and epi_isl_413523) (collected from patients who had travel history from wuhan, china) that grouped with samples from china were also identified to be associated with the major asian cluster in figure 1 . thus, the results of our independent phylogenetic analysis (as per figure 2 ) are matching to that of analysis done by gisaid thus increasing the confidence in our findings.according to specific variations in different viral proteins, gisaid identified three clades of sars-cov-2 namely g, v and s (elbe and bucklan-merrett, 2017) . g clade is characterized by d614g in s protein and largely encompasses sequences from europe. v clade is characterized by g251v in orf3 and mostly includes asian and european sequences. s clade is characterized by the presence of l84s in orf8 and mostly comprises sequences from north america. recently, a new clade of sars-cov-2 carrying v378i in orf1ab has been linked to travellers returning from iran to australia (eden et al., 2020) . we then investigated the genomes of indian sars-cov-2 viruses to find out the association between indian samples and different clades. this analysis revealed several interesting facts (figure 3) . we found indian samples does not belong to either clade v or s except the sample epi-isl_413522, which is one of samples derived from patient with recent travel history from wuhan. the other indian sample (epi_isl_413523) who also had travel history from wuhan does not seem to belong to any of these clades suggesting that this virus may be more similar to original wuhan-china virus. however, the origin of these two viral isolates needs to more investigation. most indian samples are found to classify between g and i clades. one set of thirteen indian samples . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 (n=13) that belong to the cluster b, which is enriched with european samples as per figure 2, segregate into g clade as they carry d614g mutation in s gene. another set of thirteen indian samples (n=13) that belong to the cluster a, which are enriched with oceania samples as per figure 2, segregate into i clade as they carry v378i mutation in orf1ab gene. we have also extended our viral clade analysis to recently submitted indian samples (n=9) from the state of karnataka. due to the fact that these samples are low coverage samples, they could not be included in phylogenetic analysis. however, clade analysis revealed three samples from this karnataka set belongs to g clade, while the status of other samples could not be clearly established (supplementary figure 3) . we conclude from this analysis that indian samples are divided between i and g clades. thus, these results provide additional confirmation to our earlier findings (as per figure 2) that while one set of indian samples in cluster a is more similar to oceania samples, the other set of indian samples in cluster b is more similar to european samples.our finding that indian sars-cov-2 isolates belong to different clades may have important consequences with respect to virus transmission rate and virulence, extend of the disease severity and various other aspects of disease pathogenesis. it has been reported that viruses belonging to different clades may differ in their virulence (brusky, 2020) . for example, the g clade viruses carry glycine (g) corresponding to the codon 614 of s protein instead of aspartic acid (d) in other clades. phylogenetic analysis identified that d614g mutation is originated from ancestral d residue seen in the reference wuhan virus (wu et al., 2020) . this residue is located very close to glycosylation region of the viral spike protein encoded by s gene (anderson et al., 2020) . it has been proposed that mutations in and around glycosylation region may alter viral spike protein structure and hence the membrane fusion process resulting in varied pathogenicity and transmissibility. further, the difference in the death rate of covid-19 patients of east coast vs. west coast of usa is implicated to their difference in their g . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 clade status (brusky, 2020) . there are also many reports that mutations in spike protein of other coronaviruses alter the virulence (krueger et al., 2001; geoghegan and holmes, 2018; ontiveros et al., 2003) .the presence of multiple clades of sars-cov-2 strains in a population may also have serious implications in the accuracy of diagnostic tests that are being employed worldwide.the diagnostic tests based on detection of antibody or quantifying the viral rna genome does not appear to distinguish these variations. consequently, it is important to develop diagnostic kits based on the type(s) of clades prevalent in an area. indeed, it is reported that the serology based rapid tests are ineffective in detecting coivd-19 positive cases in india and elsewhere in the world. the variation created by the presence of different viral clades in a population also needs to be considered seriously in developing vaccines. it has been also proposed that relaxation models of social distancing should consider the presence of one or more types of viral clades (brusky, 2020).collectively, we conclude that the indian sars-cov-2 viruses belong to two major clades (i and g) based on this limited analysis. the probable source of indian sars-cov-2 viruses is countries from europe and oceania regions besides middle east and south asian regions. the possible spread of the sars-cov-2 virus to india through middle east countries from europe and oceania regions cannot be ruled out. both a and b clusters contain samples from middle east countries. in addition, these samples appear to split between i and g clades (supplementary figure 3) . in the absence of the information related to travel/contact history of indian patients, more inference and definite conclusions on the possible origin and source could not be made at present. thus our result also indicate that there is a close connection between source of virus and the countries that are most travelled by indians. the study also . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 highlights the power of rapid viral genome sequencing and public data sharing to improve the detection and management of pandemic diseases such as covid-19. it is important to point out that most countries in america, europe, oceania and east asia were quick in supporting the advanced scientific studies on the virus and disease process itself to develop treatment modalities and preventive vaccines. needless to say that major countries from emerging economies such as brazil and india should support experimental research on sars-cov-2 pathogenesis.certainly, our analysis has clear limitations, the most important one being that we were able to analyse only a small number of indian sars-cov-2 genomes while the number of covid-19 cases increased beyond 20,000. further, lack of travel history of the patients is another lacuna which makes the conclusions not conclusive. hence, it is required that more number of indian isolates of sars-cov-2 needs to be sequenced to confirm these results.nevertheless, our study highlights the need for large-scale community surveillance for sars-cov-2 introductions and the spread. more importantly, this work underscores the power of pathogen genomics to identify epidemiological understanding of the virus and the disease.we have collected 28 genome sequences from indian clinical samples deposited at gisaid. in addition, we also collected another 421 representative genome sequences of samples from usa (75), europe (80), china (75), east asia (64), south asia (41), oceania (75) and middle east (11). the viral sequences having complete and high coverage were alone selected. among indian viral isolates, seven viral genome sequences that belong to passaged virus through cell lines (vero ccl81 isolate p1) were excluded in this study. a total of 28 indian viral genomes were used in this study. however, an additional 9 indian sars-cov-2 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 genomes with low coverage was used only for clade analysis. genome accession and sample data information can be found in "supplymentarydata.xlsx".a total of 449 complete genomes were taken for alignment using mafft version 7.402 at cipres science gateway (miller et al., 2010) . phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood (ml) methods was carried out using iq tree version 1.6.12 (jana et al., 2016) . a reference wuhan isolate, indian and middle east (kuwait and saudi arabia) whole genome sequences were obtained. individual genes namely orf1ab, s, orf3 and orf8 were extracted from the whole genome. obtained genes were aligned using clustal omega algorithm (madeira et al., 2019) and translated to amino acid sequences. the aligned protein coding genes was visualized in bioedit version 7.2.5 (hall et al., 1999) .author approvals: all authors have seen and approved the manuscript, and that it hasn't been accepted or published elsewhere.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 clusters identified by phylogeny analysis. i clade contains v378i marker in the orf1ab region, g clade contains d614g marker in the spike protein (s), v clade contains g251v in orf3 and s clade contains l84s marker in orf8 region. na refers to not applicable; x refers that the samples does not belong either a or b. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020 april 29, . . https://doi.org/10.1101 april 29, /2020 doi: medrxiv preprint karnataka samples . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 history suggests that humanity is always challenged by emerging viruses and viral infections in terms of livelihood and economic progress in a population. the current situation of ongoing pandemic of corona virus disease (covid 19) verily supports that history. the disease came to recognition by the world health organization (who) as a pandemic on 11 th march, 2020 and has caused a global emergency across 210 countries and territories around the world and 2 international conveyances [1] . as of today, 11 th june, 2020 at 18.09 (gmt +6), a confirmed report of 3,295,032 active infected cases with 2% criticality and 421,363 deaths has been found. (https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/). but the disease originated back in december, 2019 in wuhan city, hubei province, china in the form of cluster of pneumonia like symptoms which then quickly transcended the border to spread across the globe within a short span of time [2] .the causative agent behind the infection was first designated as 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) by the world health organization (who) [3] . the novel coronavirus was further renamed to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronovirus-2 or sars-cov-2 because of its genomic similarity of 79.5% and 96% at nucleotide level, respectively with sars-cov and bat coronavirus [4, 5] .through phylogenetic analysis, sars-cov-2 has been categorized under the family coronaviridae and order nidoviralae and has shown an origin in bat as a natural host [6, 7] . the sars-cov-2 is similar to the sars-cov and mers-cov of the same genus betacoronavirus within the same family in terms of infectivity in humans. the latter two viruses caused pandemic situations as well in recent years and were the reasons for thousands of death across the world [8] [9] [10] . as for the structural similarity, the sars-cov-2 contains a positive single stranded rna as its genetic element having a genomic length of around 30 kilobases [11] . the encoded proteins by this genome are structural and non-structural in kind and the major structural proteins are spike (s) glycoprotein, membrane (m) protein, envelope (e) protein, and nucleocapsid (n) protein [12] [13] [14] . especially the exposed parts of these proteins contain domains necessary for infection into the host cells and account for antigenicity. the similarity between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 extends to the structure of spike glycoprotein which may be exploited for a potential vaccine design because the s protein has two major subunits namely s1 and s2 which assist during viral infection into the host cell. s1 subunit contains receptor binding domain (rbd) and n-terminal domain (ntd) where rbd binds to the receptor of the host cell known as angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace2) [15, 16] . the envelope (e) protein also has its role in establishing a series of involvement from pathogenesis to viral assembly by not only interacting with the host cell protein but also maintains a defining connection with all the other structural proteins (m, s, n proteins) of the virus [17] . moreover, the exposed portion of m protein outside the membrane provides us an opportunity to design a suitable epitope-based subunit vaccine.currently, different therapeutic strategies are being utilized by the scientific community to combat this dangerous spread of covid-19, most of which are opted to develop novel drugs or vaccines. chinese traditional drugs named shufengjiedu capsules and lianhua qing wen capsules had been applied to some of the preliminary cases before they were reported to be effective. but no clinical trials to this date have ever proven them to be safe enough [18] . some other drugs such as remdesivir and chloroquine had also been reported to be effective against covid-19 through in-vitro trials. however, no authentic clinical trial has justified such a claim so far [18, 19] .besides, sars-cov-2 is dispersing too fast across almost all the countries of the world and is mutating in an unbelievable manner. due to the high mutation rate in the genome of sars-cov-2 single epitope will not suffice to provide for a successful vaccine; rather, a multiple epitope based vaccine may do the trick here [20] .at the current stage of the pandemic, it will be highly insensible to develop a vaccine through classical approach in vitro that involves identification, isolation and culture of pathogenic viruses. following this particular process will be too expensive and time consuming which is not desirable at all given the circumstances. a very sustainable way to overcome such hurdles would be to design peptide vaccine by genome and proteome analysis of the virus using computational methods. since the genome and proteome sequencing of sars-cov-2 has already been done, it is only rational that we take control measures by making the best out of computation-based analysis to design therapeutic targets. in this study, we explored the s, e, and m proteins of sars-cov-2 by using different in silico tools and servers to predict b-cell and t-cell epitopes to eventually design an effective epitope-based vaccine. the predicted epitopes were analyzed further to check their antigenicity and surface accessibility. epitope-allele interaction was investigated through molecular docking. a phylogenetic analysis was undertaken to identify molecular evolutionary relationship of the selected s, e and m proteins. the study was concluded with the introduction of a properly designed vaccine from the most suitable of epitopes.the fasta format of s, e, and m protein sequences of sars-cov-2 from various geographical areas: australia, china, usa, finland, india, sweden, south korea were retrieved from national center for biotechnology information (ncbi) (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). then, the blast program from ncbi was used to derive the similar sequences against the proteins.the s, e, and m protein sequences of sars-cov-2, sars-cov, mers and common human coronavirus strains (229e, nl63, oc43, and hku1) were targeted for this phylogenetic study. all the sequences of the proteins retrieved from the ncbi blastp result were aligned separately through the clustalw algorithm by utilizing the mega (version 10.0.5) [21] .all the required parameters for the alignment analysis were used as default program in the software. the aligned sequences were then visualized with the jalview (version 2.11.0) [22] for the observation of consensus and conserved sequences.. the phylogenetic trees were built using the neighborjoining tree function and default analysis preferences in mega.epitopes of a protein must be in the exposed regions to mount sufficient immune response. the membrane topology of these proteins was analyzed using tmhmm v2.0 server[23]and was later cross-referenced with the interpro server [24, 25] . the outer membrane regions of these proteins were selected for further analysis.a vaccine candidate must elicit sufficient antigenic response as antigenicity of epitopes play a crucial role to provoke adequate immune response. vaxijen v2.0 server[26]calculates antigenicity depending on physicochemical properties of proteins with the threshold value 0.4 (for viral protein sequence) .b cell epitopes presented on the virus surface proteins are recognized by b lymphocytes to elicit immune response. based on artificial neural network, abcpred v2.0 server [27] [28] [29] [30] predicted the linear b cell epitopes. the epitopes were cross-referenced with immune epitope database (iedb) [31] , which uses amino acid scales and hidden markov models (hmm) as prediction method. moreover, kolaskar and tongaonkarangenicity, parker hydrophilicity prediction tools from iedb were explored to determine the antigenicity and hydrophilicity properties of these selected epitopes.t cell epitopesconsist of a group of amino acids, presented by antigen presenting cell (apc) in the bound form with major histocompatibility (mhc) molecules to mount t cell mediated immune response. prediction of t cell epitopes was performed by using netctl tool, which utilizes mhc binding affinity, proteosomal processing, tap transport [32] [33] [34] . the tool predicts half-maximal inhibitory concentration (ic50) values of epitopes based on artificial neural network (ann) [35, 36] .the lengths for epitopes were set at 9.0 and 15.0 for mhc i molecule and mhc ii molecular, respectively.the three-dimensional structure of targeted t-cell epitopes were modeled by the pep-fold3server [37],a peptide structure predicting tool. the best 3d structure generated by this server was selected as a ligand for docking analysis. molecular docking was performed by the virtual screening tool pyrx[38]through its autodock vina [39, 40] program in order to analyze the interactions among our proposed epitopes and different hla molecules. protein data bank provided most of the pdb files of hla molecules for docking study whereas phyre2 protein prediction server (protein homology/analogy recognition engine v2.0) [41] was used to generate the 3d models of some hla molecules whose pdb structureswere not available in pdb. discovery studio(v4.5) [42]prepared these hla molecules as macromolecules by removing water, non-polar hydrogen and unnecessary molecules.pdbfiles were converted into pdbqt files and the default grid box parameters were maintained with exhaustiveness value 8.the binding interactions of epitope-hla molecules were visualized using ucsf chimera 1.13rc [43] .determination of population coverage for individual is essential as epitopes may exhibit variety in their binding sites during interacting with different hla allele .the iedb population coverage calculation tool [44] was utilized to determine the percentage of people expected to respond to a specific number of mhc-restricted epitopes around the world.one of the most prolific ways to reduce the load of viral diseases is to design novel vaccines [45] [46] [47] [48] . in terms of sars-cov-2, continuous research projects are being held to figure out the biological characteristics, genomics and proteomics and pathophysiology of the virus around the world [49] . immunoinformatics tools have always been a medium to develop multi-epitope based vaccines for some of the dangerous viral diseases such as rhinovirus[50], dengue virus[51],chikungunya virus[52] etc. consistent with that idea, this study aimed at providing for a peptide based vaccine design against sars-cov-2 using different bioinformatics tools by exploring structural proteins of virus namely spike (s) glycoprotein, membrane (m) protein and envelope (e) protein[53, 54]responsible for virulence mechanism and pathogenic pathways. a total of 13 sequences of s protein ( figure s4 ), 13 sequences of m protein ( figure s5 ), and 6 sequences of e protein ( figure s6) were selected for analysis.s, e, and m protein sequences from different strains of mers, sars-cov, sars-cov-2 (table s1&s3) and common human coronavirus, (table s2) were aligned with the phylogenetic tree construction using the built-in inclustalw algorithm in the mega (version 10.0.5).phylogenetic trees represented the ancestral molecular changes, evolutionary history and the molecular evolutionary relationship on account of s, m, and e proteins, respectively. from the phylogenetic analysis of spike glycoprotein from the different strains of mers, sars-cov sars-cov-2 and common human coronaviruses (human coronavirus strains: 229e, nl63, oc43 and hku1), we noticed that their ancestral and evolutionary relationship has been comprehensive and found relatable ( figure s1 ). analysis also showed that both human coronavirus oc43, and hku1 are closely related to mers virus whereas distantly related to the sars and sars-cov-2. on the other hand, human coronavirus nl63, and 229e are closely related to each other. phylogenetic analysis of the membrane proteins ( figure s2 ) of different strains of mers, sars-cov, sars-cov-2 and envelop proteins ( figure s3 ) from diverse strains of mers, sars-cov, sars-cov-2 along with common human coronaviruses strains (229e, nl63, oc43, and hku1) showed that sars-cov and sars-cov-2 are closely related to mers virus whereas oc43, and hku1 strains are closely related, and also comparatively closer to the sars-cov, sars-cov-2, and mers virus rather than the other closely related 229e and nl63 strains. unlikely the ancestral relationship in regard of s and m proteins, analysis showed a different result for e protein that sars-cov and sars-cov-2 are closely related to mers virus whereas human coronavirus 229e and nl63 are closely related, and also related to comparatively closer to the sars-cov, sars-cov-2 and mers rather than the other closely related strain human coronavirus oc43 and hku1. viral infection is facilitated by the outer portion of the domain of viral protein which binds with the receptor proteins of the host cell. so exposed portions of s, e, and m proteins of sars-cov-2 normally offer a large scope to induce antibody production against itself [55, 56] .therefore, it is necessary to design a therapeutic target based on those exposed portions of the virus. in order to do so, interpro and tmhmm servers were used to predict the outer portions of each of the protein. the length of exposed regions (non-cytoplasmic region) ranging from 1-1213, ( figure  1 ) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) and (1-19, 74-78) respectively for s, e, and m proteins were taken for our assessment. a vaccine candidate must have antigenic features to maximize its reliability to be an agent of immune response. to ensure the efficacy of the vaccine, antigenicity of the target sequences must be checked as it is crucial for the design of peptide-based vaccine. vaxijen 2.0 server was used to predict antigenicity of all the respective proteins. the s protein region had an antigenic value of 0.4646 whereas values for the region of e, and m protein were 0.7282, and 0.5102, respectively. potential b cell epitopes play significant role by providing protection against viral diseases [57] .therefore, distinctive analysis techniques were utilized in this method for the prediction of a linear b cell epitope. primary sequences of s, e, and m protein were checked through abcpred and iedb server to foresee b-cell epitopes. a total of 59, 5, and 19 b-cell epitopes for s, e, and m were predicted individually by abcpred. from all anticipated epitopes, only 4 epitopes; s (2 epitopes), e (1 epitope), and m (1 epitope) presented on the outside of s, e, and m proteins were chosen (table 1) with higher antigenicity score.kolaskar and tongaonkar antigenicity estimation tool (figure2) was utilized to predict this antigenicity, score appeared in table1 and tmhmm server was used to check the surface accessibility.based on abcped, among these four identified epitopes of s protein, 'hrsyltpgdsssgwta', and 'cftnvyadsfvirgde' showed most elevated antigenic score of 0.92, and 0.85, respectively. moreover, epitope 'hrsyltpgdsssgwta' is positioned within the ntd region whereas 'cftnvyadsfvirgde' is inside the rbd region. the e protein epitope 'nvslvkpsfyvysrvk' showed 0.8 antigenic score. this epitope is situated at 48 position of e protein. while at 7 position of m protein the 'titveelkklle' revealed 0.75 antigenic score and selected for m protein (table 1) . according to iedb, the 'titveelkklle' indicated most noteworthy antigenicity of 1.113 followed by the 'cftnvyadsfvirgde', 'titveelkklle', and 'hrsyltpgdsssgwta' with the antigenicity of 1.048, 1.043, and 0.993, respectively. the abcpred score and vaxijen antigencity results revealed the ability of all predicted peptides to expand barrier reactions within the host during sars-cov-2 infection as an extracellular part of transmembrane-protein. to discover the hydrophilicity of anticipated b-cell epitopes parker-hydrophilicity strategy was performed (figure3).with the hydrophilicity analysis, the 'hrsyltpgdsssgwta'was found to have remarkable hydrophilicity with the value of 2.95, whereas hydrophilicity values of 'cftnvyadsfvirgde', 'titveelkklle', and 'nvslvkpsfyvysrvk' were 1.513, 0.492, and 0.45, respectively (table 1) .b-cell epitope based vaccines have been quite popular for a long time; however, vaccines based on t-cell epitopes are currently in the trend as the cd8+ t cells produce a long term memory response in the host against the infected cell [58].that's why prediction of t-cell epitopes is an unquestionable requirement for a vaccine to have preventive capacity. some of the recent studies on vaccine development against covid-19 shed light on only the t-cell epitopes whereas in our study, we have approached both eligible b and t cell epitopes of sars-cov-2 for a maximized yield in our vaccine design project [58] .here, iedb server was utilized to evaluate the best t-cell epitopes from the chosen protein sequences of s, e, and m protein . moreover, antigenicity testing and screening of peptides were done with help of vaxijen 2.0 server. in light of the high combinatorial score, the 4 best epitopes for mhc class-i (table 2) were chosen for additional investigation. for mhc class i assessment, netmhccons 1.1 server is a consensus approach that combines the three best netmhc, netmhcpan, and pickpocket class strategy to provide the most accurate predictions. the mhc-i alleles for which the epitopes demonstrated higher affinity (ic50, 500nm) were chosen (table 2) .between mhc class-i anticipated epitopes, a 9 mer epitope, 'kiadynykl' that is inside the rbd region of sars-cov-2 showed higher antigenicity score of 1.6639 followed by the 'gtitveelk', 'yvysrvknl' and 'wtagaaayy' (within the ntd region of sars-cov-2) with antigenicity score of 1.0976, 0.7020, and 0.5371,respectively. for mhc class-ii, on the basis of high combinatorial score, the 4best epitopes (table s4) were chosen for further analysis. netmhcii 2.3 server was used to anticipate mhc-ii binding prediction with hla-dr, hla-dq and hla-dp mhc class ii alleles. the mhc-ii alleles for which the epitopes demonstrated higher affinity (ic50, 500nm) were selected (table s4 ). the peptide 'gvltesnkkflpfqq' that is within the rbd region of sars-cov-2 was viewed as increasingly antigenic for its higher antigenicity score 0.8200 followed by the 'yfkiyskhtpinlvr' (inside the ntd area of sars-cov-2), 'fyvysrvknlnssrv', 'madsngtitveelkk' with antigenicity score of 0.8197, 0.6103, and 0.4367, individually.moreover, molecular docking was performed for the analysis of the binding affinity of our targeted eight epitopes from membrane, spike and enveloped protein with different hla molecules. t-cell epitope sequence with their docking score are showed in the (table 3) . among these eight selected t cell epitopes, 'wtagaaayy' bound in the binding pocket of hla-b*35:01 allele (pdb id:4prn) showed the highest binding score of -9.1 kcal/mol (figure4& 5).interaction between the epitope and the binding pocket atoms of hla molecule showed in the figure 6 .on the other hand , 'yvysrvknl' bound with hla-a02:03(pdb id: 3ox8) and 'gtitveelk' bound with hla-a*11:01 (pdb id: 6joz) with the binding affinity of -7.4, and -7 kcal/mol, respectively exhibit good binding interaction of these epitopes with hla molecules. another essential prerequisite in epitope based vaccine design is to determine population coverage as mhc polymorphism leads to the expression of different forms of hla at considerably different rates among different ethnicities [59, 60] . on the basis of binding interaction of our targeted epitopes with their respective hla alleles we finalized three epitopes for vaccine design having the highest binding affinity. population coverage for these three epitopes demonstrated the consequences of the host genetic variety on the binding specificity of these targeted epitopes to class i hla alleles. their cumulative population coverage around the world 91.09% which revealed that these epitopes can cover about 91% (figure 7) population from different regions of the world.most of the recent studies emphasized on only the spike protein of the virus given its wide range of conservancy across the viral population. but our work was dedicated to specific epitopes and domains of all the mentioned proteins (s, m, and e proteins) for an in-silico design of multiepitope vaccine. vaccine development against sars-cov-2 shed light on only the t-cell epitopes in some recent studies whereas in our study, we have approached both eligible b and t cell epitopes of sars-cov-2 for a maximized yield in our vaccine design project [61] . all the ideal criteria of a potential epitope had been pulled off by our selected epitopes of s, m, and e proteins.different vaccine development strategies against sars-cov-2 are being opted along with ongoing trials on novel drug design. in our current study, we suggested three epitopes from conserved regions of spike, membrane and envelope proteins of sars-cov-2 as they have abilities to produce antigenic response. their potentialities as vaccine candidate assured by their antigenic properties and strong binding affinity for mhc molecules. this in-silico study requires experimental validation to get cost effective epitope based peptide vaccine with higher efficacy against sars-cov-2. i  n  t  e  r  a  c  t  i  o  n  o  f  α  -c  y  p  e  r  o  n  e  w  i  t  h  h  u  m  a  n  s  e  r  u  m  a  l  b  u  m  i  n  :  d  e  t  e  r  m  i  n  a  t  i  o  n  o  f  t  h  e  b  i  n  d  i  n  g  s  i  t  e  b  y  u  s  i  n  g  d  i  s  c  o  v  e  r  y  s  t  u  d  i  o  a  n  d  v  i  a  s  p  e  c  t  r  o  s  c  o  p  i  c  m  e  t  h  o  d  s  .   j  o  u  r  n  a  l  o  f  l  u  m  i  n  e  s  c  e  n  c  e  ,  2  0  1  5  .  1  6  4  :  p  .  8  1  -8  5  .  4  3  .  p  e  t  t  e  r  s  e  n  ,  e  .  f  .  ,  e  t  a  l  .  ,   u  c  s  f  c  h  i  m  e  r  a  --a  v  i  s  u  a  l  i  z  a  t  i  o  n  s  y  s  t  e  m  f  o  r  e  x  p  l  o  r  a  t  o  r  y  r  e  s  e  a  r  c  h  a  n  d  a  n  a  l  y  s  i the outbreak of a new coronavirus (sars-cov-2) [1] has had a significant impact on neighbouring countries with transportation to and from china due to the spread of sars-cov-2. it is reasonable to think that restricting human movement is effective in managing viruses, as human movement accelerates the spread of the virus. a total ban on traffic could have helped control virus transmission [2] . movement of people across the sea by plane or ship is considered necessary in the movement of viruses [3] . several governments announced strengthened border measures to prevent viral border invasion [4, 5] . the various restrictions associated with the pandemic hurt not only the economy [6] , but also the mental health [7, 8] . the fear of the virus has resulted in discrimination and excessive demands on the government. a 37-yearold government worker who worked on antivirus committed suicide in japan [7] . with the availability of viral genome sequences, research is being conducted into many different aspects [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] . an analysis of previously collected viral genomes indicated that viruses outside china formed a monophyletic clade, suggesting the effectiveness of border measures [14] . recently, more complete viral genome sequences have been published, providing more resources to discuss virus transmission [15] . although several phylogenetic trees of the virus have been published, many analyzes including fragment sequences did not provide accurate phylogenetic information. therefore, we scrutinized the available viral sequences and collected only fulllength viral genomic sequences for phylogenetic analysis.the genome sequences of sars-cov-2 isolated from human and "batcov ratg13" (accession no. gwhabkp00000000), which is most closely related to sats-cov-2 [9] , were obtained from 2019 novel coronavirus resource [15] (accessed 22 feb, 2020). we choose 51 longer sequences. the shortest one is 26,973 bps and the longest one is 29,903 bps. one of the longest sequences, "wuhan-hu-1" (accession no. mn908947), was used as the reference genome. we also obtained the genome sequence of "bat sarslike coronavirus" (accession no. mg772933) from genbank as the outgroup according to the previous study [9] . in total, we used 49 sars-cov-2 sequences (table 1 ) and 2 bat coronavirus sequences (table 2) isolation of open reading frames the open reading frames (orf) information of the reference genome were obtained from genbank. we used the translated orf amino-acid sequences as the queries, and searched other sars-cov-2 genomes for orf by using fate [16] with tblastn engine and other default parameters.there were 13 parsimony-informative sites in 29,145 bps alignment of sequences from 47 samples isolated from human. dots indicate the same as the reference base on the top of the alignment. a, c, g or t indicate the difference in the reference base. blue, green, and yellow highlight indicate group tct, tcc, and ctc respectively. group tct was defined by t8782, c28144 and t29095. group tcc was defined by t8782, c28144 and c29095. group ctc was defined by c8782, t28144 and c29095. all sites including gaps were removed from the analysis. bases of the same sites on the 2 coronavirus genomes isolated from bat were shown in bottom and 2nd line from the bottom of the alignment, respectively.codon-based multiple sequence alignment and extraction of variable/parsimony-informative sites isolated orf sequences were aligned for each gene based on codons by using dialign-tx [18] . the largest gene "orf1ab" was divided into upstream and downstream regions and aligned respectively because this gene has the ribosomal slippage site. we removed three samples, "human-unitedstates-mt020781), and "human-china-hubeiprovince-wuhancity" (accession no. nmdc60013002-05) from the analysis because their sequences include mixed bases. then, we extracted variable/parsimony-informative sites based on the multiple sequence alignment by using in-house perl script.maximum-likelihood phylogenetic analyses based on the multiple sequence alignment of orf were performed under the seven conditions below, (1) dna-based no separate, (2) separating 1st/2nd and 3rd codon position, (3) separating each codon position, (4) separating each gene, (5) separating each gene and also 1st/2nd and 3rd codon position, (6) separating each gene and each codon position, and (7) protein-based separating each gene. for each condition, the best evolutionary models were estimated by using modeltest-ng [19] with default parameters, followed by estimating the phylogenies of sats-cov-2 by using raxml-ng [20] with '--all' option and the best bayesian information criterion (bic)-supported evolutionary models. under any conditions, the outgroup was set to 'bat sars-like coronavirus' and the number of bootstraps replicates was set to 1000. obtained phylogenies were colored by using mega x [21] . all analyses data and inhouse scripts are available [22] .60 variable sites were found from 29,145 bps alignment of sars-cov-2 orf sequences from 47 samples isolated from human ( figure s1 ). there were 13 parsimony-informative sites (614, 2662, 5084, 8782, 18060, 24034, 24325, 26144, 26729, 28077, 28144, 28854 and 29095-th nucleotide of referential sars-cov-2 genome (mn908947)), of which 7 were non-synonymous (table 3 ). there were 3 important parsimony-informative sites. the first important parsimony-informative site was 8782-nd nucleotide of referential sars-cov-2 genome (mn908947). referential nucleotide is c and alternative nucleotide is t. the second important parsimony-informative site was 28144-th nucleotide of referential sars-cov-2 genome (mn908947). referential nucleotide is t and alternative nucleotide is c. this substitution results in changes in amino acids 84 of orf8, a previously indicated polypeptide involved in promoting virus transition from bat to human [24, 25] . the third important parsimony-informative site was 29095-th nucleotide of referential sars-cov-2 genome (mn908947). referential nucleotide is c and alternative nucleotide is t. therefore, we named 3 groups, tcc, tct and others (ctc) (figure 1 ). viruses found outside china did not form a single group, opposite to previous study [14] . this result suggests that the viral were introduced to each country several times.phylogenies of sars-cov-2 were constructed based on the orf sequences ( figure 2 and figure  s2 ). dna-based phylogeny under the separating each codon position condition (figure 2) showed the highest final log-likelihood and 2nd-lowest aic score among dna-based phylogenetic trees. on the other hand, protein-based phylogenetic tree ( figure  s2f ) might not be reliable because the tree was constructed based on less informative sites except for the synonymous substitution sites. according to our phylogeny, the group ctc formed a monophyletic clade, including all samples isolated from chinese in wuhan except for "cna0007335-human-china-hubeiprovince-wuhancity". samples of the group tcc and tct were paraphyletic for group ctc and located near the root of the tree. our phylogenies suggest that the "bat-sars-like coronavirus" (mg772933) and "batcov ratg13" are more closely related to samples included in the group tcc and tct than samples included in the group ctc. some of the phylogenies constructed under other conditions suggest the different phylogenetic position of group tcc and tct, however, support the monophyly and the same phylogenetic position of group ctc ( figure s2 ). these results indicate that sars-cov-2 widely spread in wuhan is different from that of other areas. in areas other than wuhan, where virus invasion has been observed, the damage has not seemed to be as severe as wuhan, however the spread of group ctc might increase the damage in the near future. from the perspective of virus control, sequencing should be performed since viruses have multiple properties that is hard to be distinguished by qpcr. the viral genome sequences "mt039890-human-sourth-korea" and "gwhabkg0000000-human-china-hubei-province-wuhan-city" have many sample-specific substitutions in their sequence. the viral genome sequence "mn988713-human-usa-illinois-chicago" has several ambiguous bases in parsimony-informative sites, discovered in this study. interestingly, the ambiguous bases can be explained by the mixture of group tcc and ctc (table 4 ). this fact suggests that "mn988713-human-usa-illinois-chicago" contains at least two different viral genomes. we could corroborate this hypothesis after next generation sequence data release.to determine whether viral sequences have novel mutations acquired during spreading the infection or just reflect the diversity of the place of origin, various sars-cov-2 genome sequences should be collected in the place of origin.a maximum-likelihood phylogenetic analysis based on the multiple sequence alignment of orf were performed under the condition of separating each codon position. blue, green, and yellow branches indicate group tct, tcc, and ctc respectively. substitutions on the parsimony-informative sites were mapped to the corresponding branches. sars-cov-2 isolated from human formed a monophyletic clade with 100% bootstrap value. group ctc formed a monophyletic clade with 74% bootstrap value. group tcc was paraphyletic respect to the group ctc. group tct was paraphyletic respect to the clade consists of group ctc and tct. final log-likelihood was -55794.362675. aic score was 112649.332493. branch length was meaningless. ※w means t or a, y means c or t, s means g or c.after alignment, the sars-cov-2 sequences had 60 variable sites from 29,145 bps alignment of orf sequences from 47 samples isolated from human. dots indicate the same as the reference base on the top of the alignment. a, c, g or t indicate the difference in the reference base. nucleotide position numbers in the reference genome are shown above the alignment. all sites including gaps were removed from the analysis. sars, a new disease characterized by high fever, malaise, rigor, headache and non-productive cough, has spread to over 30 countries with around 8% of mortality rate on average. sequence analysis of sars coronavirus (sars-cov) [17, 25] showed that it is a novel coronavirus [12] . anand et al. [1] reported a three-dimensional model of sars-cov main proteinase and suggested that there are a number of methods and software packages that have been developed for detection of recombination events in dna sequences. the performance of these methods has been extensively evaluated and compared on simulated and real data [23, 24] . in the present study we applied these methods to rna viruses. sars-cov and other 6 coronavirus genomes (sars-cov, ibv, bcov, hcov, mhv, pedv, tgev) were first aligned using clustalw [33] . sites with gaps were removed and a 25077-nt alignment was generated. subsequently, seven methods were employed to detect the occurrence of recombination (see corresponding reference in parenthesis for details of each method): bootscan [26] , geneconv [28] , dss (difference of sums of squares) [20] , hmm (hidden markov model) [8] , maxchi (maximum chi-square method) [19] , pdm (probabilistic divergence measures) [9] , rdp (recombination detection program) [18] . bootscan, maxchi and rdp are implemented in rdp software package, http://web.uct.ac.za/depts/microbiology/microdescription.htm. geneconv is implemented in the program, http://www.math.wustl.edu/∼sawyer/geneconv/. dss, hmm and pdm are implemented in topali software package, http://www.bioss.sari.ac.uk/software.html.basically default parameter settings were used in all the programs, except the following values: gscale = 1 (geneconv), internal and external references (rdp), window size = 300 and step = 10 (dss, hmm and pdm).after potential recombination events were identified by at least 3 methods above, separate neighbor joining trees were constructed for each putative recombination region to better evaluate the evidence for conflicting evolutionary histories of different sequence regions. all trees were produced with topali mentioned above. table 2 summarizes the results of bootscan analysis with 100% bootstrap support and significant p-value (<0.05 for uncorrected and mc corrected pvalue). two regions (13151-13299 and 16051-16449, position in alignment) are identified as putative recombination regions and all 6 coronaviruses are potential parents with sars-cov as potential daughter.geneconv detected 9 putative recombination events occurred in a wide range of positions 5941-24997 (in alignment) at a significant level p < 0.05 for two p-values: simulated p-value (based on 10,000 permutations) and blastlike bc ka p-value (table 3 ). all 6 coronaviruses are potential parents with sars-cov as potential daughter.maxchi identified 15 putative recombination events (table 4 , possible misidentification events are not retained). most of the breakpoints are significant at about 0.001 level; the position located in alignment spans from 3534 to 22840, but some beginning or ending breakpoints are not determined. similarly, 6 coronaviruses are potential parents with sars-cov as potential daughter.rdp revealed that 6 putative recombination events occur in the domain of alignment 5910-13334 (table 5) , with the uncorrected and mc corrected pvalue at less than 0.002 and 0.05 respectively. in this case, 4 coronaviruses (ibv, bcov, mhv and pedv) are potential parents with sars-cov as potential daughter. figure 1 shows the dss profiles of putative breakpoints between sars-cov and other coronaviruses (dotted line indicates the 95 percentile under the null hypothesis of no recombination): sars-cov, ibv, bcov and mhv (fig. 1a) , sars-cov, mhv, pedv and tgev (fig. 1b) , sars-cov, ibv, hcov and tgev (fig. 1c ). there are about 6 different breakpoints (significant peaks): 13614 and 16085 (fig. 1a) , 11008 and 12850 (fig. 1b) , 12805, 13614 and 16444 (fig. 1c) .hmm plots for sars-cov, ibv, bcov and hcov (fig. 2 ) revealed that the putative breakpoints are at about position 5500 and 19000. there is a clear transition from state 1 (sars-cov grouped with ibv) (fig. 2a) into state 3 (sars-cov grouped with hcov) (fig. 2c) . the region between 5500 and 19000 is noisy, and at this moment no information can be provided by hmm. figure 3 shows the results of pdm analysis performed on sars-cov and other coronaviruses (dotted line indicates the 95% critical region for the null (fig. 3c, d) , 1393, 6111, 16624, 19859 and 20802 (fig. 3e, f) . posada [23] suggested that one should not rely too much on a single method for recombination detection. here we consider the regions identified by at least 3 methods as putative recombination regions. the results are summarized in table 6 . seven putative recombination regions span a range of positions in sars-cov phylogenetic trees constructed by using putative recombination regions and nonrecombination regions identified by above techniques are shown in figure 4 . the left panels stand for non-recombination regions and the right panels for recombination regions. we compared each row of figures and found that the phylogenetic tree in the left panel (non-recombination region) had very different topology when compared to the phylogenetic tree in the right panel (recombination region), which indicates that recombination has occurred. for example, in fig. 4a , 7 coronaviruses are divided into 4 groups: group 1 for tgev, hcov and pedv, group 2 for bcov and mhv, group 3 for ibv, and group 4 for sars-cov, consistent with marra et al. [17] ; while in fig. 4b, 7 coronaviruses are divided and sars-cov, suggests that sars-cov is most closely related to bcov and mhv, which is consistent with a recent report [29] . at the same time, sars-cov is also most closely related to tgev (fig. 4d) and ibv (fig. 4f) . thus, phylogenetic analysis substantiates the presence of recombination events in the history that led to the sars-cov genome.in this study, seven recombination detection methods and phylogenetic analyses were performed on sars-cov and the six coronaviruses identified by blast (ibv, bcov, hcov, mhv, pedv and tgev). these techniques successfully identified recombination events in bacteria and viruses [2, 3, 6, 21, 26, 39] . our analysis concurred to suggest the occurrence of recombination events between ancestors of sars-cov and these 6 coronaviruses. indeed, pairwise alignment showed that many segments of high homology with ibv, bcov, hcov, mhv, pedv and tgev do exist in sars-cov genome, table 7 exhibits the segments with length >20 nt and identiy >80%, and fig. 5 shows the mosaic structure of the region 14930-15908 in sars-cov genome based on the segments with length >50 and identity >80%. of course, the other coronaviruses used in the analysis are also mosaic structures, for more sequence similarities exist among them than with sars-cov. it is noted that all the sequence comparisons in this study are based on nucleotide sequences. while the protein sequences in sars-cov are largely different from those in the known three groups of coronavirus [17] , such as, for s protein, the identity is: 25.9% for sars-cov and bcov, 21.7% for sars-cov and hcov, 21.5% for sars-cov and ibv, 25.6% for sars-cov and mhv, 20.6% for sars-cov and pedv, 19.4% for sars-cov and tgev. although sars-cov is close to bcov, mhv, tgev and ibv, the corresponding protein, replicase 1a, is still different: with identity 27.4% for sars-cov and bcov, 24.8% for sars-cov and ibv, 32.2% for sars-cov and mhv, 25.0% for sars-cov and tgev.naturally, we should take into account the role of convergent evolution, which would bear its mark on the viral genome. the recombination events that we witnessed in sars-cov are present in six different viruses, suggesting sequential horizontal transfers and progressive adaptation to new hosts cells or animals. indeed because viruses need both receptors to permeate host cells and resist the immune response of the host, their outer layer proteins are submitted to an extremely strong selection pressure that may restrict considerably the possible variations of the corresponding proteins (and accordingly of the corresponding genome pieces of sequences). it is nevertheless remarkable that, despite the inclusion of all possible types of viruses in our sample set (as well as shuffled genomes from the viruses we have identified as relevant) we find a more or less single category of viruses as similar to sars-cov. this suggests that even if the contribution of convergent evolution is important, this happened on a more or less common phylogenetic background, suggesting several steps of recombination followed by fine adaptation. in this context, we would like to suggest that ancestors of pedv, mhv or both are the most plausible origin of sars-cov. guan et al. [7] based on phylogenetic techniques and bootscan recombination analysis stavrinides and guttman [32] indicated that the replicase of sars-cov was a mammalian-like origin, the m and n proteins have an avian-like origin, and the s protein has a mammalian-avian mosaic origin. while in the present study we used phylogenetic analysis and 7 recombination detection methods, including the powerful methods of maxchi and geneconv among 14 methods studied (simplot (bootscan), geneconv, homoplasy test, pist,  maxchi, chimaera, phypro, plato, rdp, recpars, reticulate,  runs test, sneath test, triple) [23, 24] , to conduct whole genomewide recombination analysis. we identified seven putative recombination regions, which encompass, in terms of proteins involved, replicase 1a, replicase 1b and the spike glycoprotein. stavrinides and guttman [32] primarily inferred the occurrence of recombination qualitatively, but did not identify the precise recombination region in the protein involved (the s protein is an exception, they identified a recombination region in s protein, located between nucleotides 2472 and 2694 of the s protein, i.e. between nucleotides 23963 and 24185 of the sars-cov genome, basically covered by the last recombination region for s protein (table 6) ). most importantly, each of our recombination regions is identified by at least 3 methods, because one should not rely too much on a single method, as suggested in [23] . in general, we believe two studies lead to the overall conclusion: the evolution of sars-cov has involved recombination.the recombination event in the replicase is related to the fact that the rna polymerase of coronaviruses utilize a discontinuous transcription mechanism to synthesize mrnas. the viral polymerase must jump between different rna templates regularly during positive-or negative-strand rna synthesis and depending on the rejoining sites, the resultant rna recombination will be either homologous or nonhomologous. this is the copy-choice model of recombination in rna viruses [13, 27, 31, 34] . the recombination event in s protein is certainly important since this allows the virus to alter surface antigenicity and escape immunesurveillance in the animals, thus adapting to a human host.the existence of sars-cov-like viruses (99.8% homology to human sars-cov) in several wild animals in a live animal market in guangdong [7] indicated that interspecies transmission among the human and animal sars-cov-like viruses had occurred. the mutation analysis of sequence variations among these isolates will help identify the genetic signature of sars virus strains when a sufficient amount of sequence data is available.the very fact that several species of animals are affected does not allow one to trace directly the origin of the virus as endemic in one of these species, but, rather, might be indicative that animals and men might have been contaminated by a virus from a common origin, presumably located in animal food present in local markets in the guangdong province. investigating a wide variety of animal coronaviruses, especially in relation to rodents, birds, snakes and farm animals, would be interesting with regard to the origin of the sars-cov that caused disease in humans.finally, a challenging question arises. what is the molecular basis of recombination in sars-cov? many requirements are needed for recombination to occur: (1) two coronaviruses can infect a host simultaneously and continue to replicate without interference with each other; (2) sufficient nucleotide identity between these genomes is essential for genome-switching to occur during rna replication; (3) the proteins arising from recombination must be functional; (4) the recombinant virus must have some selective advantage for its survival. that is, the recombination that creates a successful "new" coronavirus is probably a rare event. so, we must stress that the potential recombination events in sars-cov, identified in the present study, are most likely "old" events, which may represent the events that occurred thousands of years ago. although the recent findings indicated that sars-cov did exist in a number of wild animals [7] , we have not yet determined where these sars-cov-like virus strains come from.hku12 (thcov hku12) and munia coronavirus hku13 (muncov hku13) [2] . most of these genomes were sequenced using the rna extracted directly from the clinical specimens, such as nasopharyngeal aspirate or stool, as the template, while the viruses themselves were still non-cultivable [2, 3, 6, [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] . this provided more accurate analysis of the in situ viral genomes avoiding mutational bias during in vitro viral replication. these sequence efforts have resulted in a marked increase in the number of coronavirus genomes and have given us an unprecedented opportunity to understand this family of virus at the genomic and in silico levels. these understandings have also led to generation of further hypotheses and experiments in the laboratory. in this article, we reviewed our current understanding on the genomics and bioinformatics analysis of coronaviruses. details of the bioinformatics tools will not be discussed.coronaviruses possess the largest genomes [26.4 kb (thcov hku12) to 31.7 kb (sw1)] among all known rna viruses ( figure 1 ) [2, 13, 16] . the large genome has given this family of virus extra plasticity in accommodating and modifying genes. the g + c contents of coronavirus genomes vary from 32% (hcov-hku1) to 43% (pi-batcov hku5 and muncov hku13) (table 1) [2, 3, 10] . both the 5' and 3' ends of coronavirus genomes contain short untranslated regions. for the coding regions, the genome organizations of all coronaviruses are similar, with the characteristic gene order 5'-replicase orf1ab, spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m), nucleocapsid (n)-3', although variable numbers of additional orfs are present in each subgroup of coronavirus (table 1, figure 1 ). a transcription regulatory sequence (trs) motif is present at the 3' end of the leader sequence preceding most orfs ( table 1 ). the trs motifs are thought to be important for a "copy-choice" mechanism that mediates the unique random template switching during rna replication, resulting in a high frequency of homologous rna recombination in coronaviruses [17] .orf1ab of coronaviruses occupy about two thirds of their genomes. it encodes the replicase polyprotein and is translated from orf1a (11826 to 13425 nt) and orf1b (7983 to 8157 nt). in all coronaviruses, a slippery sequence (uuuaaac), followed by sequences that form a putative pseudoknot structure, are present at the junction between orf1a and orf1b. translation occurs by a -1 rna-mediated ribosomal frameshift at the end of the slippery sequence. instead of reading the transcript as uuuaaacggg, it will be read as uuuaaaccggg. the replicase polyprotein is cleaved by papain-like protease(s) (pl pro ) and 3c-like protease (3cl pro ), proteins encoded by orf1ab of the coronavirus genome, at consensus cleavage sites, into 15 to 16 non-structural proteins (nsps) named nsp1, nsp2, nsp3, etc ( table 1) . as the number of coronavirus genomes is expanding, novel cleavage sites have been discovered [3, 18] . some of these non-structural proteins encode proteins of essential functions, such as pl pro (nsp3), 3cl pro (nsp5), rna-dependent rna polymerase (pol) (nsp12) and helicase (nsp13) (figure 1 ). the genomes of all known members of alphacoronavirus and betacoronavirus subgroup a possess two pl pro (pl1 pro and pl2 pro ), while those of all known members of betacoronavirus subgroup b, c and d and gammacoronavirus possess only one pl pro (table 1, figure 1 ). the gene sequences that encode these conserved proteins are frequently used for phylogenetic analysis. in addition to the nsps with essential functions, bioinformatics analysis of some other nsps revealed their putative functions. downstream to pl pro or pl1 pro in nsp3 is the x domain which contains putative adp-ribose 1"-phosphatase (adrp) activity [1] . in other microorganisms, such as saccharomyces cerevisiae and other eukaryotes, adrp and its functionally related enzyme cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (cpdase), were important for trna processing [19] . adp-ribose 1",2"-cyclic phosphate (appr>p) is produced as a result of trna splicing. appr>p is in turn converted to adp-ribose 1"-phosphate (appr-1"p) by cpdase and appr-1"p is then further processed by adrp. as for nsp13, nsp14 and nsp15, they possess a putative 3'-to-5' exonuclease (exon) domain of the dedd superfamily [1] , a putative poly(u)-specific endoribonuclease (xendou) domain, and a putative s-adenosylmethionine-dependent ribose 2'-o-methyltransferase (2'-o-mt) domain of the rrmj family respectively [1] . adrp, cpdase, exon, xendou and 2'-o-mt are enzymes in rna processing pathways. contrary to the pre-trna splicing pathway that adrp and cpdase belong to, exon, xendou and 2'-o-mt are enzymes in a small nucleolar rna processing and utilization pathway.in all members of betacoronavirus subgroup a, a haemagglutinin esterase (he) gene, which encodes a glycoprotein with neuraminate o-acetyl-esterase activity and the active site fgds, is present downstream to orf1ab and upstream to s gene ( figure 1 ). the he gene of coronavirus is believed to be acquired from influenza c virus, and is the most notable example of acquisition of new genes from non-coronavirus rna donors by heterologous recombination [20] . the presence of he genes exclusively in members of betacoronavirus subgroup a, but not members of betacoronavirus subgroup b, c and d suggested that the recombination had probably occurred in the ancestor of members of betacoronavirus subgroup a, after diverging from the ancestor of other subgroups of betacoronavirus.the s proteins are responsible for the "spikes" present on the surface of coronaviruses and give this family of virus the characteristic crown-like appearance under electron microscopy. the s proteins are type i membrane glycoproteins with signal peptides. the s proteins are used for receptor binding and viral entry, and are the proteins with the most variable sequences in the coronavirus genomes. in some coronaviruses, the s proteins are cleaved into the s1 and s2 domains at consensus cleavage site (rrsrr of bcov, rrsr of hcov-oc43, rrkrr of hcov-hku1, rsrr of phev, rradr of mhv, rrfrr of sdav and rrfrr of ibv) (table 1) , with the sequences of the s1 domains much more variable than the s2 domains. in all coronaviruses, most of the s protein is exposed on the outside of the virus, with a short transmembrane domain at the c terminus, followed by a short cytoplasmic tail rich in cysteine residues. two heptad repeats are present at the c termini of the extracellular parts of the s proteins. at the moment, no bioinformatics tool is available for accurate prediction of the receptor by analyzing the amino acid sequences of the s proteins of the corresponding coronaviruses.the e and m proteins are small transmembrane proteins associated with the envelope of all coronaviruses. in some coronaviruses, such as mhv and sdav and possibly hcov-hku1, the translation of the e protein is cap-independent, via an internal ribosomal entry site. although these two genes are conserved among all coronaviruses, they are not good targets for phylogenetic studies because of their short sequences.similar to the conserved proteins encoded by orf1ab, the n gene is also another common target for phylogenetic analysis. due to its immunogenicity, it is also a common target for cloning and generation of recombinant proteins for serological assays.variable numbers of small orfs are present between the various conserved genes in different lineages in the coronaviridae family (table 1, figure 1 ). in some coronaviruses, small orfs are present downstream to the n gene (table 1, figure 1 ). most of these small orfs are of unknown function. one exception is the small orfs downstream to n in feline infectious peritonitis virus (fipv) and tgev, which are important for virulence and viral replication/assembly respectively [21] [22] [23] . another notable exception is the 3a protein of sarsr-cov, which forms a transmembrane homotetramer complex with ion channel function and modulates virus release [24] . for some of these small orfs, such as orf3a and orf8 of sarsr-cov genomes, their sequences are as highly variable as those of the s proteins. in particular, the most significant difference between human sarsr-cov and civet sarsr-cov genomes was a 29-bp deletion in the orf8 of human sarsr-cov [25] .the first impression of the phylogenetic position of a strain or species of coronavirus is usually acquired by constructing a phylogenetic tree using a short fragment of a conserved gene, such as pol or n. however, this can sometimes be misleading because the results of phylogenetic analysis using different genes or characters can be different. when sarsr-cov was first discovered, it was proposed that it constituted a fourth group of coronavirus [26, 27] . however, analyses of the amino-terminal domain of s of sarsr-cov revealed that 19 out of the 20 cysteine residues were spatially conserved with those of the consensus sequence for betacoronavirus [28] . on the other hand, only five of the cysteine residues were spatially conserved with those of the consensus sequences in alphacoronavirus and gammacoronavirus [28] . furthermore, subsequent phylogenetic analysis using both complete genome sequence and proteomic approaches, it was concluded that sarsr-cov is probably an early split-off from the betacoronavirus lineage [1] , and sarsr-cov was subsequently classified as betacoronavirus subgroup b and the historical betacoronavirus as betacoronavirus subgroup a. therefore, the phylogenetic position of a coronavirus is best appreciated and confirmed by constructing phylogenetic trees using different genes in the coronavirus genome. the most commonly used genes along the coronavirus genome for phylogenetic studies include chymotrypsin-like protease, pol ( figure 2) , helicase, s and n, because these genes are present in all coronavirus genomes and are of significant length. the envelope and membrane genes, although present in all coronavirus genomes, are too short for phylogenetic studies. it is noteworthy that the cluster formed by the three novel avian coronaviruses bucov hku11, thcov hku12 and muncov hku13, which was originated proposed as group 3c [2] , might represent a new coronavirus genus provisionally designated deltacoronavirus (figure 2 ). using this approach of multiple gene phylogenetic studies, unique phylogeny of individual gene that may have biological significance may be discovered. during our phylogenetic study on rh-batcov hku2, another coronavirus that has was also found in the stool samples of chinese horseshoe bats, its unique s protein phylogenetically distinct from the rest of the genome was discovered [15] . the s protein of rh-batcov hku2 is the shortest among s proteins of all coronaviruses and had less than 30% amino acid identities to those of all known coronaviruses, in contrast to other genes that showed higher amino acid identities to the corresponding genes in other members of alphacoronavirus. when the s protein of rh-batcov hku2 is aligned with those of other members of alphacoronavirus, many of the amino acid residues conserved among and specific to alphacoronavirus were not found. rather, the s protein of rh-batcov hku2 shares the two conserved regions of deletions both of 14 amino acids among members of betacoronavirus in its c-terminus, suggesting that this segment of the s protein of rh-batcov hku2 may have co-evolved with the corresponding regions in betacoronavirus. most interestingly, a short peptide of 15 amino acids in the s protein of rh-batcov hku2 was found to be homologous to a corresponding peptide within the rbm in the s1 domain of sarsr-cov. a similar peptide was also observed in sarsr-rh-batcov, but not in any other known coronaviruses. these suggested that there is a common evolutionary origin in the s protein of sarsr-cov, sarsr-rh-batcov and rh-batcov hku2, and rh-batcov hku2 might have acquired its unique s protein from a yet unidentified coronavirus through recombination.in 1992, sanchez et al. analyzed 13 enteric and respiratory tgev related isolates and estimated the mutation rate of tgev to be 710 -4 nucleotide substitutions per site per year [29] . 1n 2005, using linear regression, maximum likelihood and bayesian inference methods, vijgen et al. estimated the rate of evolution in bcov to be 4.3 (95% confidence internal 2.7 to 6.0) 10 -4 nucleotide substitutions per site per year [30] . the estimation of time of divergence was first extensively used in coronaviruses after the sars epidemic for estimating the date of interspecies jumping of sarsr-cov from civets to humans and that from bcov to hcov-oc43 [31, 32] . subsequently, when various novel human and animal coronaviruses were discovered, evolutionary rates and divergence time in the coronaviridae family were estimated by various groups using different approaches [31, [33] [34] [35] . although bayesian inference in beast is probably the most widely accepted approach and was used by most researchers, the use of different genes (orf1ab, helicase, s and n genes) and datasets by different groups have resulted in considerable difference in the estimated history of coronaviruses. it was found that the s and n genes of phev, bcov and hcov-oc43 evolved at different rates, and the divergence time of the phev lineage and the hcov-oc43 and bcov lineage based on these two rates were 100 years different [31] . one group, using the helicase gene for analysis, has estimated the life history of coronaviruses to be as short as about 420 years [35] .recently, we used the uncorrelated exponentially distributed relaxed clock model (uced) in beast version 1.4 [36] to estimate the time of divergence of sarsr-cov based on an alignment of a large set of sarsr-rh-batcov orf1 sequences collected over a period of five years. under this model, the rates were allowed to vary at each branch drawn independently from an exponential distribution. using this model and large dataset, the time of emergence of sarsr-cov was at 1972, about 31 years before the sars epidemic; that of sarsr-cov in civet was at 1995, about eight years before the sars epidemic; and the most recent common ancestor date of human and civet sarsr-cov was estimated to be 2001.36, which was comparable to the dates estimated by other groups (table 2 ) [37] . the date obtained from the figure of the reference but was not mentioned in the reference's text.as a result of their unique random template switching during rna replication, thought to be mediated by a "copy-choice" mechanism, coronaviruses have a high frequency of homologous rna recombination [41, 42] . recombination in coronaviruses was first recognized between different strains of mhv and subsequently in other coronaviruses such as ibv, between mhv and bcov, and between feline coronavirus (fcov) type i and canine coronavirus (ccov) [43] [44] [45] [46] . as shown below, such recombination can result in the generation of coronavirus species or different genotypes within a coronavirus species. in our experience, the possibility of homologous rna recombination and the possible part of the genome that recombination has taken place are usually first appreciated using bootscan analysis or phylogenetic analysis using different parts of the coronavirus genome. other methods for recombination analysis, such as those in the rdp3 package, are also available. then, the exact site of homologous rna recombination would be best revealed by multiple sequence alignment.the best documented example of generation of coronavirus species through homologous rna recombination is the generation of fcov type ii by double recombination between fcov type i and ccov. it was first observed that the sequence of the s protein in fcov type ii was closely related to that of ccov [47, 48] but the sequence downstream of the e gene in fcov type ii was more closely related to that of fcov type i strain than to ccov [49, 50] . this observation suggested that there might have been a homologous rna recombination event between the genomes of ccov and fcov type i, resulting in the generation of fcov type ii. further analysis by multiple sequence alignments pinpointed the site of recombination to a region in the e gene. a few years later, an additional recombination region in the pol gene was also discovered, and it was concluded that fcov type ii originated from two recombination events between the genomes of ccov and fcov type i [43] .as for the generation of different genotypes in a coronavirus species through homologous rna recombination, the best documented example is hcov-hku1. the possibility of homologous rna recombination was first suspected when a few strains of hcov-hku1 showed differential clustering when the pol, s and n genes were used for phylogenetic tree construction [51] . this observation has led to our subsequent study on complete genome sequencing of 22 strains of hcov-hku1. recombination analysis by bootscan analysis and phylogenetic analysis using different parts of the 22 complete genomes revealed extensive recombination in different parts of the genomes, resulting in the generation of three genotypes, a, b and c, of hcov-hku1 [52] . using multiple sequence alignment, two sites of recombination were pinpointed. the first one was observed in a stretch of 143 nucleotides near the 3' end of nsp6, where recombination between hcov-hku1 genotype b and genotype c has generated genotype a; and the second one in another stretch of 29 nucleotides near the 3' end of nsp16, where recombination between hcov-hku1 genotype a and genotype b has generated genotype c [52] .recently, using the complete genome sequences of the 19 coronavirus genomes, we analyzed the codon usage bias in coronaviruses as well as selection of cpg suppressed clones by the immune system and cytosine deamination being the two major independent biochemical and biological selective forces that has shaped such codon usage bias [53] . in the study, we showed that the mean cpg relative abundance in the coronavirus genomes is markedly suppressed [53] . however, we observed that only cpg containing codons in the context of purine-cpg (acg and gcg), pyrimidine-cpg (ucg and ccg) and cpg-purine (cga and cgg); but not cpg-pyrimidine (cgu and cgc); are suppressed. however, when trinucleotide frequencies were analyzed in the 19 coronavirus genomes, all the eight trinucleotides with cpg were suppressed [53] . these indicate that another force that has led to an increase use of cgu and cgc as codons for arginine, but does not act on trinucleotides over the whole genome in general, is probably present. furthermore, this force is probably unrelated to the relative abundance of the corresponding trna molecules in the hosts of the coronaviruses, as the pattern of bias in the hosts is not the same as that in the coronaviruses.in addition to cpg suppression, marked cytosine deamination is also observed in all the 19 coronavirus genomes [53] . using the six amino acids that are only encoded by nnc or nnu (asparagine, histidine, aspartic acid, tyrosine, cysteine and phenylalanine), hence excluding most other pressures that may affect the relative abundance of cytosine and uracil, it was observed that all nnu are markedly over represented with usage fractions of more than 0.700, whereas the usage fractions of all nnc are less than 0.300 [53] . for all codons that encode the same amino acid and with either u or c in any position, the usage fraction of the codon that uses u is always higher than the one that uses c in all coronaviruses. furthermore, the percentage of u showed strong inverse relationships with the percentage of c in the coronavirus genomes. these suggest that cytosine deamination is another important biochemical force that shaped coronavirus evolution.interestingly, among all the 19 coronaviruses, hcov-hku1 showed the most extreme codon usage bias. hcov-hku1 is the only coronavirus that had effective number of codons outside the mean  2 standard deviations range. in addition, hcov-hku1 also possessed the lowest g + c content, highest gc skew, lowest percentages of g and c and highest percentage of u among all coronavirus genomes. furthermore, hcov-hku1 showed extremely high nnu/nnc ratio of 8.835. the underlying mechanism for the extreme codon usage bias, cytosine deamination and g + c content in hcov-hku1 is intriguing.rapid and accurate batch sequence retrieval is always the cornerstone and bottleneck for all kinds of comparative genomics and bioinformatics analysis. during the process of batch sequence retrieval for comparative genomics and other bioinformatics analysis of the coronavirus genomes that we have sequenced, we encountered a number of major problems about the coronavirus sequences in genbank and other coronavirus databases. first, in genbank, the non-structural proteins encoded by orf1ab are not annotated. second, in all databases, the annotations for the non-structural proteins encoded by orfs downstream to orf1ab are often confusing because they are not annotated using a standardized system. third, multiple accession numbers are often present for reference sequences. these problems will often lead to confusion during sequence retrieval. fourth, coronaviruses, especially sarsr-cov, amplified from different specimens may contain the same gene or genome sequences, which will lead to redundant work when they are analyzed. in view of these problems, we have developed a comprehensive database, covdb, of annotated coronavirus genes and genomes, which offers rapid, efficient and user-friendly batch sequence retrieval and analysis [54] . in covdb, first, annotations on all non-structural proteins in the polyprotein encoded by orf1ab of every single sequence were performed. second, annotation was performed for the non-structural proteins encoded by orfs downstream to orf1ab using a standardized system. third, all sequences with identical nucleotide sequences were labeled and one can choose to show or not to show strains with identical sequences. fourth, this database contains not only complete coronavirus genome sequences, but also incomplete genomes and their genes. this is useful because some genes of coronaviruses, such as pol, s and n, are sequenced much more frequently than others because they are either most conserved or least conserved, and therefore are particularly important for primers design for rt-pcr assays and evolutionary studies.after the sars epidemic, there has been a marked increase in the number of coronaviruses discovered and coronavirus genomes being sequenced. this increase in the number of coronavirus species and genomes, a comprehensive and user-friendly database for efficient sequence retrieval, and the ever improving bioinformatics tools have enabled us to perform meaningful genomic, phylogenetic, evolutionary rate and divergence, recombination, and other bioinformatics analyses on the coronaviridae family. three genera, alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus and gammacoronavirus, have been used to replace the traditional group 1, 2 and 3 coronaviruses. a fourth genus, deltacoronavirus, which includes bucov hku11, thcov hku12 and muncov hku13, is likely to emerge. under this new classification system, bat coronaviruses dominate the alphacoronavirus and betacoronavirus genera and bird coronaviruses dominate the gammacoronavirus and deltacoronavirus genera. this huge diversity of coronaviruses in bats and birds has made them excellent gene pools for coronaviruses in these four genera [55] .in december 2019, a novel coronavirus, sars-cov-2, was identified in wuhan, china, as the etiologic agent of coronavirus disease 2019 , which by march 2020 has already spread across more than 80 countries 1 . common symptoms of infection include fever, cough, and shortness of breath, while severe cases are characterized by advanced respiratory distress and pneumonia, often resulting in death 2 . soon after the first epidemiological data together with sars-cov-2 genetic sequences were made available, a glut of phylogeny-based analyses began to circulate discussing, in scientific papers as well as (social) media, countries that might have been fueling the spread. the implications of misunderstanding the real dynamic of the covid-19 pandemic are extremely dangerous. ethnic or social discrimination resulting from unsupported assumptions on viral contagion -often amplified by irresponsible, uncontrollable communications -can be highly damaging for people and countries.despite (social) media are often vehicle for fake news and boast news hype, it is also worth noting the tremendous effort of the scientific community to provide free, up-to-date information on ongoing studies, as well as critical evaluations. in particular, the us-based nextstrain 3 team has been posting real-time updates on the epidemic tracing by molecular analyses. several discussions and evidence-based debates on controversial hypotheses on the epidemic have ensued -such as the number of untraced infections in the us, the putative virus introduction in italy through germany, and the alleged lineage diversification in china 4 later criticized 5 -aided by a concerted and productive effort of internationally-renowned research groups in edinburgh, glasgow, and oxford, uk, among others. recently, an editorial published on science 6 has also highlighted how unsupported or misleading claims circulating in forums, social media, and even peer-reviewed articles, have been led by a substantial over interpretation of the available data.hence, the urgency to reframe the current debate in more rigorous scientific terms, and quantitatively evaluate whether sufficient information for reliable phylogenetic and phylogeographic studies currently exists, or which gaps need to be addressed.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 16.20034470 doi: medrxiv preprint before carrying out any phylogeny-based analysis of virus evolution and spatiotemporal spread, it is crucial to test the quality of sequence data, since uneven sampling, presence of phylogenetic noise, and absence of temporal signal can affect reliability of the results (e.g. ancestral state reconstructions, molecular clock calibrations) 7 . we downloaded all sars-cov-2 full genome sequences deposited on gisaid (https://www.gisaid.org/) 8 to compare the number of high quality genomes sampled per country with the number of confirmed cases at the time of sampling, as well as the country's total population ( figure 1 ). as march 10 th 2020, 331 genome sequences from 29 countries were available, almost twice as much than just one week earlier (march 3 rd 2020, 169 genome sequences from 22 countries). yet, the sampling per country was inhomogeneous, with confirmed cases clearly uncorrelated to the number of genomes (spearman correlation = 0.03). moreover, correlation could only be investigated with confirmed cases (as proxy), since not all affected countries have made publicly available the total number of coronavirus testing performed. even within the same country, sequenced genomes were usually sampled from few hotspots, not necessarily representative of the whole epidemic in that country.italy, for example, the second country per confirmed cases, has uploaded so far only two genomes from lombardy and three from lazio (table s1) , i.e. only two of the twenty italian regions, all with confirmed cases 9 . china and usa contributed with 123 and 63 genomes respectively (56% combined), while 13 countries contribute with only one or two samples (6.3% combined). notably, three countries with less than 400 confirmed cases have provided a substantial number of genomes (netherlands 28, australia 18, singapore 11; 17% combined) ( figure 1 ).the effect of inhomogeneous sampling and missing data on phylogeography reconstructions, like the ones recently rushed through news and (social) media to claim specific dissemination routes of sars-cov-2 among countries, can be quite dramatic. an instructive example is the putative introduction of sars-cov-2 in italy from germany. the maximum likelihood (ml) tree, inferred from the full genome viral sequences available on march 3 rd , 2020 (supplementary figure s1 ), showed a well-supported cluster of european and asian sequences (reported in figure 2a ), which contained a subclade (subclade a, figure 2a ) including a sequence isolated in germany that . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 16.20034470 doi: medrxiv preprint appears to be paraphyletic (with strong bootstrap support) to an italian sequence clustering, in turn, with sequences from finland, mexico, germany and switzerland (figure 2a ).based on this observation (which was available on nextstrain), a heated discussion circulated on social media about a transmission event from germany to italy followed by further spread from italy the other countries. however, in a new tree inferred just one week later, when more than 135 new full genome sequences were made available on gisaid 8 ( figure s2 ), the direct link between germany and italy has disappeared due to the additional clustering of previously unsampled sequences from portugal, brazil, wales and netherland ( figure 2b ). most importantly, there is no sufficient evidence of a higher likelihood (shimodaira-hasgawa test, table 1 ) for tree topologies generated arbitrarily switching branches in the tree (see arrows in figure 2b) compared to the ml tree inferred from the real data. in other words, it is not possible with the present data to decide which branching pattern (and, therefore, phylogeographic reconstruction)is the most likely.lack of resolution and uncertainty in the sars-cov-2 phylogenetic tree is to be expected, considering that relatively little genetic diversity can be accumulated during the first three months of an epidemic, even for an exponentially spreading and fast-evolving rna virus. plots of pairwise transitions/transversions vs. genetic distance 10 showed, indeed, low genetic diversity among sars-cov-2 genomes, considerable scattering, and overlap in transitions and transversions among closely related sequences (figure 3a ). the 331 full genomes available contained 477 out of 29,564 variable sites (1.6%), of which 377 were singleton and only 100 (0.34%) parsimony informative, indicating a substantial lack of phylogenetic information, and raising the possibility of a number of sequencing errors. further assessment of phylogenetic signal in the dataset was carried out using likelihood mapping analysis 11 , which estimates the likelihood of each of possible tree topology for any group of four sequences (quartet), randomly . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 16.20034470 doi: medrxiv preprint chosen from an alignment, and reports them inside an equilateral triangle (the likelihood map)where the corners represent distinct tree topologies and the center star-like trees. quartets are considered "resolved" when the three likelihoods are significantly different (phylogenetic signal, most dots equally distributed in the corners, i.e. data are suitable for robust phylogeny inference), unresolved or partially resolved, when all three likelihood values or two of them are not significantly different (phylogenetic noise, most dots in sides or center areas, i.e. data may not be sufficient for robust phylogeny inference). extensive simulation studies have shown that, for sequences to be considered robust in terms of phylogenetic signal, side/center areas of the likelihood mapping must include <40% of the unresolved quartets 12 , way lower than the 52.9% unresolved quartets detected in the sars-cov-2 full genomes alignment ( figure 3b ). it is important to keep in mind that such a lack of phylogenetic signal makes the overall topology of any sars-cov-2 tree unreliable, and even clades with high bootstrap values should be interpreted with extreme caution. finally, the mean genetic distance of each sequence from the root of a ml tree indicated that the available genomic data lack temporal signal (no significant linear correlation between accumulated genetic distance and sampling time, figure 3c ). this is, again, expected in genomes obtained over a very short period of time (~ three months) since the beginning of the outbreak. bayesian analysis 13 , which infers phylogenetic and phylogeographic patterns from a posterior distribution of trees, might facilitate comparisons about different evolutionary scenarios, help in retrieving the correct topology, and estimate an accurate evolutionary rate. with more genome sequences sampled from different time points and geographic areas made available, literally, every day, bayesian analysis may soon be a viable option. however, as long the new data do not increase phylogenetic and temporal signal, bayesian phylogenetic and phylogeography results would remain equally questionable.taken together, our observations suggest that any conclusion drawn, at present, about existing lineages and direction of viral spread, based on phylogenetic analysis of sars-cov-2 sequence data, is potentially misleading. nowadays, published scientific data and media are very easily . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 20, 2020. . accessible to a worldwide audience, thus it is important more than ever to weigh the information being shared. we believe that current molecular epidemiology data are not solid enough to provide a scientifically sound analysis of sars-cov-2 spread. any inference based on phylogenetic trees should be considered at the very best preliminary, and hypothesis-generating.hence the need for 1) avoiding stigmatization based on partial information and 2) continuing the concerted scientific effort to increase the number and quality of available data. the evolutionary dynamics of sars-cov-2 spread will unveil an unprecedented amount of information, which is essential to make policy decisions. the whole of humanity is threatened by the current pandemic, and policy makers need to adjust their mitigation measures while the pandemic itself is developing. some of the urgent answers required lie in the timely availability of abundant, high quality sequence data not only from countries experiencing a high number of reported cases, such as italy and south korea, but also from others that seem to be experiencing, at least for now, a lower number of infections.gisaid was accessed on march 3 rd and 10 th , 2020 (final dataset information reported in table   s1 ). after quality control of sequences that were not full genomes or contained extensive stretches of unknown nucleotides, the first dataset (march 3 rd 2020) consisted of 169 genomes from 22 countries, while the second (march 10 th , 2020) 331 from 29 countries. confirmed cases were retrieved for the same day from interactive web-based dashboard developed by johns hopkins university 14 .transition/transversions vs. genetic distance plot were calculated using dambe6 10 . evaluation of the presence of phylogenetic signal satisfying resolved phylogenetic relationships among sequences was carried out with iq-tree, allowing the software to search for all possible quartets . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 16.20034470 doi: medrxiv preprint using the best-fitting nucleotide substitution model 11 . ml tree reconstruction was performed in iq-tree based on the best-fit model chosen according to bayesian information criterion (bic) 15, 16 . topology was tested performing the shimodaira-hasegawa 17 on "subclade a" by comparing the inferred tree to three trees where two branches: (tree 1) italy (epi_isl_412973) switched with wales (epi_isl_413555), (tree 2) germany (epi_isl_406862 with) brazil (epi_isl_412964), (tree 3) and portugal (epi_isl_413648) with brazil (epi_isl_412964), (tree 4) germany (epi_isl_406862) with portugal (epi_isl_413648). all tests performed 10,000 resamplings using the using the rell approximation method 18 . position of these genomes within "subclade a" is indicated in figure 1 with an arrow.exploration of temporal structure, i.e. presence of molecular clock in the data, was assessed by regression of divergence -root-to-tip genetic distance-against sampling time using tempest 19 . in this case, absence of a linear trend indicates that the data does not contain temporal signal and that the data is not appropriate for phylogenetic inference using molecular clock models.ancestral state reconstruction of full datasets reported in figures s1 and s2 were based on the ml tree obtained with iq-tree and performed using treetime 20 . we choose to show the "european subclade" and "subclade a" as cladograms in figure 1 as there are no phylogenetic and temporal signals in the datasets: scaling phylogenies in time or nucleotide substitution in this case is misleading. each bi-directional arrow, and corresponding number, connects two tip branches that were switched to generate an alternative tree topology to be tested (see table 1 , methods). cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 20, 2020. . is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 20, 2020. . . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. epi_isl_412971_betacov_finland_fin-25_2020 epi_isl_406533_betacov_guangzhou_20sf206_2020 epi_isl_407896_betacov_australia_qld02_2020 epi_isl_408478_betacov_chongqing_yc01_2020epi_isl_412979__betacov_wuhan_hbcdc-hb-03_2020epi_isl_411220_betacov_france_idf0386-islp3_2020 epi_isl_410044_betacov_usa_ca6_2020 epi_isl_413020_betacov_switzerland_1000477377_2020epi_isl_406030_betacov_shenzhen_hku-sz-002_2020epi_isl_408669_betacov_japan_ky-v-029_2020epi_isl_408515_betacov_wuhan_ivdc-hb-envf13-21_2020 epi_isl_410713_betacov_singapore_7_2020 epi_isl_412873_betacov_korea_kcdc24_2020epi_isl_402120_betacov_wuhan_ivdc-hb-04_2020epi_isl_406970_betacov_hangzhou_hz-1_2020 epi_isl_406973_betacov_singapore_1_2020 epi_isl_412029_betacov_hong_kong_vm20001988_2020epi_isl_410720_betacov_france_idf0372-isl_2020 epi_isl_411951_betacov_sweden_01_2020 epi_isl_408488_betacov_jiangsu_ivdc-js-001_2020epi_isl_402123_betacov_wuhan_ipbcams-wh-01_2019 epi_isl_407894_betacov_australia_qld01_2020 epi_isl_411955_betacov_usa_ca8_2020 epi_isl_403962_betacov_nonthaburi_61_2020 epi_isl_406801_betacov_wuhan_wh04_2020 epi_isl_408978_betacov_wuhan_wh05_2020epi_isl_407084_betacov_japan_ai_i-004_2020 epi_isl_407215_betacov_usa_wa1-f6_2020 epi_isl_411060_betacov_fujian_8_2020 epi_isl_410984_betacov_france_idf0515-isl_2020epi_isl_412980__betacov_wuhan_hbcdc-hb-04_2020 epi_isl_410546_betacov_italy_inmi1-cs_2020 epi_isl_408977_betacov_sydney_3_2020 epi_isl_412982__betacov_wuhan_hbcdc-hb-06_2020 epi_isl_407071_betacov_england_01_2020 epi_isl_412912_betacov_germany_baden-wuerttemberg-1_2020 epi_isl_411927_betacov_taiwan_4_2020 epi_isl_410536_betacov_singapore_5_2020 epi_isl_406538_betacov_guangdong_20sf201_2020 epi_isl_407988_betacov_singapore_3_2020 epi_isl_406036_betacov_usa_ca2_2020 epi_isl_411954_betacov_usa_ca7_2020 epi_isl_412028_betacov_hong_kong_vm20001061_2020 epi_isl_406862_betacov_germany_bavpat1_2020 epi_isl_406597_betacov_france_idf0373_2020 epi_isl_408009_betacov_usa_ca4_2020 epi_isl_410716_betacov_singapore_10_2020 epi_isl_403933_betacov_guangdong_20sf013_2020 epi_isl_402129_betacov_wuhan_wiv06_2019epi_isl_406594_betacov_shenzhen_szth-003_2020 epi_isl_407987_betacov_singapore_2_2020 epi_isl_413015_betacov_canada_on_vido-01_2020 epi_isl_407976_betacov_belgium_ghb-03021_2020 epi_isl_406531_betacov_guangdong_20sf174_2020 epi_isl_410715_betacov_singapore_9_2020epi_isl_404227_betacov_zhejiang_wz-01_2020 epi_isl_408479_betacov_chongqing_zx01_2020 epi_isl_406535_betacov_foshan_20sf210_2020 epi_isl_408976_betacov_sydney_2_2020 epi_isl_411066_betacov_fujian_13_2020 epi_isl_407073_betacov_england_02_2020epi_isl_403929_betacov_wuhan_ipbcams-wh-04_2019 epi_isl_410301_betacov_nepal_61_2020 epi_isl_403931_betacov_wuhan_ipbcams-wh-02_2019epi_isl_410531_betacov_japan_na-20-05-1_2020 epi_isl_403963_betacov_nonthaburi_74_2020 epi_isl_402125_betacov_wuhan-hu-1_2019epi_isl_408514_betacov_wuhan_ivdc-hb-envf13-20_2020epi_isl_402119_betacov_wuhan_ivdc-hb-01_2019 epi_isl_411956_betacov_usa_tx1_2020 epi_isl_406596_betacov_france_idf0372_2020 epi_isl_412967_betacov_china_iqtc02_2020 epi_isl_408431_betacov_france_idf0626_2020epi_isl_410532_betacov_japan_os-20-07-1_2020epi_isl_411957_betacov_china_wh-09_2020 epi_isl_412970_betacov_usa_wa2_2020 epi_isl_412978__betacov_wuhan_hbcdc-hb-02_2020 epi_isl_412869_betacov_korea_kcdc05_2020 epi_isl_412965_betacov_canada_bc_37_0-2_2020 epi_isl_412871_betacov_korea_kcdc07_2020 epi_isl_408008_betacov_usa_ca3_2020epi_isl_406593_betacov_shenzhen_szth-002_2020 epi_isl_406536_betacov_foshan_20sf211_2020 epi_isl_412459_betacov_jingzhou_hbcdc-hb-01_2020 epi_isl_410718_betacov_australia_qld04_2020 epi_isl_412862_betacov_usa_ca9_2020 epi_isl_413019_betacov_switzerland_1000477102_2020epi_isl_412981__betacov_wuhan_hbcdc-hb-05_2020epi_isl_408668_betacov_vietnam_vr03-38142_2020 epi_isl_410535_betacov_singapore_4_2020 epi_isl_408665_betacov_japan_ty-wk-012_2020 epi_isl_406716_betacov_china_whu01_2020 epi_isl_402127_betacov_wuhan_wiv02_2019 epi_isl_411926_betacov_taiwan_3_2020 epi_isl_406223_betacov_usa_az1_2020 epi_isl_407214_betacov_usa_wa1-a12_2020 epi_isl_406717_betacov_china_whu02_2020 epi_isl_404228_betacov_zhejiang_wz-02_2020epi_isl_412898__betacov_wuhan_hbcdc-hb-02_2019 epi_isl_413017_betacov_south_korea_kumc01_2020 epi_isl_408480_betacov_yunnan_ivdc-yn-003_2020 epi_isl_403936_betacov_guangdong_20sf028_2020 epi_isl_408667_betacov_japan_ty-wk-521_2020 epi_isl_411218_betacov_france_idf0571_2020 epi_isl_405839_betacov_shenzhen_hku-sz-005_2020 epi_isl_408010_betacov_usa_ca5_2020 epi_isl_406031_betacov_taiwan_2_2020 epi_isl_406844_betacov_australia_vic01_2020 epi_isl_411950_betacov_jiangsu_js01_2020 epi_isl_412974_betacov_italy_spl1_2020epi_isl_403928_betacov_wuhan_ipbcams-wh-05_2020 epi_isl_412870_betacov_korea_kcdc06_2020 epi_isl_404253_betacov_usa_il1_2020 epi_isl_410045_betacov_usa_il2_2020 epi_isl_403932_betacov_guangdong_20sf012_2020epi_isl_408484_betacov_sichuan_ivdc-sc-001_2020 epi_isl_410537_betacov_singapore_6_2020 epi_isl_412872_betacov_korea_kcdc12_2020 epi_isl_407079_betacov_finland_1_2020epi_isl_410545_betacov_italy_inmi1-isl_2020 epi_isl_408670_betacov_usa_wi1_2020 epi_isl_403937_betacov_guangdong_20sf040_2020 epi_isl_403934_betacov_guangdong_20sf014_2020epi_isl_413014_betacov_canada_on-phl2445_2020epi_isl_411915_betacov_taiwan_cgmh-cgu-01_2020 epi_isl_410717_betacov_australia_qld03_2020 epi_isl_412026_betacov_hefei_2_2020 epi_isl_407313_betacov_hangzhou_hzcdc0001_2020 epi_isl_412972_betacov_mexico_cdmx_indre_01_2020 epi_isl_406034_betacov_usa_ca1_2020 epi_isl_411952_betacov_jiangsu_js02_2020 epi_isl_411902_betacov_cambodia_0012_2020epi_isl_413016_betacov_brazil_spbr-02_2020 epi_isl_413018_betacov_south_korea_kumc02_2020 epi_isl_403930_betacov_wuhan_ipbcams-wh-03_2019epi_isl_412899__betacov_wuhan_hbcdc-hb-03_2019 epi_isl_408489_betacov_taiwan_ntu01_2020 epi_isl_409067_betacov_usa_ma1_2020 epi_isl_404895_betacov_usa_wa1_2020epi_isl_408666_betacov_japan_ty-wk-501_2020 epi_isl_410218_betacov_taiwan_ntu02_2020 epi_isl_407893_betacov_australia_nsw01_2020 epi_isl_407193_betacov_south_korea_kcdc03_2020epi_isl_412983_betacov_tianmen_hbcdc-hb-07_2020 epi_isl_410714_betacov_singapore_8_2020 epi_isl_403935_betacov_guangdong_20sf025_2020 epi_isl_406798_betacov_wuhan_wh01_2019 epi_isl_411953_betacov_jiangsu_js03_2020 epi_isl_412030_betacov_hong_kong_vb20026565_2020 epi_isl_412968_betacov_japan_hu_dp_kng_19-020_2020 epi_isl_412973_betacov_italy_cdg1_2020 epi_isl_402132_betacov_wuhan_hbcdc-hb-01_2019epi_isl_408486_betacov_jiangxi_ivdc-jx-002_2020 epi_isl_408430_betacov_france_idf0515_2020 epi_isl_410486_betacov_france_ra739_2020 epi_isl_412966_betacov_china_iqtc01_2020epi_isl_412969_betacov_japan_hu_dp_kng_19-027_2020epi_isl_411219_betacov_france_idf0386-islp1_2020epi_isl_408481_betacov_chongqing_ivdc-cq-001_2020 epi_isl_412975_betacov_australia_nsw05_2020 epi_isl_406534_betacov_foshan_20sf207_2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 16.20034470 doi: medrxiv preprint cdna synthesis and viral genome amplification cdna synthesis was performed with superscript iv first strand synthesis kit (thermo) using 11 µl of extracted viral nucleic acids and random hexamers according to manufacturer's specifications. direct amplification of the viral genome cdna was performed in multiplexed pcr reactions to generate ~400 bp amplicons tiled across the genome. the multiplex primer set, comprised of two non-overlapping primer pools, was created using primal scheme and provided by the artic network (version 3 release). 1 pcr amplification was carried out using q5 hot start hf taq polymerase (neb) with 5 µl of cdna in a 25 µl reaction volume. a two-step pcr program was used with an initial step of 98°c for 30 seconds, then 35 cycles of 98°c for 15 seconds followed by five minutes at 65°c. separate reactions were carried out for each primer pool and validated by agarose gel electrophoresis.sequencing library preparation approach was adapted from the artic network protocol and oxford nanopore protocol "pcr tiling of covid-19 virus". 1-3 amplicons from both primer pools were combined and purified with a 1x volume of ampurexp beads (beckman coulter). a total of 50 ng of dna was treated with neb ultra ii end prep enzyme mix (neb). up to 24 specimen libraries were barcoded using nanopore native barcoding expansion kits (oxford nanopore) and nebnext ultra ii ligase (neb) for simultaneous sequencing. uniquely barcoded samples were pooled and cleaned with a 0.4x volume of ampurexp beads. adapter ligation and cleanup was performed using the oxford nanopore genomic dna by ligation kit according to manufacturer specifications. libraries were sequenced on the nanopore minion device using flo-min106d type r9.4.1 flow cells.base calling of nanopore reads was performed on the northwestern university's quest high performance computing cluster for genomics using guppy v3.4.5 with the dna r9.4.1 450bps high accuracy configuration and default quality score filtering (--qscore_filtering). read quality filtering, reference alignment, and consensus sequence generation was performed using artic network software and protocols. 3, 4 briefly, demultiplexed and quality filtered sequence reads were aligned to a sars-cov-2 reference genome sequence (ncbi accession number mn908947.3) using minimap2 v2.17. 5 alignments were filtered to remove low-quality alignments, and variants relative to the reference were determined from raw signal data using nanopolish v0.12.5. 6 regions with less than 10-fold read coverage were masked. we chose to use a lower read coverage cutoff than the default of 20 in the artic network software to allow for consensus sequence calls in regions with relatively poor amplification due to inefficient primer binding. manual validation of variant calls in regions with 10 -19x coverage was performed using tablet software. 7 isolate lineages were determined with pangolin using the 2020-05-19 definitions. 8, 9 consensus genome sequences were deposited in the gisaid database. accession numbers are given in supplemental table 1 . publicly-available sars-cov-2 genome sequences were downloaded from the gisaid database on 04/10/2020. 10 only full genome sequences in the database with <1% ns were selected for inclusion in the analyses.genome sequences were aligned using mafft v7.453 software and manually edited using mega v6.06. 11, 12 the us analyses included 901 sars-cov-2 sequences from the us deposited in gisaid as of april 4, 2020 and the global analysis included 3099 sars-cov-2 sequences deposited in gisaid from 64 different countries up to april 4, 2020. all maximum likelihood (ml) phylogenies were inferred with iq-tree v 2.0.5 using its modelfinder before each analysis to estimate the nucleotide substitution model best-fitted for each dataset by means of bayesian information criterion (bic). 13, 14 we assessed the tree topology for each phylogeny both with the shimodaira-hasegawa approximate likelihood ratio test (sh-alrt) and with ultrafast bootstrap (ufboot) with 1000 replicates each. 15, 16 treetime v0.7.4 was used for the assessment of root-to-tip correlation, the estimation of time scaled phylogenies and ancestral reconstruction of most likely sequences of internal nodes of the tree and transitions between geographical locations along branches. 17 we used the sampling dates of the sequences to estimate the evolutionary rates and determine the best rooting of the tree. we used the population proportion per location in each of the datasets as weights in the analysis to correct for strong sampling biases in the datasets.bayesian time-scaled phylogenetic analyses were only performed for the phylogenies of each clade separately due to the high complexity of the full us and global phylogenies. we used beast v2.5.2 to estimate the date and location of the most recent common ancestors (mrca) as well as to estimate the rate of evolution of the virus. 18 beast priors were introduced with beauti v2.5.2 including an uncorrelated relaxed molecular clock model with a lognormal distribution and the treetime estimate as the prior for the mean, a gtr substitution model with invariant sites, as the best-fitted model obtained with modelfinder, and a coalescence bayesian skyline to model the population size changes through time. markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) runs of at least 100 million states with sampling every 5,000 steps were computed. 19 the convergence of mcmc chains was monitored using tracer v.1.7.1, ensuring that the effective sample size (ess) values were greater than 200 for each parameter estimated.phylogeographic patterns were estimated using a discrete-state continuous time markov chain to reconstruct the spatial dynamics between geographical locations, 20 assuming an asymmetric transition model with separated rate parameters for each possible transition. mcmc was run for over 100 million steps with a burn-in of 20%. parameters were sampled every 5,000 steps and trees sampled every 10,000 steps. pairwise migration rate estimates had an ess of more than 1000 in every case. statistics from the trees were extracted using pact v0.9.5 and spread3 v0.9.6 was used to visualize the phylogeographic patterns associated with the phylogenies. 21, 22 in each case, the maximum clade credibility (mcc) trees were obtained from the tree posterior distribution using treeannotator v2.5.2 after 20% burnin.all statistical analyses were performed in r version 4.0.0. the r package lme4 was used for the linear and logistic regressions, fitdistrplus was used to test the best fitted model for the data, lsmeans was used to test for all possible contrasts and perform multiple comparison correction, nnet was used for the multinomial logistic regression, finalfit package was used to generate the descriptive table, and ggplot2 and ggpubr were used to generate the statistical figures.to evaluate for differences in ct values between clades, specimens were grouped according to the estimated clade of the detected virus. all specimens that did not cluster in any of the 3 major clades were placed into a separate group. a linear model was fitted after testing for normal distribution of the data. clade membership was included in the model, controlling for all possible confounders such as the date of the qpcr, age, sex, race, maximal severity of illness, and the specimen collection source. all possible contrasts within the model were performed and corrected for multiple comparisons using tukey's test. corrected p-values of less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.we also tested for differences in viral load by specimen source (nasopharyngeal swab vs. bronchoalveolar lavage) by fitting a linear model that included the same confounders as above, extended to contain the interaction between clade and specimen source. for this analysis we only used data from patients with viruses from the two most abundant clades, clades 1 and 2 (n = 76 patients total). within this model, we tested for all possible combinations of clade, source, and their interaction and corrected for multiple comparisons as before.to determine if the difference in ct values between clades was driven by differences in time since symptom onset or exposure, the number of days between symptom onset or exposure and specimen collection was determined by chart review. we tested for differences between clade 1 and clade 2 in the number of days between symptom onset and specimen collection (n = 76) or possible virus exposure (n = 29 patients) using a wilcoxon signed-rank test.finally, to test for association between disease severity and viral clade, we employed multinomial logistic regression, using maximal severity of covid-19 per patient as the outcome variable [binned as mild (outpatient or ed only), moderate (inpatient hospitalization), or severe (icu admission and/or death)], and clade, ct values, and other demographic variables as the predictors. to analyze the association between clade 1 and 2 and all available clinical and demographic variables, we fitted a logistic regression model including age, sex, race, severity of illness, time since symptoms onset, and specimen source to test for any possible association between these variables and the clade observed.artic network. https://artic.network/ncov-2019 (accessed march 23, 2020).oxford nanopore technologies. https://community.nanoporetech.com (accessed april 27, 2020).per supplemental table 1 accession numbers for the consensus sars-cov-2 genome sequences deposited in this study in the gisaid database with pangolin lineage assignments. in late 2019, the first clusters of people with severe respiratory infections and pneumonia were reported in the hubei province of china. [1] [2] [3] the novel betacoronavirus known as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has since emerged as the cause of an unprecedented worldwide healthcare crisis with more than 7 million confirmed cases worldwide and more than 400,000 attributable deaths during the first six months of 2020. 4, 5 the spread of the novel coronavirus disease has proceeded at different rates across the globe, but ongoing community transmission is widespread.in the united states (us), the first confirmed case of covid-19 was reported on january 20 th in washington state with a second confirmed case reported shortly thereafter in chicago, illinois on january 23 rd . both cases were linked with recent travel to china. 6 the chicago patient later passed the virus to her husband in the first reported case of local transmission on january 30 th . 6 the state of new york reported its first case on march 1 st and rapidly developed into a hotspot.by the end of march, the us had confirmed cases in all 50 states and reported the most cases of any country in the world. stay-at-home orders went into effect in an attempt to mitigate virus spread in illinois, new york, and washington on march 21 st , 22 nd , and 23 rd , respectively.based on publicly available data, prevalence and mortality rates differ on a state-by-state basis [as of april 27th, 2020: new york, 282,143 cases (5.8% mortality); washington state, 13,319 cases (5.5% mortality); illinois, 41,777 cases (4.5% mortality)] (supplemental figure 1) . 7, 8 these differences can be attributed to a multitude of factors including: geography, population density, demographics, the timing and extent of community mitigation measures, testing availability, healthcare infrastructure, and public health reporting practices. 9 whether variability in viral genotype may also contribute to these observed differences in transmission and disease burden remains unknown.in parallel with the unprecedented speed and scale of the pandemic, the sharing and integration of clinical and epidemiological data has also occurred at an exceptional pace, with over 40,000 viral genome sequences of sars-cov-2 from across the globe currently available via online databases such as gisaid. 10 rapid whole-genome sequencing (wgs) of emerging viruses allows for informed development of molecular diagnostic assays, as well as tracing of patterns of spread across multiple epidemiological scales. 11 understanding the molecular epidemiology . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 21, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 19 .20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint 4 of the virus through evolutionary models and phylogenetic analysis can further aid in estimating the genetic variability and evolutionary rate, which can have significant implications for disease progression as well as drug and vaccine development.while extensive wgs has been reported in washington state and new york, there are relatively few sequences available from illinois. here, we present a phylogenetic analysis of 88 sars-cov-2 viruses from the airways of covid-19 patients seeking care in a single healthcare system in chicago, illinois from march 14, 2020 through march 21, 2020. we further assessed these viral genomic data for correlations with clinical and demographic features of our cohort.individuals suspected of covid-19 within two hospitals of the northwestern medicine healthcare system were screened for sars-cov-2 infection as per the cdc protocol. 12 samples were collected between march 14, 2020 through march 21, 2020. participants included individuals presenting to emergency departments at northwestern memorial hospital (nmh) or lake forest hospital (lfh), patients admitted to the hospital at nmh, and outpatient or corporate health clinic patients. nasopharyngeal swab and/or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid specimens were collected from screened individuals and stored in either phosphate-buffered saline (pbs) or viral transport medium. viral rna was extracted from clinical specimens utilizing the qiaamp viral rna minikit (qiagen). clinical testing for sars-cov-2 presence was performed by quantitative reverse transcription and pcr (qrt-pcr) with the cdc 2019-ncov rt-pcr diagnostic panel utilizing n1 and n2 probes as previously described. 12 all specimens with a cycle threshold (ct) less than or equal to 35 were considered positive and included in this study. ct values from the n1 probes were used in all subsequent analyses.detailed whole genome sequencing and analysis methodologies can be found in the supplemental methods. briefly, cdna synthesis was performed with superscript iv first strand synthesis kit (thermo) according to manufacturer's specifications. direct amplification of the viral genome cdna was performed using multiplexed primer pools per protocols provided by the artic network (version 3 release) 13 . the sequencing library preparation protocol was adapted from the artic network protocol and oxford nanopore protocol "pcr tiling of covid-19 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 21, 2020. high accuracy configuration and default quality score filtering (--qscore_filtering). read quality filtering, reference alignment, and consensus sequence generation was performed using artic network software and protocols. 15, 16 regions with less than 10-fold read coverage were masked. we chose to use a lower read coverage cutoff than the default of 20 in the artic network software to allow for consensus sequence calls in regions with relatively poor amplification due to inefficient primer binding. manual validation of variant calls in regions with 10 -19x coverage was performed using tablet software. 17 consensus genome sequences were deposited in the gisaid database (accession numbers provided in supplemental table   1 ).detailed phylogenetic and statistical methodologies can be found in the supplemental methods.this study was reviewed and approved by the institutional review board of northwestern university.the funding sources had no role in the design of the study, in the collection/analysis/ interpretation of the data, in the writing of the report, or in the decision to publish. the corresponding authors had access to all of the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit this work for publication.between march 14 and march 21, 2020, a total of 127 qrt-pcr clinical tests performed at nmh were positive for sars-cov-2 (supplemental figure 2a ). residual rna from these . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 21, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint 6 diagnostic tests was collected for wgs. of these, 37 specimens failed to achieve sufficient amplification required for sequencing or had inadequate read coverage after sequencing.almost half of the 90 successfully sequenced specimens had been collected from patients evaluated in emergency departments at nmh or lfh, 25% from non-icu hospitalized patients at nmh, and 12% from patients in the nmh icu (supplemental figure 2b ). two sequenced specimens were found to be redundant and were excluded from further analysis, leaving 88 sequenced specimens from 88 individuals. the qrt-pcr cycle threshold (ct) values of these specimens ranged from 14.52 to 32.37. after applying alignment quality filters and normalizing segment coverage to a maximum of 200 reads in each direction, the average median genome coverage across non-overlapping amplicon sequences was 348 reads per specimen (min 56, max 395).we first performed a maximum likelihood (ml) phylogenetic analysis of the 88 sars-cov-2 specimen genomes in this study (supplemental methods). this analysis showed that most of the sequences (93%) clustered in three main clades (support: >85% alrt and >85% ufboot) ( figure 1a ). for the purposes of this report we will refer to these clades, ordered by relative abundance in the sequence set, as clades 1 (n=51, 57.9%), 2 (n=24, 27.3%), and 3 (n=7, 7.9%). using the pangolin software method of lineage classification, 18, 19 isolates in clade 1 were assigned mainly to lineage b·1 (92% assigned to lineage b·1; 2% to b·1.1; and 6% to b·1.5), the majority of isolates in clade 2 belonged to lineage a·3 (92% to a.3; 8% to a), and isolates in clade 3 belonged mainly to lineage a·1 (86% to a·1; 14% to a) (supplemental table   1 ). the intra-and inter-clade variability of the sequences showed a mean intra-group variability of 1.16x10 -4 base differences per site [sem= 3.16x10 -5 ] versus a mean inter-group variability of 4.80 x10 -4 base differences per site [sem= 1.17x10 -4 ], confirming the higher within-clade sequence similarity in the observed phylogenetic clustering.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 21, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 21, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprintto place the three observed clades in a broader geographic context, we expanded our analysis to include 901 sars-cov-2 sequences from the us deposited in gisaid as of april 4, 2020.with the complete us dataset, we performed ml phylogenetic reconstruction of the sequences, generated a temporal phylogeny, and reconstructed the ancestral states of the tree to identify clade-defining mutations ( figure 1b) identified in illinois at the end of january 2020. 6 we next studied the phylodynamic and phylogenomic characteristics of these three clades using a bayesian approach to infer possible differences in their population dynamics. these analyses . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 21, 2020. to further investigate the origin and population dynamics of the clade 2, we performed a phylogenetic analysis at the global level. we included an additional 3099 sars-cov-2 sequences deposited in gisaid from outside the us up through april 4, 2020. we conducted similar ml analyses as those performed on the us sequences above (supplemental figure 4) .these results further confirmed strong statistical support for clade 2 (91.6% alrt and 92% ufboot). again, the detected spread of this clade has been exceptionally limited, with a majority of sequences derived from this study, china, or australia. ancestral reconstruction of these global sequences showed low divergence of these samples from those first sequenced in wuhan, china ( figure 3a ).. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 21, 2020. we used global sequences phylogenetically related to clade 2 available in the gisaid database and performed the analysis encompassing simultaneous estimation of sequence and discrete (geographic) trait data. the depicted phylogenetic tree corresponds to the maximum clade credibility tree. branch colors represent the most probable geographical location of their descendent node inferred through bayesian reconstruction of the ancestral state. the width of the branches represents their posterior probability. x-axis corresponds to the inferred date. b) phylogeographic reconstruction of the origin of clade 2 under a discrete diffusion model. westward movements are indicated by lines with an upward curvature, eastward movements are indicated by lines with a downward curvature, lines are colored according to the most probable geographical location of their descendent node, and circle sizes around a node are proportional to the number of lineages maintaining that location.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 21, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint to better discern the most likely origin of clade 2, we performed a phylogeographical analysis using all available clade 2 sequences and related global sequences. as suggested above, these results determined the most likely origin of this clade to be china at our current state of global sampling ( figure 3b ). clade 2-like sequences from other areas outside the us most likely represent introductions of similar viruses into those areas rather than secondary seeding from illinois. one exception to this is a cluster of sequences in australia that appear to be more closely related to those in illinois than china ( figure 3b ). together, these findings are most consistent with an introduction of clade 2 into illinois from china in january 2020. additionally, global analysis with the other two clades (supplemental figure 4) suggest that the new yorkcentered clade 1 was likely to have been introduced into the us from europe while the washington-centered clade 3 was most likely introduced directly from china, consistent with other reports. 21 together, these analyses show distinct global phylodynamics of the three main clades observed in the chicago area: clade 1 was introduced by way of new york through europe, clade 2 was introduced directly from china, and clade 3 was introduced through washington state fromthe west coast, to date clade 2 is almost exclusively found in the chicago area.the limited spread of clade 2 sars-cov-2 viruses both in the us and worldwide could suggest phenotypic variability that may impact transmission rate. to further investigate this, we compared the ct values for each sample, which serves as a proxy for viral load in the patients' upper airways at the time of diagnosis. we grouped the viruses according to their assigned clade, creating an additional group for the viruses that did not fall into any of the three major clades. we fit a linear model to test for differences in ct values between the clades, controlling for the date of isolation, hospital location, age, sex, race, severity of illness, and specimen collection source (supplemental table 2 ). we detected significantly higher ct values corresponding to lower viral loads in clade 2 (chicago-centered) compared to clade 1 (new york-centered, q=0.008) and clade 3 (washington-centered, q=0.027) ( figure 4a ). due to the limited sample sizes for clade 3 (n = 7) and ungrouped specimens (n = 6), our subsequent analyses focus solely on clades 1 (n = 51) and 2 (n = 24).. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 21, 2020. and/or could account for the differences between clades 1 and 2. we tested for differences between sample source, clade, and both, accounting for their potential interaction in the linear model. we found a significant difference between np and bal samples (q= 0.0484), with lower ct values in the bal specimens (supplemental figure 5a) . when considering only np samples, . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 21, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint 14 the ct values of clade 1 viruses were still significantly lower than clade 2 viruses as observed previously (q=0.0062). however, no significant difference in ct value was detected by clade in the bal samples. while the numbers of bal samples are low, this result suggests that the viral load differences between the two clades are primarily observed in the upper airways of infected patients.it has been reported that viral loads in the upper airways generally decrease over the course of infection. 22, 23 to determine whether the difference in average ct values between samples from patients infected with clade 1 or clade 2 viruses corresponded with the time of specimen collection, the number of days between reported symptom onset and specimen collection was determined for each patient from available case files. no significant difference in time from symptom onset to specimen collection between patients infected with clade 1 or clade 2 viruses was observed (supplemental figure 5b) . additionally, the date of possible virus exposure was able to be determined for 29 patients and again no significant difference was found between clades (supplemental figure 5c ). consistent with prior reports, we did find that later dates of specimen collection after symptom onset significantly correlated with higher ct values among patients infected with clade 1 viruses, though this same trend was not observed among patients infected with clade 2 viruses (supplemental figure 5d ). these results suggest that the average viral load in the upper airways of patients infected with clade 2 viruses is lower relative to those infected with clade 1 viruses at the time of diagnosis independent of time since symptom onset.given early reports that covid-19 disease severity is correlated with sars-cov-2 viral load, 24,25 we next looked for associations between viral clades 1 and 2 and maximal disease severity. disease severity was binned as mild (outpatient or ed only), moderate (inpatient hospitalization), or severe (icu admission and/or death) and set as the outcome variable. we then fit a logistic regression model including all available demographic and clinical variables.interestingly, we found no significant association between any available variable and disease severity in our dataset, including clade ( figure 4b) . we finally fit a logistic regression model including all available demographic and clinical variables with clade as the outcome variable (supplemental table 3 ). consistent with our previous results, ct value was the only variable associated with viral clade and vice versa. these data suggest that ct value in the upper airway at the time of diagnosis may not be associated with disease severity, though it is associated with the viral clade.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 21, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprintin this study, we report the phylogenetic and phylodynamic analyses of 88 sars-cov-2 genomes from covid-19 patients in chicago, illinois, us, which largely fall into three major clades. two of these three clades are broadly representative of the major circulating clades that expanded and disseminated rapidly across the us through early april 2020 with points of origin in new york (clade 1) and washington state (clade 3). in addition, we identified a third major clade (clade 2) that is relatively unique in the us and predominantly found in the chicago area through europe, a model which is also supported by a recent pre-print report describing the european origin of sars-cov-2 in new york city. 20 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 21, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint both the us and global sequence data suggest relatively little dispersion of clade 2 strains beyond illinois as of mid-to late-march 2020. indeed, though the clade appears to have originated from china as early as mid-january 2020, there is little evidence to date of spread beyond a few likely cases in other midwest states and a secondary cluster in australia. this is in contrast to clade 3 and especially clade 1 viruses, which have spread over a larger geographic area in less time. though a large number of isolates collected in the us and globally were available to this study through the gisaid collective, under-sampling of some regions and/or patient groups could have resulted in imprecise estimates of transmission patterns or potentially have missed a broader distribution of clade 2 specimens. however, the proportion of viruses sampled from chicago in this study that were clade 2 (24 of 88, 27.3%) was far greater than the proportion in the database sampled across the us (10 of 901, 1.1%) or from non-us countries (34 of 3099, 1.1%), suggesting that clade 2 was more abundant in the chicago area relative to other sampled locations as of late march 2020. as more genomes both from illinois and elsewhere are sequenced, we will continue to assess for changes in the population structure and distribution of sars-cov-2.notably, we found that clade 2 viruses had significantly lower viral loads in patient upper airways relative to clade 1 viruses at the time of diagnosis. this is among the first reports of sars-cov-2 phylogenetic lineage correlating with phenotypic differences. clade 1 viruses are defined by nonsynonymous mutations in the rna-dependent rna polymerase (nsp12 p322l) and spike (s d614g) proteins. other studies have likewise linked the spike d614g mutation to a broader global spread and to higher viral loads. 26, 27 similarly, other reports have noted the rapid spread of the nsp12 p322l mutation. 28 our study was not designed to determine causal relationships between mutations and phenotypes, and it is possible that the virus is adapting multiple, independent changes that aid in its propagation. lower viral loads in the upper airways of infected patients may decrease viral transmissibility and impact the overall spread, but further laboratory and clinical studies will be required to test the impact of these variants on viral replication, disease severity, and transmissibility. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 21, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint while these restrictions went into place concurrent with sample gathering for this study, they may have contributed to a slower spread of clade 2 viruses outside the state. second, the virus may be more prevalent among members of a relatively more insular community within the state with comparatively less travel or socialization with non-community members. third, these viruses may be found to have distinct clinical manifestations that lessen the opportunity for asymptomatic transmission to multiple other individuals. ongoing studies of clinical and demographic patient data associated with ongoing specimen collection may provide support for these or other scenarios.the other clinical and demographic data we examined, including disease severity, did not correlate significantly with clade or ct value. previous reports suggested that disease severity may be correlated with viral load as measured by ct value during disease, but our data suggest the same may not hold true for ct values collected at diagnosis. 29 although patients in the icu had lower ct values than patients in other locations, supporting a link between viral load and severity, most icu samples were bal specimens, not np specimens. this correlation may therefore simply be reflective of different ct values in the lower vs. upper airways. finally, we did observe a correlation between ct value and the time since symptom onset, confirming previous reports, 22,23 though this did not change significantly by clade and did not explain the higher ct values of clade 2 viruses. further studies with more specimens and associated clinical data will be needed to elucidate these relationships.as the specimens in this study were collected over the first 8 days during which testing was broadly available at our institution, the phylogenetic patterns and abundances observed represent a cross-sectional snapshot of our region. longitudinal evaluations could reveal more detailed clade dynamics and population structure. additionally, these specimens were collected from one healthcare system primarily serving patients from the north and west sides of chicago, potentially limiting generalizability to other regions in and around chicago or other parts of illinois. nevertheless, these data suggest chicago is an ideal location for observational and interventional studies to capture the breadth of sars-cov-2 genetic diversity. this ability to compare diverse viral genotypes in a single hospital setting allowed us to identify clade-specific differences in viral load at the time of diagnosis, which may in turn have consequences for transmissibility.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 21, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprinton december 31, 2019, the wuhan health commission first reported clusters of people with severe respiratory infections and pneumonia from wuhan, china (1) (2) (3) . with more than 3 million confirmed cases worldwide and more than 200,000 attributable deaths during the first four months of 2020, the novel single-stranded positive-sense rna betacoronavirus known as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has emerged as the cause of an unprecedented worldwide healthcare crisis (4, 5) . the spread of the novel coronavirus disease has proceeded at different rates across the globe, but ongoing community transmission is widespread.in the united states, the first confirmed case of covid-19 was reported on january 20thin washington state with a second confirmed case reported shortly thereafter in chicago, illinois on january 23rd (6) . both patients had recently traveled to wuhan, china, where the transmission event is suspected to have taken place. the chicago patient later passed the virus to her husband in the first reported case of local transmission on january 30th (6) . the state of new york quickly developed into a hotspot after its first case was reported on march 1st. by the end of march, the united states had confirmed cases in all 50 states and reported the most cases of any country in the world. stay-at-home orders went into effect in an attempt to mitigate virus spread in illinois, new york, and washington on march 21st, 22nd, and 23rd, respectively.based on publicly available data, prevalence and mortality rates differ on a state-bystate basis [as of april 27th, 2020: new york, 282,143 cases (5.8% mortality); washington state, 13,319 cases (5.5% mortality); illinois, 41,777 cases (4.5% mortality)] (7, 8) . specifically, in illinois the upswing in cases occurred later than in washington, despite estimated similar times of arrival, and the rate of increase has been slower than observed in new york (supplemental figure 1) (7) . these differences can be attributed to a multitude of factors including: geography, population density, demographics, the timing and extent of community mitigation measures, testing availability, healthcare infrastructure, and public health reporting practices (9) . whether variability in viral genotype may also contribute to these observed differences in transmission and disease burden remains unknown.in parallel with the unprecedented speed and scale of the pandemic, the rapid sharing and integration of clinical and epidemiological data has also occurred at an exceptional pace, with over 10,000 viral genome sequences of sars-cov-2 from across the globe currently available via online databases such as gisaid (10). rapid whole-genome sequencing (wgs) of emerging viruses allows for informed development of molecular diagnostic assays, as well as . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 19 .20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint 4 tracing of patterns of spread across multiple epidemiological scales (11) . understanding the molecular epidemiology of the virus through evolutionary models and phylogenetic analysis can further aid in estimating the genetic variability and evolutionary rate, which can have significant implications for disease progression as well as drug and vaccine development.while extensive wgs has been reported in washington state and new york, there are relatively few sequences available from illinois. here, we present a phylogenetic analysis of 88 sars-cov-2 viruses from the airways of covid-19 patients seeking care in a single healthcare system in chicago, illinois from march 14, 2020 through march 21, 2020. these analyses find three distinct clades of virus circulating in the chicago area, most closely resembling viruses circulating in new york (clade 1), china (clade 2), and washington state (clade 3). notably, the viral loads in patients infected with clade 1 viruses were significantly higher than clade 2. these results suggest that genetic differences in sars-cov-2 may be linked to differences in viral load and, potentially, with transmissibility of the virus.individuals suspected of covid-19 within two hospitals in northwestern medicine (nm) were screened for sars-cov-2 infection as per the cdc protocol (12). the nm a healthcare system comprises 10 hospitals spread across the chicagoland area spanning approximately 50 square miles. samples were collected between march 14, 2020 through march 21, 2020.memorial hospital (nmh) or lake forest hospital (lfh), patients admitted to the hospital at nmh, and outpatient or corporate health clinic patients. nasopharyngeal swab and/or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid specimens were collected from screened individuals and stored in either phosphate-buffered saline (pbs) or viral transport medium. viral rna was extracted from clinical specimens utilizing the qiaamp viral rna minikit (qiagen). clinical testing for sars-cov-2 presence was performed by quantitative reverse transcription and pcr (qrt-pcr) with the cdc 2019-ncov rt-pcr diagnostic panel utilizing n1 and n2 probes as previously described (12). all specimens with a cycle threshold (ct) less than or equal to 35 were considered positive and included in this study. specimens and clinical data of patients with positive tests had patient-identifying information removed and were assigned a study code number.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint cdna synthesis and viral genome amplification cdna synthesis was performed with superscript iv first strand synthesis kit (thermo) using 11 μl of extracted viral nucleic acids and random hexamers according to manufacturer's specifications. direct amplification of the viral genome cdna was performed using primer sets generating overlapping ~ 400 bp amplicons tiled across the genome. the multiplex primer set, comprised of two non-overlapping primer pools, was created using primal scheme and provided by the artic network (13). the version 3 release of this primer set was used for these studies.pcr amplification was carried out using q5 hot start hf taq polymerase (neb) with 5 μl of cdna in a 25 μl reaction volume. a two-step pcr program was used with an initial step of 98°c for 30 seconds, then 35 cycles of 98°c for 15 seconds followed by five minutes at 65°c.separate reactions were carried out for each primer pool and validated by agarose gel electrophoresis.sequencing library preparation approach was adapted from the artic network protocol and oxford nanopore protocol "pcr tiling of covid-19 virus" (13, 14) . amplicons from both primer pools were combined and purified with a 1x volume of ampurexp beads (beckman coulter). a total of 50 ng of dna was treated with neb ultra ii end prep enzyme mix (neb). up to 24 specimen libraries were barcoded using nanopore native barcoding expansion kits (oxford nanopore) and nebnext ultra ii ligase (neb) for simultaneous sequencing. uniquely barcoded samples were pooled and cleaned with a 0.4x volume of ampurexp beads. adapter ligation and cleanup was performed using the oxford nanopore genomic dna by ligation kit according to manufacturer specifications. libraries were sequenced on the nanopore minion device using flo-min106d type r9.4.1 flow cells.base calling of nanopore reads was performed on the northwestern university's quest high performance computing cluster for genomics using guppy v3.4.5. read quality filtering, reference alignment, and consensus sequence generation was performed using artic network software and protocols (15). briefly, demultiplexed and quality filtered sequence reads were aligned to a sars-cov-2 reference genome sequence (ncbi accession number mn908947.3) using minimap2 v2.17 (16) . alignments were filtered to remove low-quality alignments, and . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint 6 variants relative to the reference were determined from raw signal data using nanopolish v0.12.5 (17) . regions with less than 10-fold read coverage were masked. validation of variant calls was performed using a combination of custom in-house software and manual examination of alignments using tablet software (18) . consensus genome sequences were deposited in the gisaid database. accession numbers are given in supplemental table 1 . publicly-available sars-cov-2 genome sequences were downloaded from the gisaid database on 04/10/2020 (10). only full genome sequences with <1% ns were selected for inclusion in the analyses.genome sequences were aligned using mafft v7.453 (19) phylogeographic patterns were estimated using a discrete-state continuous time markov chain to reconstruct the spatial dynamics between geographical locations (26) , assuming an asymmetric transition model with separated rate parameters for each possible transition. mcmc was run for over 100 million steps with a burn-in of 20%. parameters were sampled every 5,000 steps and trees sampled every 10,000 steps. pairwise migration rate estimates had an ess of more than 1000 in every case. statistics from the trees were extracted using pact v0. 9.5 (27) . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint and spread3 v0.9.6 (28) was used to visualize the phylogeographic patterns associated with the phylogenies. in each case, the maximum clade credibility (mcc) trees were obtained from the tree posterior distribution using treeannotator v2.5.2 after 20% burn-in.all statistical analyses were performed in r version 4.0.0. to evaluate for differences in ct values between clades, specimens were grouped according to the estimated clade of the detected virus. all specimens that did not cluster in any of the 3 major clades were placed into a separate group. a linear model was fitted after testing for normal distribution of the data. clade membership was included in the model, and possible confounders such as the date of the qpcr, age, sex, race, maximal severity of illness, and the specimen collection source were controlled for. all possible contrasts within the model were performed and corrected for multiple comparisons using tukey's test. corrected p-values of less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.to test for association between disease severity and viral clade, we employed multinomial logistic regression, using maximal severity of covid-19 per patient as the outcome variable [binned as mild (outpatient or ed only), moderate (inpatient hospitalization), or severe (icu admission and/or death)], and clade, ct values, and other demographic variables as the predictors. to analyze the association between clade and all available clinical and demographic variables, we fitted a logistic regression model including age, sex, race, severity of illness, and specimen source to test for any possible association between these variables and the clade observed. finally, we also tested for differences in viral load by specimen source (nasopharyngeal swab vs bronchoalveolar lavage) by fitting a linear model that included the same confounders as before, extended to contain the interaction between clade and specimen source. within this model, we tested for all possible combinations of clade, source, and their interaction and corrected for multiple comparisons as before. for these last three analyses we only used data from patients with viruses from our two major clades, clades 1 and 2.this study was reviewed and approved by the institutional review board of northwestern university.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint 8between march 14 and march 21, 2020, a total of 127 clinical tests performed by the diagnostic molecular biology laboratory at northwestern memorial hospital (nmh) were positive for sars-cov-2 as determined by qrt-pcr. the residual rna from these diagnostic tests were assigned unique sample identifiers and collected for sequence analysis. of these, 37 specimens failed to achieve sufficient viral genome amplification required for sequencing or failed to achieve required coverage after alignment, defined in this study as at least 10x coverage across at least 90% of the genome. the remaining 90 specimens were considered successfully sequenced (supplemental figure 2a) . almost half of these 90 specimens were collected from patients evaluated in emergency departments at nmh or lake forest hospital, 25% from non-icu hospitalized patients at nmh, and 12% from patients in the nmh icu (supplemental figure 2b ). two sequenced specimens (nm-ncov-0082 and nm-ncov-0087) were found to be redundant and excluded from this analysis, leaving 88 sequenced specimens we performed a maximum likelihood (ml) phylogenetic analysis of the 88 sars-cov-2 specimen genomes using the gtr nucleotide substitution model. to measure branch support, we used sh-alrt with 1000 replicates. this analysis showed that most of the sequences analyzed (93%) clustered in three main clades with strong statistical support (>85% alrt) ( figure 1a) . due to the lack of a consensus in current nomenclature, we will refer to these clades throughout this report, ordered by relative abundance in the sequence set, as clades 1, 2, and 3. the intra-and inter-clade variability of the sequences showed a mean intra-group variability of 1.16x10 -4 base differences per site [sem= 3.16x10 -5 ] versus a mean inter-group variability of 4.80 x10 -4 base differences per site [sem= 1.17x10 -4 ], confirming the higher within-. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint 9 clade sequence similarity in the observed phylogenetic clustering. among our sequences, 57.9% clustered in clade 1, 27.3% in clade 2, and 7.9% in clade 3.to place the three observed clades in a broader geographic context, we expanded our analysis to include 901 sars-cov-2 sequences from the usa deposited in gisaid as of april 4, 2020. we included the reference sequence obtained from wuhan, china at the beginning of the pandemic to root the trees. with this dataset, we performed ml phylogenetic reconstruction of the sequences, generated a temporal phylogeny, and reconstructed the ancestral states of the tree to identify clade-defining mutations ( figure 1b) and possible geographical location transitions. finally, we performed phylodynamic analyses using a bayesian approach to confirm the clades observed in our sequences and understand their origin and dynamics. these analyses confirmed our previous clustering, with a bulk of the chicago sequences falling into three distinct clades (figure 2a) . overall, the local epidemic in the chicago area is broadly reflective of the epidemic in the usa as a whole, with most major and minor clades represented within this one hospital system. these results are consistent with three main introductions of sars-cov-2 into the chicago area seeding the three predominant clades, while also suggesting several other minor introductions with more limited expansion (figure 2a) . (figure 2b, top) . this timing corresponds with the first confirmed case was reported in washington state, which was a patient who returned from wuhan on january 15 (29) . these data are consistent with two main introductions of clade 3 into illinois, followed by limited spread. consequently, only 8% of the sequences in our collection are clade 3.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint 11 the three clades also differ considerably in their inferred effective population sizes (ne) ( figure 2c) . clade 1 had a later introduction into the usa, but a subsequent exponential expansion made it the predominant clade. clade 3 had two phases of expansion to reach a slightly lower peak population size. cluster 2, on the other hand, has had a constant and limited expansion despite its early introduction ( figure 2c) .overall, our results suggest that as of mid-march 2020, three main clades of sars-cov-2 were circulating in the chicago area. clade 2 appears to have been introduced in illinois early in the epidemic and seems to have undergone more limited spread when compared to the other two clades, clade 1 centered in new york and clade 3 centered in washington.to further investigate the origin and population dynamics of the chicago-centered clade 2, we performed a phylogenetic analysis at the global pandemic level. to this end, we included an additional 3099 sars-cov-2 sequences deposited in gisaid from throughout the world up through april 4, 2020. we conducted similar ml analyses as those performed on the usa sequences above (supplemental figure 4) . these results further confirmed the strong statistical support for clade 2 (>90%). except for some sequences from australia, the spread of this clade has been exceptionally limited. ancestral reconstruction of these global sequences showed a close relationship between clade 2 with sequences obtained from china, mainly shanghai, with low divergence from the first sequenced samples in wuhan, china ( figure 3a) .to better discern the most likely origin of clade 2, we performed a phylogeographical analysis using all available clade 2 sequences and related global sequences. as suggested above, these results determined the most likely origin of this clade at our current state of global sampling to be wuhan, china ( figure 3b) . clade 2-like sequences from other areas outside the usa most likely represent introductions of similar viruses into those areas rather than secondary seeding from illinois. one exception to this is a cluster of sequences in australia that appear to be more closely related to the illinois sequences than those from china ( figure 3b) .together, these findings are most consistent with a single introduction of this clade into illinois directly from wuhan, china around mid-january 2020 as the source of the observed clade 2 sequences in chicago. this result coincides with the history of the first case reported in illinois, which was a traveler from wuhan. the sequence of the virus from this individual is very close to the node that defines this clade (6) .additionally, global analysis with the other two clades (supplemental figure 4) suggest that the new york-centered clade 1 was likely to have been introduced into the usa from china . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. is well-represented on the west coast, clade 2 is almost exclusively found in the chicago area.the limited spread of clade 2 sars-cov-2 viruses both in the usa and worldwide are suggestive of phenotypic variability that may impact transmission rate. to further investigate this, we compared qrt-pcr cycle threshold (ct) values, a proxy for viral load in the patients' airways, calculated for each sample at the time of diagnosis. we first grouped the viruses according to their assigned clade, creating an additional group for the viruses that did not fall into any of the three major clades. we fitted a linear model to test for differences in ct values between the clades, controlling for the date of measurement, age, sex, race, severity of illness, and specimen collection source (supplemental table 2 ). we detected significantly higher ct values corresponding to lower viral loads in clade 2 (chicago-centered) compared to clade 1 (new york-centered) (q=0.0080 after multiple comparison correction) (figure 4a) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint 13 the viral load differences between the two clades are primarily observed in the upper airways of infected patients. that being said, most of our bal samples came from patients in the icu while only two np samples where obtained from the icu, making it difficult to disentangle whether the differences observed between bal and np are due to the severity of the disease or the anatomical compartment from which the samples were obtained (supplemental table 2 ).given early reports that covid-19 disease severity is correlated with sars-cov-2 viral load (30, 31) , we next looked for associations between viral clade and additional clinical characteristics. to test this, we fit a logistic regression model including all available demographic and clinical variables to evaluate for associations with these variables with maximal disease severity and/or clade. we found no significant association between any available variable and disease severity in our limited dataset. consistent with our previous results, ct value was the only variable associated with viral clade and vice versa. these data suggest that ct value in the upper airway at the time of diagnosis may not be associated with disease severity, though it is associated with the viral genotype. given the rapid rates of phylogeographic and population size expansion of clade 1 versus clades 2 and 3, and the observed higher viral loads in the upper airways of clade 1-infected patients at the time of diagnosis, it is possible that clade 1 viruses exhibit higher transmissibility, though this has yet to be formally tested.in this study, we report the phylogenetic and phylodynamic analyses of 88 sars-cov-2 genomes from covid-19 patients in chicago, illinois, usa. these results reveal at least three major clades circulating in the chicago region as of mid-march 2020. two of the three clades are broadly representative of the major circulating clades that expanded and disseminated rapidly across the usa through early april 2020 with points of origins in new york (clade 1) andwashington state (clade 3). in addition, we identified a third major clade (clade 2) that is relatively unique in the usa and likely originated in illinois. despite an early estimated arrival date, viruses in this clade lack the rapid and wide dispersion evidenced with the other viral clades. interestingly, patients infected with viruses in clade 1 presented with significantly higher viral loads in the upper airways of patients at the time of diagnosis than patients infected with viruses in clades 2 or 3. these data suggest that differences in virus genotype may have direct impacts on viral load, which in turn may influence transmission and viral spread.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint 14 chicago, illinois is the third-largest city in the usa and is located centrally in the country with direct flights to all continents except antarctica. despite recording the second confirmed case of covid-19 and the first confirmed case of person-to-person transmission in the usa, relatively little sars-cov-2 sequencing data had been available from the chicago area with only 11 sequences available on gisaid [as of may 11, 2020] . the data presented here add an additional 88 sequences to this collection and constitute the first systematic analysis of sars-cov-2 whole genome sequences from covid-19 patients in the chicago area.phylogenetic analyses of these sequences demonstrate that the major clades circulating in chicago in mid-march 2020 represent separate introduction events that can be traced back to distinct sources. although the chicago-centered clade 2 and the washington-centered clade 3 are phylogenetically related, this analysis shows that they were the result of geographically and temporally separate introductions into the usa from china. the first positive test for sars-cov-2 in illinois was from an individual who had returned to chicago directly from wuhan, china six days prior to becoming ill (6) . this individual would later pass this virus to her husband in the first confirmed case of local transmission in the usa. the sequences of these patients' viruses are closely related to viruses from wuhan, china as well as viruses in clade 2.together, these data suggest that clade 2 viruses were introduced into the chicago area from china and began community transmission around mid-january 2020. while clade 3 viruses are also related, they are more consistent with an independent introduction event through an intermediate in washington state. we additionally find that that clade 1 viruses are most likely to have been introduced to chicago via new york, through europe, a model which is also supported by a recent pre-print report suggesting that most strains of sars-cov-2 circulating in new york city are phylogenetically more closely related to strains from the european continent than other potential sources (32) . the mechanism of action is unclear (33, 34) . similarly, other reports have noted the rapid spread of the nsp12 p322l mutation (35) . our study was not designed to determine causal relationships between mutations and phenotypes, and it is possible that the virus is adapting multiple, independent changes that aid in its propagation. further laboratory and clinical studies will be required to test the impact of these variants on viral replication, disease severity, and transmissibility. the viral diversity within chicago enabled us to capture this variation in a single health care system and control for sampling date, patient demographics, and hospital location in these analyses, but it is also possible that unmeasured confounders are also influencing these results.in addition to the potential for lower viral loads, there are several other conceivable factors that could account for the muted spread of clade 2 viruses outside the chicago region. ongoing studies of clinical and demographic patient data associated with these specimens in our institution could potentially elucidate whether there is support for any of these . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint scenarios, though more specimens and sequences will be required to determine these associations.the clinical data we examined, including disease severity, did not correlate significantly with clade or ct value. for example, a similar proportion of patients infected with either clade 1 or clade 2 viruses were located in the icu at time of sampling (5 of 51 and 3 of 24, respectively). previous reports suggested that disease severity is correlated with viral load as measured by ct value during disease course, but our data suggest the same may not hold true for ct values collected at diagnosis. although patients in the icu had lower ct values than patients in other locations, supporting a link between viral load and severity, most icu samples were bal specimens, not np specimens. this correlation may therefore simply be reflective of different ct values in the lower vs. upper airways. further studies with more specimens and associated clinical and demographic data will be needed to further elucidate these relationships.as the specimens in this study were collected over the first 8 days during which testing was broadly available at our institution, the phylogenetic patterns and abundances observed represent a cross-sectional snapshot of our region. longitudinal evaluations could reveal more accurate clade dynamics and population structure. additionally, these specimens were collected from one health system primarily serving patients from the north and west sides of chicago, potentially limiting generalizability to other regions in and around chicago or other parts of illinois. nevertheless, these data suggest chicago is an ideal location for observational and interventional studies to capture the breadth of sars-cov-2 genetic diversity. this ability to compare diverse viral genotypes in a single hospital setting allowed us to identify clade-specific differences in viral load at the time of diagnosis, which may in turn have consequences for transmissibility. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprint clades most closely related to the three major clades in the chicago collection are highlighted.we included sequences from northwestern and global sequences from gisaid. branches are colored by location and tips corresponding to northwestern sequences are highlighted. well supported clades of the tree that include our defined chicago clades are indicated. table 1 | accession numbers for the consensus sars-cov-2 genome sequences deposited in this study in the gisaid database.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20107144 doi: medrxiv preprintsevere acute respiratory syndrome (sars) is a new infectious disease reported first in the autumn of 2002 and diagnosed for the first time in march 2003 [1] . it is still a serious threat to human health and sars coronavirus (cov) has been associated with the pathogenesis of sars according to koch's postulate [2] .significant research efforts have been made into investigation of the sars-cov genome sequence, aimed at establishing its origin and evolution to help eventually in preventing or curing the disease it causes. although the task is a hard one, it opens up the opportunity, amongst others, for comparative investigation of different sars-cov isolates aimed at identification of genome regions properties expressing different levels of sequence polymorphism [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] .the genome of sars-cov consists of a single positive rna strand approximately 30 kb in length, consisting of about 10 open reading frames (orf), and about 10 intergenic regions (igrs). the first two overlapping orfs at the 5' end encompass two-thirds of the genome, while the rest of the orfs at the 3' end account for the remaining third. [9] in gbk and fasta formats ( table 1 ). the main goal was twofold: first, to analyze and compare nucleotide sequences, to identify snps positions, insertions and deletions, and second, to group them according to sequence similarity, eventually pointing to phylogeny of sars-cov isolates.according to the length of isolates (insertions and deletions) and the presence of snps, we classified them into three main groups with subgroups: "regular" isolates with no insertions or deletions (with different numbers of snps), isolates with "long insertions" and isolates with "many individual" insertions and deletions (with different positions of snps), which is close to phylogenetic analysis results.all the sequences are between 29573 and 29757 in length (table 1) , with a high degree of similarity (>99% pairwise). still, they can be differentiated on the basis of sequence polymorphism (insertions and deletions), number and sites of snps [8] . results of the comparison of genome primary structure of the analyzed isolates are given in figure 1 . twh position  1---------------------------------27168   -----27782   ------27808  27814   ---------27883   ------------------29727  isolate  number   |  |  ||  |  |  1-6,11:twh (twc2)  atattaggtt up to the poly-"a" of length 13 present at the 3' end of fra ( figure 1 ).ii) similarity analysis showed that a significant number of isolates have the same length (29727 bases), the same beginning and ending subsequences (that seem to be exact starts and ends of the complete sars-cov genome up to the poly-"a" at the 3' end), thus forming a kind of referent group; these are the isolates twh, twc3, twk, tws, twy, urbani, frankfurt 1 ( figure 1 ). the fully sequenced isolate twh then has been chosen as the referent isolate for sequence comparisons since its average number of snps compared to other isolates is the smallest. for example, twh and urbani have an average number of snps 15.7 and 17.6 respectively for all the isolates, and 5.7 and 10.5 respectively for the referent group.for snps see the tables in the additional files 1 and 2.iii) most isolates, compared to twh, are shorter at the 5'end (e.g., sin2500, sin2679, sin2774, sin2677, sin2748, as), have various length poly-"a" strings at the 3' end (e.g., tor2, hsr1, fra, bj02, tw1, hku-39489, whu), or both (bj01, bj03, bj04, cuhk-w1, cuhk-su10). three of the isolates, taiwan tc1, taiwan tc2, taiwan tc3, have both starting and ending deletions (at the 5' end 69, at the 3' end 85 nucleotides). several isolates (e.g. twj, twc, sin2677, sin2748) have some short deletions inside the sequence ( figure 1 ).iv) there is a group of isolates that have significant length insertions (29 nucleotides) inside the sequence. these are the isolates gd01, sz3, sz16. a significant number of individual insertions have been identified in zj01 and zmy 1 isolates ( figure 1 , additional files 3,4,5).among the snp contents of isolates, there is a significant difference in the number of snps for different pairs of isolates. for twh as the referent isolate, this number varies from 1 to 80 snps. isolates may be classified into three groups based on the number of snps with twh ( figure  2 ):1. with less than 15 (twc3, twk, tws, twy, urbani,  twj, twc, tw1 finally, besides the number, there are differences in positions of snps (potential mutation sites). in order to avoid nucleotide changes that probably arose during propagation of the virus in cell culture and sequencing, figure 3 represents positions (on the relative scale of all isolates and on twh scale) where two or more snps occurred, not taking into consideration isolates with long insertions (gd01, sz3 and sz16). the positions of multiple snps of these three isolates, similar as far as these three are concerned, are highly different from all the others and are represented in figure 4 . these results coincide with those published in marra et al's paper [4] for urbani and tor2 isolates, but differ from those published in ruan's paper [8] for the 14 isolates therein analyzed (sin-group, bjgroup, tor2, urbani, cuhk-w1, hku-39849, gd01), which were obviously based on different revisions of the pubmed ncbi entrez database [9] ; the isolates from the dataset considered may be classified according to their sequence polymorphism and snp contents properties just described. at first, properties (iii, iv) may result in three different groups ( figure 2 ):a. "regular isolates" whose nucleotide structure is close to the referent group ( structural tree for sars-cov isolates figure 2 structural tree for sars-cov isolates. the tree is based on qualitative analysis of sequence variation of 36 isolates. protein  1ab  1ab  1ab  1ab  1ab  1ab  1ab  1ab  1ab  1ab  1ab  1ab  1ab  s  s  s  hyp  hyp  e  m  m  hyp  hyp  hyp  n   relative  scale  2562  3858  7930  8585  9417  9867  11461  11506  17590  18991  19090  19111  19865  21749  22250  24962  25329  26080  26233  26507  26630  27273  27843  27858  28328   twh scale  2557  3852  7919  8572  9404  9854  11448  11493  17564  18965  19064  19084  19838  21721  22222  24933  25299  26050  26203  26477  26600  27243  27812  27827 28268 positions with two or more snps in b group with amino acid changes figure 4 positions with two or more snps in b group with amino acid changes. only snps in b group isolates, regarding twh, have been counted. the same notation is applied as in figure 3 . (figure 7b) finally, the positions of snps will move cuhk-w1 from a1 into a2 group (more than 50% of common snp positions) while whu will move from a2 into a1 (less than 30% of common snp positions), giving the final grouping of isolates presented as a structural tree (figure 2 although qualitative in nature, the structural tree turns out to be close to the quantitative grouping which is a basis for (computational) phylogenetic classification. tables in additional files 1 additional files 2 for isolates of a2 group and twh, on the twh scale, additional files 3 for isolates of group b with twh, and additional files 4,5 for isolates of c1, c2 groups, respectively). figures 5,6 ,7 represent density distribution of snps, insertions and deletions on the twh scale, for the same groups of isolates. figure 8 represents the overall density distribution of snps, insertions and deletions for all the 36 isolates, along with the gene map for twh (which is quite similar to gene maps of other isolates). density distributions do not show regularities yet (with respect to the number of available sequences) that could provide for precise statistical characterization. still, they exhibit crowding regions close to the 3' end which is also characterized by the presence of a number of proteins of unknown function.it can also be noted that the proposed grouping of 36 isolates, based on different criteria, still conserves the previous classification t-t-t-t / c-g-c-c [8] . all the isolates from groups a1 and c have t-t-t-t configuration, while all the isolates from groups a2 and b have c-g-c-c configuration, except for gz50, bj04 being tgcc (figure 2 , the fact that the enlarged number of isolates exhibits the same properties relating to the four loci supports the assumption that the mutations could not have arisen by chance base substitution during propagation in cell culture and the sequencing procedure [8] .we analyzed amino acid changes in proteins for the annotated isolates (19 out of 36), and presumed proteins in non-annotated ones for multiple snps in all the isolates.results of the analysis are represented in figures 3 and 4 . figure 3 shows that silent mutations occurred in envelope bj04  twh  bj03  gz50  twh  bj02  bj03  bj03  bj03  bj03  bj02  bj04  cuhk-w1  bj01,bj02   gz50  twh,bj04,gz50   cuhk-w1  twh,gz50,cuhk-w1   bj02  bj01  bj04  twh  bj04  bj03  bj02  gz50  twh  bj02  cuhk-w1  cuhk-w1  twh,hz50,cuhk-w1   bj03  bj02  bj04  bj02  bj03  bj04  bj04  bj02  gz50  bj02  bj04  twh,bj04   bj03  twh  bj02  bj02  gz50  bj03  bj03  bj04  bj02,bj03   gz50  bj01  bj02  bj01,bj03   twh  bj01,bj02, protein e, while nucleotide changes resulted in amino acid changes in spike (s), membrane (m) and nucleocapside (n) proteins. all three snps in the spike protein are situated in the outer membrane region and not within the potential epitope region (amino acid position 469-882) as proposed by ren y. et al. [13] . amino acid changes occurred in two multiple snps in m protein, one multiple snps in n protein and 7 (out of 13) multiple snps of the polyprotein 1ab, as well as in one multiple snp of a hypothetical protein, while the silent mutations occurred in three hypothetical proteins. figure 3 also represents properties of the corresponding amino acidsphylogenetic tree of 36 sars-cov complete genome isolates figure 9 phylogenetic tree of 36 sars-cov complete genome isolates. distances represent degree of sequence variation. the largest distance is associated with zmy 1, followed by zj01 isolate (groups c1, c2). groups a1, a2 and b are clearly distinguished. the tree has been obtained using clustalw and phylodraw programs.resulted by snps. the only significant change in amino acid properties is in s protein gly→asp (a2, b groups, i.e., in cuhk-w1, gz50, bj01-bj03, gd01, sz3 and sz16 isolates) and hypothetical protein cys→arg (the same isolates, bj04 in addition). the only addition in nonannotated sequences is in hypothetical protein following s protein in twh, exhibiting silent change, and in nonannotated bj02 and bj03, corresponding to the hypothetical protein, gly→glu. similar analysis can be done for amino acid changes corresponding to snps at positions specific for b group isolates (figure 4 ). taking into account the only annotated isolate gd01, there are five amino acid changes in polyprotein 1ab, two amino acid properties changes in s protein (ser→leu and tyr→asp, the second being within the epitope region), one amino acid change in m protein and one amino acid property change (cis→arg) in bgi-pup.the sars-cov isolates have been multialigned using the clustalw program [10] as the very first step in obtaining a phylogenetic tree. the aligned sequences have been submitted then to clustalw for bootstrapping and phylogenetic tree production. enlargement of the sequence set resulted in the refinement of the phylogenetic tree produced, as compared to previous results such as ruan [8] and zhang&zheng [14] , obtained for 14 and 16 isolates, respectively. the phylogenetic tree obtained, drawn using the phylodraw program [15] , is represented in figure 9 . it is similar to our structural tree based on qualitative analysis of the isolates (figure 2 ).the results of the analysis of dissimilarities, described in previous paragraphs, are in accordance with the alignment obtained by clustalw, but regrouped and formatted in a way that facilitates further interpretation and application.comparative analysis of genome sequence variations of 38 sars-cov isolates resulted in some conclusions that might be of interest in further investigation of the sars-cov genome:1. all of the sars-cov isolates are highly homologous (more than 99% pairwise). most of them have similar nucleotide structure, with the same 5' and 3' ends and poly-"a" at the 3' end of different length (0-24), some of them with a single short deletion close to the 3' end of the sequence; out of 312 snps in total, only two are in igrs.2. three of the 38 isolates have long insertions within the sequence;3. two of the isolates have a large number of individual insertions / deletions, exhibiting different snp positions;4. all the isolates may be grouped according to sequence polymorphism into three groups (with up to two subgroups), reflecting their similarities / dissimilarities. since the isolate sequences have a high degree of homology, different properties of groups are represented in a more transparent way in the classification tree obtained by such a qualitative analysis, than in a bootstrapped phylogenetic tree obtained from multialigned sequences using the clustalw program [10].5. the total number of amino acid changes caused by multiple snps is 15 (in isolates of a, c groups) and 34 in isolates of b group. the total number of silent mutations is 10 (for a, c groups) and 7 (for b group).6. since s protein is of special interest regarding its receptor affinity and antigenecity, it is interesting to notice that all amino acid properties' changes are located in its outer membrane region, one for a, c groups and two for b group.7. the results obtained may be useful in further investigation aiming at identification of sars-cov genome regions responsible for its infectious nature.we investigated the complete genomes of 38 sars-cov isolates. nucleotide sequences are taken from the pubmed ncbi entrez database [9] in gbk and fasta formats ( table  1) .the coverage included all the isolates published by october 31 st 2003 (with updated revisions). the identifiers, accession numbers, genomic size (in nucleotides), revision dates and country or source of the isolates considered are included in the table, together with labels as referred in this paper. the fully sequenced isolate twh has been chosen as the referent isolate, since its average number of snps was the lowest as compared to all other isolates.for similarity analysis of isolates, the following procedure has been applied consisting of two steps:1. identification of structurally identical parts of isolates, i.e., insertion and deletion sites 2. identification of snps in structurally identical parts.step 1 has been carried out by a function performing similarity analysis of subsequences of a given length (e.g., 100 bps), and identifying significantly non-matching strings as being inserted in the corresponding sequence (i.e. deleted from the other). since significant number of isolates have the same length (29727 bases) and starting and ending subsequences (that seem to be the exact starts and ends of the complete sars-cov genome up to the poly-"a" at the 3' end), they may be considered as forming a representative group. the nucleotide structure of all other isolates was analyzed with respect to this representative group. for each pair of isolates (x,y) (x from the representative group), a file insdelx-y has been produced containing positions and lengths of each of the insertions or deletions in the isolate y.step 2 has been carried out by comparing structurally identical parts (of the same length) of pairs of isolates. the starting and ending positions of those parts have been taken from the file insdelx-y (for comparison of x and y), produced in step 1. the procedure returns results in a file with snps in the two sequences (files mismx-y).we also used the clustalw program [10] for multialignment as a control process, as well as for phylogenetic investigations.in order to use similarity analysis results for drawing any phylogenetic conclusions about the sars-cov genome dataset, a clustalw [10] multialigned output has been generated and a bootstrapped phylogenetic tree has been produced and drawn using the phylodraw program [15] .c oronaviruses (covs) (order nidovirales, family coronaviridae, genus coronavirus) are enveloped viruses with plus-stranded rna genomes of 26-32 kb, the largest contiguous rna genomes in nature (1) . they are classified into 3 groups, which contain viruses pathogenic for mammals (groups 1 and 2) and poultry (group 3) (1). hu-man covs (hcovs)-229e, -nl63, -oc43, and -hku1 are endemic worldwide and cause mainly respiratory infections in children and adults. the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus (sars-cov) is a novel zoonotic coronavirus that caused an international epidemic in 2002-2003. fortunately, efficient public health management interrupted this epidemic (2) . studies conducted in china in the aftermath of the sars epidemic have identified covs in bats (chiroptera) and implicated this speciose mammalian order as the most likely reservoir of all known coronaviruses (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) . among the most urgent concerns prompted by the sars epidemic is the likelihood of similar future events. thus, it seems highly relevant to study the ecology of bat covs in terms of diversity, host restriction, virus prevalence, risk of exposure, and the circumstances of past host transition events.the genetic diversity of bat-borne covs is currently unclear. preliminary data suggest that covs may be adapted in a stricter sense to a specific host species rather than to specific regions (5, 6, (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) . a variety of pathogenic covs occur in other mammals or poultry. however, the genetic range within these animals is considerably less than that observed in even single bat species or subfamilies (7, 8) .estimates indicate that there are >100 bat species in sub-sahran africa. this finding is in contrast to ≈50 species in the entire western palaearctic region (europe, middle east, north africa) (13, 14) . african bats have been shown to harbor pathogens that are occasionally transmitted to humans. this transmission may result in severe disease outbreaks, e.g., ebola and marburg viruses (15) . because bats are a part of the human diet in wide areas of africa (16) , it appears highly relevant to study covs in african bats.we have demonstrated by serologic studies that african bats have antibodies against covs (10) . antibodies reactive with sars-cov antigen were detected in 47 (6.7%) of 705 bat serum specimens from 26 species (10) . recently, tong et al. detected sequences of covs in bats from kenya (17) . we describe the results of studies on bats in ghana obtained by using noninvasive sampling of frugivorous and insectivorous bats at 2 caves, a lake habitat of diverse insectivorous bats, and a large urban roosting site of frugivorous bats. bayesian inference of diversification dates gave implications on the recency of the introduction of hcov-229e into the human population, irrespective of its original source.in the locations identified in figure 1 , mist netting and sampling were conducted as described (11) . in kumasi zoo, fecal samples were collected with plastic foil under trees occupied by eidolon helvum bats (estimated colony size 300,000). for all capturing and sampling, permission was obtained from the wildlife division of the ministry of lands, forestry, and mines in ghana. research samples were exported under a state agreement between the republic of ghana and the federal republic of germany, represented by the city of hamburg. additional export permission was obtained from the veterinary services of the ghana ministry of food and agriculture.samples (1-4 fecal pellets or swabs suspended in rna stabilization solution [rnalater tissue collection; applied biosystems, foster city, ca, usa]) were tested at the kumasi centre for collaborative research in tropical medicine as described (11, 18) . after initial sequencing, specific primers were designed for each group of cov found. nested reverse transcription-pcr (rt-pcr) primer sets used for sequencing of longer fragments of representative viruses are available upon request. nucleic acid alignments were conducted based on amino acid code by using the clustalw algorithm (www. ebi.ac.uk/clustalw) in the molecular evolutionary genetics analysis version 4.0 software package (www.megasoftware.net) (19) . two gap-free nucleotide alignments (817 bp and 1,221 bp) were generated. tree topologies were determined on both datasets by using mrbayes version 3.1 (20) . the analysis used a general time reversible (gtr) substitution model, with 6 rate categories to approximate a gamma-shaped rate distribution across sites and an invariant site assumption (gtr + γ6 + i). markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) chains of 10 7 iterations were sampled every 500 generations, resulting in 20,000 sampled trees. two metropolis-coupled chains (1 cold and 3 heated chains each) were run in parallel, compared, and pooled. convergence of chains was confirmed by the potential scale reduction factor statistic in mrbayes (21) and by visual inspection of each cold chain using the tracer program (22) . phylogenetic dating was conducted by using bayesian evolutionary analysis sampling trees (beast) (22) . chain lengths in beast were at least 20,000,000 generations with sampling every 500 generations. convergence of the model was checked visually and by the effective sample size statistic with tracer.during february 2008, bats were sampled in the described locations around kumasi, ghana. initially, 7 fecal samples tested positive by pan-cov pcr. products (440 bp, rdrp gene) were sequenced and aligned with prototype cov. neighbor-joining phylogenies indicated 2 distinct groups of sequences that belonged to cov group 1 (n = 4) and group 2 (n = 3), respectively. specific primer pairs for the group 1 and group 2 sequences were designed and applied again to all samples. five additional viruses were found, resulting in a total cov prevalence of 9.76% in insect-eating bats (n = 123). no virus was found in any oral swab. all virus findings in fecal samples are listed by capture site in table 1 .notably, all cov findings were in insect-eating leafnosed bats of the genus hipposideros. within the genus, the species h. abae could be discriminated unambiguously by morphology ( table 1 ). the remaining hipposideros species were assigned to the complex of forms related to currently recognized species h. caffer and h. ruber. because 2 morphotypes were present (figure 2 ), the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene was sequenced as described (23) . both morphotypes belonged to phylogenetic lineages distinct from h. caffer and possibly represented 2 distinct species (p. vallo, personal ongoing investigation). both are collectively referred to as h. caffer (cf.) ruber in this study. a fraction of 15.4 % of h. cf. ruber specimens yielded cov, without a difference between sexes (14%/19%, n = 57/21 [m/f], respectively). only adult males and nonlactating adult females, but no lactating females, juveniles, and subadults of h. cf. ruber were encountered.to estimate the quantity of cov genomes in bat feces, we did end-point dilution experiments with the nested pan-cov rt-pcr (18). the previously determined sensitivity limit of the pcr assay was 5-45 copies/pcr (18) . in the assay, the equivalent of 1 mg feces was tested per pcr tube (100 mg feces collected, 1:10 dilution extracted, 1:10 dilution tested). the highest dilution factor that still yielded an amplification signal in any of the samples was 1:10, which suggested a maximal concentration of 50 to 450 cov rna copies/mg of feces.in h. cf. ruber bats in the kwamang and booyem caves, a diverse group 1 cov was found. further analysis was complicated by the low rna content in samples. based on alignments of prototype group 1 viruses, 5 different nested rt-pcrs were designed and the rdrp fragment could finally be extended by 441 bp to the 5′ end, providing an 817-nt fragment for phylogenetic analysis. all methods of phylogenetic inference placed this virus next to a common ancestor with human coronavirus 229e, which circulates worldwide in humans ( figure 3 ). bootstrap support of the hcov-229e/ghanabt-covgrpi root point in neighbor-joining analysis was 100%. the corresponding bayesian posterior probability was 1.0. the most closely related member of the ghanabt-covgrp1 clade shared 91.90% nucleotide identity with hcov-229e in the analyzed fragment. the most distant member was 86.50% identical. the next phylogenetic neighbor, the human cov hcov-nl63, was only 74.70%-78.60% identical in the analyzed fragment.with the pan-cov screening assay, a group 2 cov was initially found in the kwamang cave. sequences from 3 bats were identical. the secondary group-specific pcr identified 4 additional samples of this virus, 1 of them from booyem cave b and the remaining from kwamang. nucleotide identity among these sequences was 97.2%-100%. phylogenetic analysis with different methods of inference (neighbor-joining nucleotide-based, neighbor-joining amino acid-based, bayesian) yielded variable tree topologies suggesting basal associations with either the 2a, 2d, or 2b subgroups (data not shown) (24) . based on alignments of prototype group ii viruses, 8 additional nested rt-pcr primer sets were designed and 2 of the samples could be amplified. sequences could be extended 520 bp upstream and 383 bp downstream of the initial fragments, yielding 1,221-bp fragments for phylogenetic analysis. bayesian phylogenetic inference with different substitution models and parallel analysis using metropolis coupling now placed the virus reliably next to a common ancestor with the 2b group of cov (sars-like viruses, figure 3 ). the bayesian posterior probability of the cov 2b/ghanabt-covgrp2 clade being monoyphletic was 1.0. a maximum of 72.2% nucleotide identity was shared with sars cov.reliable isolation dates were researched in the literature for each employed virus. because a reliable molecular clock dating existed for the most recent common ancestor (mrca) of the hcov-oc43/bovine cov pair (25) , this date was set as a normal-distributed probabilistic prior within the published ranges (25) for calibration of all analyses. a first analysis was conducted on the 1,225-bp dataset that did not include the novel ghanabt-covgrp1. all virus sequences were assumed to be contemporary. phylogeny was inferred using a gtr + γ4 + i model. the resulting mrca date of the cov2b (sars-like)/ghanabt-covgrp2 clade was 260 ad and that of the hcov-nl63/-229e pair was 981 ad (see table 2 for details). to include the novel ghanabat-covgrp1, we repeated the same analysis by using the 817-bp dataset. the resulting mrca date of the hcov-nl63/229e pair was 816 ad in this analysis, which was in good concordance with results from the 1,221-bp dataset ( table 2 ) and also with previously published data (26) . the diversification estimate for the novel group 1 bat-cov and hcov-229e then was 1803 ad.because it has been suggested that codon-based evolutionary models may be preferred for bayesian phylogenetic inference from protein-coding datasets (27) , analyses on the 817-bp dataset were repeated by using the srd06 substitution model in beast. this analysis did not yield a different substitution rate, but resulted in older resulting mrca dates ( table 2) . a bayes factor test conducted in tracer yielded a strong estimate of superiority of the codon-based model over the gtr + γ4 + i model (log 10 bayes factor 139 [20 is highly significant]). to further optimize the prediction of mrca dates, the constant population size assumption used in all analyses was exchanged against expansion growth or exponential growth assumptions. both assumptions were predicted to fit the data better than the constant size model (bayes factors 13.5 and 13.9). there was no difference between the expansion and exponential models (bayes factor 0.34 in favor of expansion). the mrca date of hcov-229e and the ghanabt-covgrp1 was 1686 (expansion) or 1800 (exponential growth). table 2 summarizes the results. figure 3 shows a dated phylogeny of coronaviruses with mrcas according to the 2 last mentioned analyses.to determine whether cov recombination might play a role in the studied virus population, the structural nucleocapsid gene was amplified using 8 nested rt-pcr primer sets that had been designed on alignments of all available cov group 1 nucleocapsid sequences. using a similar approach, we also tested the same samples for cov group 2 nucleocapsid sequences. only group 1 rt-pcrs yielded fragments. these fragments could be combined into contig- *mrca, most recent common ancestor; ci, confidence interval; hpd, high population density; sars, severe acute respiratory syndrome; hcov, human coronavirus; gtr + + i, general time reversible gamma-shaped rate distribution across sites and an invariant site assumption. †estimation of the year (bc) of the most recent common ancestor. ‡estimation of the year of the most recent common ancestor of extant cov. all years ad except as indicated. §cov group 2b without novel bt-cov from this study (figure 2 ). uous 1,030-nt sequences for bt-cov ghanakwam 19 and 1,176 nt for bt-cov ghanaboo 344. as shown in figure 3 , panel b, the resulting phylogenetic placement was exactly matching that of the rdrp fragments, giving no evidence of recombination between the rdrp region located in the middle of the genome and the nucleocapsid gene located at the extreme downstream end. sequencing of the nucleocapsid gene of the ghanabt-covgrp2 was not successful when we used 15 nested rt-pcrs designed on alignments of all available cov 2b nucleocapsid sequences. amplification with above mentioned nested rt-pcrs for cov group 1 was also unsuccessful.in the aftermath of the sars epidemic, bats have been identified as carriers of cov in china (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) . furthermore, in addition to our earlier finding of antibodies against covs in various african bats (10), we have confirmed the presence of cov in bats of ghana. together with recent data from germany, north america, trinidad, and kenya (11, 12, 28) , these findings suggest that the association of cov with bats is a worldwide phenomenon. the prevalence of cov in insect-eating bats (9.76%) matched our previous findings in germany. however, in that study we sampled during the breeding season and showed that covs are most likely amplified in maternity roosts (11) . the composition of the catch in this study (no lactating females, no young bats) suggests sampling outside the breeding season and may not be directly comparable. future studies relating to risks of exposure should address whether virus prevalence may change over time.the risk of exposure was also addressed by investigations of virus concentration. several groups have shown that covs are almost exclusively detected in bat feces and not, as hypothesized earlier, in saliva (3, 4, 28, 29) . surprisingly, little virus was found in all fecal samples tested in our study. we estimated the rna concentration per full sample (100 mg feces = 2-4 fecal pellets) to be only up to 4.5 × 10 4 rna copies. human pathogenic viruses transmitted by the fecal-oral route generate much higher virus concentrations in stool, up to ≈10 12 rna copies/mg, e.g., for different picornaviruses (30) (31) (32) . based on these data it would be difficult to postulate that humans can acquire cov from bat feces. however, studies in other locations and at different times are needed to address virus concentration in bat droppings in more detail. because virus in this study was only observed in insectivorous bats and not in frugivorous bats, future studies should investigate whether insects might constitute a source of cov infection for bats.to achieve a direct prediction of the potential of bat covs to infect human cells, it would be highly relevant to conduct virus isolation studies on bat feces. however, in our study we sampled no more than 100 mg of feces per bat. all samples had to be collected in rnalater solution (0.5 ml) (applied biosystems) for reasons of storage and transportation. although it has been suggested that rnalater solution may preserve virus infectivity (33, 34) , our observations showed that the solution has to be diluted at least 1:20 in cell culture medium to avoid cytotoxicity (data not shown). because of the low virus rna concentrations observed, we did not attempt to isolate the virus. however, the absence of successful virus isolation from bat feces in previous studies (3) (4) (5) (6) 8, 11, 12) may not reflect the incapability of bat cov to infect human cells. recently, a synthetic bat cov complemented with an appropriate spike protein has shown potential to infect human cells (35) .reconstruction of phylogenetic and temporal relationships between bat cov and other mammalian cov is another way to obtain information on their zoonotic potential. unfortunately, for cov long sequence fragments must be analyzed before valid phylogenies can be inferred from the conserved nonstructural genome portion (28, 36) . because of the low concentration of rna in bat samples, generation of long sequences from novel bat cov is tedious and technically demanding, which may be why some published phylogenies of bat cov are based on short datasets, making it difficult to use these data for reference. for molecular clock dating, we have therefore relied on reference viruses mainly from other mammals that covered our 1,221-bp fragment in the conserved rdrp region. we assumed that the rdrp would be under less selective pressure than the structural genes and other nonstructural genes, and therefore could be used to infer nucleotide substitution rates over distantly related covs (7, 25, 26, (36) (37) (38) . we have confirmed all tree topologies using alternative methods of phylogenetic inference, including an mcmc algorithm implemented in mrbayes that eliminates artifacts contributed by fixation of mcmc chains in suboptimal prosterior probability maxima (20) . calibration was conducted on reliable isolation dates of prototype and novel bat cov from the literature, as well as on the mrca of the hcov-oc43/bovine cov clade. for dating of only this specific cov clade, a wide range of dated virus isolates has been available that covered as much as 34% ) of the projected time of virus evolution from root to tip (1890-2004) (25) . a probabilistic calibration prior was used, which is favorable for dating in combination with relaxed molecular clock assumptions (39) . the determined mean substitution rates were in good concordance with earlier studies on non-bat-cov that used maximum likelihood-based methods in addition to bayesian inference (25, 26, 38, 40) .although the exponential growth prior on the virus population seemed equivalent with an expansion growth model by the bayes factor test and produced highly compatible mrcas, the exponential model produced a better match with the previously determined mrca of the hcov-nl63/hcov-229e pair (26) . because pyrc et al. generated these data by 3 alternative approaches (bayesian, serial unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean, maximum likelihood [26] ), we used their mrca to validate our results, and consequently prefer the mrca dating from the exponential growth population model (as presented in figure 3 in plain type). one earlier study on bat and non-bat cov suggested a much faster evolutionary rate for cov than other studies (7) . as vijaykrishna et al. pointed out, their results were associated with large confidence intervals caused by the lack of available data on bt cov at the time the study was conducted (7) . the increase of available sequence data now enables a better account of cov evolutionary history.all covs in our study were found in members of the genus hipposideros (family hipposideridae). the genus rhinolophus from the sister family rhinolophidae was found to host sars-like viruses in several studies in china. one of our hipposideros covs was in a basal phylogenetic relationship with the sars-like clade (group 2b); their most recent common ancestors date back to ≈400 bc. tong et al. (17) have detected a sequence fragment of a bat cov in kenya that also belongs to the 2b clade but is associated with the genus chaerephon, a free-tailed bat that is rather distantly related to the genus hipposideros. although these authors analyzed only a short sequence fragment, their 2b cov seems to be related more closely to sars cov than the virus found in our study. in the many studies conducted in china, only closely related members of the 2b group were detected, with the most basal members dating back only to the 17th century, according to our analysis. the cooccurrence of basal and closely related viruses in africa, as well as the existence of the same virus clade in bats other than those of the family hipposideridae, may entail speculations about a possible origin of the sars-like group of covs in africa rather than in asia.another result that should be integrated with earlier findings is the surprisingly recent date of the mrca of the novel grp1 bt cov and the human common cold virus hcov-229e. further to the proven recent host switching of sars cov, vijgen et al. have suggested that hcov-oc43 entered the human population ≈120 years ago, causing a pandemic (25) . this virus was most likely acquired by humans from domestic cattle. results of our study show that it is not unlikely that hcov-229e, which today is circulating worldwide in humans, resulted from a host switching event not more than 208-322 years ago. however, as with molecular clock dating of viruses, associated confidence limits should not be overlooked.because h. cf. ruber bats are found only in sub-saharan africa and are not migratory (23) , it would be relevant to know how tightly the associated cov is restricted to its host. despite the statistical limitations of our rather small sample size, the absence of cov in bats of the closely related species h. abae that were tested in our study in 2 different caves speaks in favor of tight host restriction. another supportive argument is the absence of cov in c. afra, a bat species sampled in sufficient numbers at the booyem cave. this cave was coinhabited by cov-positive h. cf. ruber bats. if tight host restriction to nonmigratory h. cf. ruber bats existed, this would indicate an origin of hcov-229e within the geographic range of its host, i.e., the rainforest belt and the wet forested savannahs of sub-saharan africa (23) . unfortunately, it will be difficult to reconstruct whether the projected host transition event might have been associated with human epidemic disease.since its first appearance in 2012, middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) has affected more than 1300 cases in more than 25 countries in four continents, and has an alarming fatality rate of more than 30%. 1 a novel lineage c betacoronavirus, mers coronavirus (mers-cov), has been confirmed to be the etiological agent of mers. 2,3 subsequent detection of mers-cov and its antibodies in dromedaries in various countries in the middle east and north africa has suggested that these animals are probably the reservoir for mers-cov. [4] [5] [6] in addition, both before and after the mers epidemic, the discovery of other closely related lineage c betacoronaviruses in various bat species and hedgehogs suggests that these animals may be hosts for an ancestor of mers-cov. [7] [8] [9] [10] in further support of this hypothesis, the spike protein of tylonecteris bat cov hku4 binds dipeptidyl peptidase 4, 11,12 the cellular receptor for mers-cov.as of august 2016, 212 genome sequences of mers-cov were available in genbank. although 91 of the sequences were obtained from mers-cov in dromedaries, a large proportion of them were from a recent study in saudi arabia. 13 the small number of dromedary mers-cov genomes obtained from other countries has hindered understanding of the epidemiology and evolutionary history of the virus in camels outside of saudi arabia. in our previous report on mers-cov epidemiology in dubai, nine dromedary mers-cov strains were sequenced and found to be closely related. 14 recently, we have reported another dromedary mers-cov strain detected in an isolated dromedary herd in the united arab emirates (uae). 15 complete genome sequencing and phylogenetic analysis has indicated that this mers-cov strain is a unique member of a cluster of closely related mers-cov strains obtained from patients in the hafr-al-batin region of saudi arabia and qatar, 16, 17 as well as those from patients in the recent korean outbreak. 18 from the results of these two studies, we hypothesized that diverse mers-cov strains may be circulating in dromedaries of the uae. to test this hypothesis, we performed complete genome sequencing of 10 additional strains of mers-cov isolated from dromedaries in different regions of the uae. the results support a polyphyletic origin of mers-cov in dromedaries and the co-circulation of diverse strains from multiple sources in the same farm. a novel clade a strain, the first identified in the uae, may belong to a separate lineage, a2, circulating in dromedaries.strains and viral culture ten mers-covs isolated from 10 respiratory samples from 10 dromedaries sent to the central veterinary research laboratory in dubai, uae, in 2014 and 2015 were included in this study. isolation of mers-cov was performed as previously described. 15 briefly, the samples were diluted 10-fold with viral transport medium and filtered. two hundred microliters of the filtrate was inoculated into 200 μl of minimum essential medium (gibco, grand island, ny, usa). four hundred microliters of the mixture was added to 24-well tissue culture plates containing vero cells for adsorption inoculation. after 1 h of adsorption, excess inoculum was discarded, the wells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline, and the medium was replaced with 1 ml of minimum essential medium (gibco). the cultures were incubated at 37°c with 5% co 2 and were inspected daily by inverted microscopy for cytopathic effect (cpe) for five days. each of the cultures exhibited the typical cpe of detachment and rounding of cells. all cultures with a cpe were confirmed to be infected with mers-cov through a real-time quantitative rt-pcr assay targeting a region of the viral genome upstream of the envelope gene and isothermal amplification with a genie instrument (optigene limited, horsham, uk).viral rna was extracted from the cultures using a qiaamp viral rna mini kit (qiagen, hilden, germany). the rna was eluted in 60 μl of buffer ave and was used as the template for rt-pcr.the complete genomes of the 10 isolated dromedary mers-cov strains were sequenced as previously described. 14, 15 briefly, the rna extracted from the mers-cov strains was converted to cdna by using a combined random priming and oligo(dt) priming strategy. the cdna was amplified by primers designed on the basis of multiple sequence alignments of available mers-cov genome sequences using previously described strategies. 19 the 5′ ends in the viral genomes were confirmed via rapid amplification of cdna ends (race) using a 5′/3′ race kit (roche diagnostics gmbh, mannheim, germany). sequences were assembled and edited to produce the final sequences of the mers-cov genomes.nucleotide and amino acid sequences of predicted open reading frames (orfs) and the full genomes of 10 mers-cov were aligned with 85 human mers-cov and 87 camel mers-cov genomes using multiple alignment using fast fourier transform (mafft). ten mers-cov genome sequences from genbank were not included in the analysis because of an incomplete 5′ genomic region or having redundant sequences of a single strain. pairwise identity of the 182 mers-cov genome sequences as well as their orfs and predicted proteins was calculated using mega5.maximum-likelihood phylogenetic trees with 1000 bootstrap replicates were constructed using phyml v3.0 (montpellier, france) on the basis of the complete genome, orf1a, orf1b, and s genes of 85 human and 97 camel mers-cov genomes. the best-fit substitution model was selected using jmodeltest and used in the maximum-likelihood analysis.to detect possible recombination, bootscan analysis was performed by using the nucleotide alignment of the genome sequences of mers-cov and simplot version 3.5.1, as previously described. 20, 21 the analysis was conducted using a sliding window of 1500 nucleotides moving in 200 nucleotide steps with genome sequences obtained in the present study as the query. possible recombination sites suggested by the bootscan analysis were confirmed through multiple sequence alignments.in addition to the bootscan analysis, possible recombination breakpoints were also detected using rdp, geneconv, boot-scan, maximum chi square, chimaera, siscan and 3seq implemented in recombination detection program version 4 (rdp4). automasking was used for optimal recombination detection. the rdp analysis was run without a reference and with a window size of 60, the bootscan window size was increased to 500, the maxchi and chimaera number of variable sites per window was increased to 120, and the window size and step size for siscan were increased to 500 and 20, respectively. potential recombination events detected by four or more of the seven independent recombination detection methods in the ten genomes in this study were further analyzed with phylogenetic trees constructed using sequences upstream and downstream of the potential recombination breakpoint.divergence times for the mers-cov strains were calculated using a bayesian markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) approach implemented in beast (version 1.8.0), as described previously. 22, 23 one representative strain was selected for mers-cov strains with close sequence similarity and obtained from the same outbreak. analyses were performed under the srd06 substitution models for the concatenated main coding regions of the genome (orf1ab, s, e, m and n), with an uncorrelated lognormal molecular clock and a gmrf skyride coalescent model. the mcmc run was 1 × 10 8 steps long with sampling every 1000 steps. convergence was assessed on the basis of the effective sampling size after a 10% burn-in using tracer software, version 1.6.0. 22 the mean time to the most recent common ancestor (tmrca) and the highest posterior density regions at 95% (hpds) were calculated. the trees were summarized in a target tree by using the tree annotator program included in the beast package by choosing the tree with the maximum sum of posterior probabilities (maximum clade credibility) after a 10% burn-in.the nucleotide sequences of the ten dromedary mers-cov genomes sequenced in this study have been submitted to the genbank sequence database under accession nos. kx108937-kx108946.we isolated 10 mers-cov strains from nasal swabs of two live and eight dead dromedary calves from different regions in the uae, including a breeding herd, which returned from its winter pasture in saudi arabia and calves from dromedary dairy farms in dubai and umm al quwain. the clinical and epidemiological data of the 10 dromedaries infected with mers-cov strains isolated and sequenced in this study are summarized in table 1 and figure 1 . the median age of the dromedaries was 1 month (range: 15 days to nine months). two of the eight dead dromedaries exhibited nasal discharge before they died.phylogenetic analysis of the complete genomes of the ten sequenced mers-cov isolates showed that one isolate belongs to clade a, and nine belong to clade b (table 2; figure 2 ). phylogenetic analysis of the complete genome, orf1a, orf1b and the s gene sequences all showed that the clade a strain, d998/15, isolated from a 1-month-old dromedary calf from a special dairy farm in dubai, is a unique member of clade a, being most closely related to another dromedary isolate, nrce-hku205, which was previously detected in egypt ( figure 3 ). moreover, these two isolates formed a separate cluster distinct from the other two known clade a strains, emc/2012 and jordan-n3/2012, both isolated from humans. the results suggest that clade a isolates from humans and camels may form two separate lineages, a1 and a2. this hypothesis is further supported by analysis of amino acid substitutions along the whole genome sequences. comparison of deduced amino acid sequences of proteins among clade a1, clade a2 and the six lineages of b strains showed a total of 16 substitutions, most occurring in the viral nsp3 and s proteins (table 2) . notably, two substitutions in nsp3, at positions 1574 and 1717, were found within the catalytic domain of pl pro . 24 highly variable residues were observed at position 1574, which has been reported to be under positive selection. 25 another substitution in the s protein at position 1020 (glutamine in clade a strains and histidine/ arginine in clade b strains) was found within heptad repeat 1 of the s2 region. interestingly, the heptad repeat region has recently been reported to be a major selection target among mers-covs, and different residues at position 1020 may affect the stability of the sixhelix bundle formed by the heptad repeats. 26 there were nine amino acid substitutions between clade a and b strains, and five amino acid substitutions between clade a1 and a2 strains. from these results, we propose that the two clade a dromedary isolates d998/15 and nrce-hku205 should be classified under a new lineage, a2, which is distinct from the two clade a human isolates emc/2012 and jordan/ 2012.the nine clade b isolates belong to three distinct lineages (figure 2 ). five isolates from a dairy farm in dubai and one from a dubai breeding herd returning from saudi arabia belong to lineage 1. one isolate from a dairy farm in dubai and one from umm al qaiwain belong to lineage 3. one isolate from a dairy farm in dubai belongs to lineage 5 ( figure 2 ). phylogenetic trees based on orf1a, orf1b and the s gene were further constructed to assess strains that had an inconsistent phylogenetic position in the different trees. the two lineage three strains in this study (d1271/15 and d1189.1/15), along with other lineage three strains, were found to cluster more closely with lineage 4 mers-cov in the tree constructed for orf1a, but cluster more closely with lineage 5 mers-cov in the tree constructed for orf1b (figure 3 ). for the tree constructed for the s gene, these lineage three strains did not cluster closely with either lineage 4 or lineage 5 mers-cov (figure 3 ). the remaining eight strains identified in this study were found to consistently cluster within the same lineages in all three trees (figure 3 ).because phylogenetic analyses showed inconsistent phylogenetic positions for strains d1271/15 and d1189.1/15 in the orf1a and orf1b trees, we performed bootscan analysis and multiple sequence alignments for these two strains. for both strains, bootscan analysis showed high bootstrap support for clustering between the two strains and lineage 4 mers-cov in two parts of their genomes (position 1-15 000); but for position 15 000-24 000, bootscan analysis showed high bootstrap support for clustering between the two strains and lineage 5 mers-cov ( figure 4a) . a multiple sequence alignment using these two strains, a lineage 4 mers-cov and a lineage 5 mers-cov further indicated that upstream of position 14 697, the two strains possessed nucleotides identical to lineage 4 mers-cov; but from position 16 155-23 785, the two strains possessed nucleotides similar to lineage 5 mers-cov ( figure 4a ).for the analysis using rdp4, recombination breakpoints were detected in the two genomes at positions 14 958 and 28 835. phylogenetic trees constructed using concatenated nucleotides sequences from position 1 to 14 957 and 28 836 to 30 087, and from position 14 958 to 28 835 confirmed the inconsistent phylogenetic position of these two newly detected strains in the two trees ( figure 5 ).the inferred evolutionary rate of mers-cov was 8.55 × 10 − 4 (95% hpd: 7.09 × 10 − 4 , 1.01 × 10 − 3 ). the divergence time of the present 10 dromedary strains is shown in figure 6 . on the basis of time-resolved phylogeny, the root of the tree is january 2011 (95% hpd: june 2010, table 2 comparison of amino acid substitutions between different clades and lineages (figure 6 ). (figure 2) . interestingly, the source clade a strain, d988/15, was isolated from a young female dromedary in a special dairy farm with camel mothers from pakistan. therefore, the source of this virus was most probably different from that of the seven clade b strains, which were isolated from dromedaries from a different dairy farm. the latter farm is a large closed system, which may explain the relative genetic closeness of the circulating mers-cov strains. yet, the seven this polyphyletic origin of mers-cov is unique among human covs. such a polyphyletic origin of mers-cov in dromedaries is similar to the diverse lineages of sars-cov-like viruses in horseshoe bats, 28, 29 but in contrast to the monophyletic origin of most human sars-cov strains, mers-cov strains from humans are polyphyletic as a result of multiple camel-to-human transmission events. 30, 31 according to the existing evidence, a single interspecies transmission event probably occurred from bats to palm civets as the intermediate or amplification host, and then from palm civets to humans before the sars epidemic in 2003. 28, 32, 33 the rapid expansion of the epidemic arose after efficient human-to-human transmission of the human sars-cov strains. in contrast, mers-cov has become endemic in dromedaries of the uae and other countries in the middle east, with diverse strains being introduced into the human population. this finding is in line with the overall mers-cov phylogeny in the middle east, with the tmrca of all mers-covs being dated back to around january 2011, thus suggesting that mer-cov has emerged in humans relatively recently (figures 2 and 6) . the difference in evolutionary pathways between sars-cov and mers-cov also provides an explanation for why, mers-unlike sars, which disappeared rapidly after civets were segregated from humans by closing wild animal markets in provinces in southern china-has persisted for more than three years and will probably continue to circulate in dromedaries and humans unless effective vaccines are available. recently, viruses closely related to human coronavirus 229e (hcov 229e) have also been found in camels. 34 however, in contrast to the polyphyletic origin of human and camel mers-covs, the hcov 229e and related dromedary-derived viruses were each monophyletic, thus suggesting that this endemic human coronavirus may constitute a descendant of camelid-associated viruses.the clade a isolate d988/15, the first clade a mers-cov detected in the uae, may belong to a separate lineage, a2, within clade a. at present, there are only a few clade a isolates, including the first human mers-cov isolated in saudi arabia (emc/2012), another human isolate from jordan (jordan-n3/2012), two dromedary strains from egypt (nrce-hku205 and nrce-hku270 with partial sequence available only) 35 and six nigerian strains (genome not completely sequenced). 36 although clade a strains are much less common than clade b strains, our results suggest that diverse clade a mers-covs may be present in various countries in the middle east and africa. both phylogenetic and amino acid substitution analyses showed that the current clade a strains may consist of two distinct lineages: one from humans (a1) and one from camels (a2). further studies to isolate and sequence more clade a strains in humans and camels may provide insights on the role of clade a strains in mers-cov evolution and the potential significance of the observed amino acid changes for host adaptation.the present results show that recombination events are common among certain strains of mers-cov. recombination is a wellrecognized mechanism by which covs generate diversity. we have previously described recombination among the three human cov hku1 genotypes, and other human or animal coronaviruses, 21, 37, 38 and other researchers have also found recombination in coronaviruses such as feline coronavirus type ii and infectious bronchitis virus. 39 15 showed inconsistent phylogenetic clustering in trees based on different viral genes ( figure 3 ). however, bootscan analysis and multiple alignments did not reveal evidence of recombination for strain d2731.3/14 ( figure 4b ). only strains d1271/15 (from dubai) and d1189.1/15 (from umm al quwain) showed evidence of a likely recombination event after stepwise examination using phylogenetic analysis, bootscan analysis and multiple sequence alignments (figure 4a ). it is also important to note that the nucleotide sequences of all mers-cov genomes are 499% identical. therefore, even for the strains with possible recombination, there are only approximately 10 base pair differences upstream and downstream of the potential recombination site between the 'recombinant' and 'parent' strains. although these sequence differences may have arisen through recombination, they may also have resulted from individual nucleotide mutations. further studies with careful interpretation of recombination analysis results will be important to understand the role of recombination in the emergence and evolution of mers-cov.potentially exceeding the rate reported during the sars-cov pandemic. 9 a research has reported a high rate of neutralizing antibodies against mers-cov found in camels in the arabian peninsula showing high relationship at genetic level to those from human cases suggesting that these camels are constituting the source of human infections. 10 at molecular level, the covs have a high frequency of recombination due to their unique replication mechanism which increases the propensity to result in high rates of mutation allowing the viruses to acclimatize to new hosts and ecological niches. 11 de benedictis et al have characterized small genomic sequence fragments of bat covs (btcovs) that were closely related to mers-cov and suggested that mers-cov ancestors may have evolved in bats. 12 in china, since 2002, sars-cov was implicated as a causative agent of sars and caused atypical pneumonia that spread rapidly throughout parts of asia, north america, and europe during 2002 to 2003 with cases having been reported in 30 countries. 13 according to the world health organization report, the mortality rate of sars-cov was more than 10%. 5 close person-to-person contact has been shown to be the major transmission way of sars-cov principally via contact with aerosolized droplets or other bodily fluids. 14 shortly after sars-cov outbreak and the subsequent implication of bats as reservoir hosts of the causative agent, cov drove numerous studies on bats and the viruses they harbor. a specimen from neoromicia cf. zuluensis bat in 2011 yielded a novel betacoronavirus called neocov. 15 according to the ndapewa ithete and his colleagues results (in 2013), neocov differed from mers-cov by only one amino acid (a.a) exchange (0.3%) in the translated 816-nt rdrp gene fragment and by only a 10.9% a.a sequence distance in the gene that encodes the glycoprotein responsible for cov attachment and cellular entry. thus, neocov was much more related to mers-cov than any other known virus. 16 victor max corman et al 10 reported that 85% of the neocov genome was identical to mers-cov at the nucleotide level; therefore, neocov shared essential details of genome architecture with mers-cov and thus they have suggested that neocov and mers-cov belonged to one viral species. the presence of a genetically divergent s1 subunit within the neocov spike gene indicated that intra-spike recombination events may have been involved in the emergence of mers-cov. 9 despite the clinical similarities between mers and sars, mers-cov is distinct from sars-cov in several biological aspects such as it uses a distinct receptor (dpp4) and was classified as a "generalist" cov which enable it to infect a broad range of cells in culture. 7 in this study, we have attempted to provide a better understanding of the relationship between mers-cov, sars-cov, and neocov at the level of amino acids regarding 6 similar proteins, including e, m, n, s, orf1a, and orf1ab, using different bioinformatics tools. the leading force for this study was the previous studies which constructed phylogenetic tree between different species of coronaviridae based on either structural protein and nonstructural protein or whole genome, and they have found that there was some relationship between mers-cov and sars-cov, while others studied the relationship between mers-cov and neocov but there was no study included mers-cov, sars-cov, and neocov in the same study to know whose is the most related to whom. bioinformatics tools and phylogenetic analysis enables us to understand relationships between ancestral sequences and its descendants.in this study, genome sequences of the 3 target species of cov were retrieved from the national center for biotechnology information (ncbi; genome and nucleotide databases; https:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov/nuccore), namely mers-cov (genome id: 31360), sars-cov (genome id: 10320), and neocov (genome id: kc869678). however, 4 structural proteins, e, s, n, and m, and 2 ns proteins, orf1a and orf1ab, of each species were obtained from the ncbi protein database (www.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov/protein/). table 1 presents general information about all retrieved both nucleotide and protein sequences. these genome and protein sequences were then subjected for comparison using different bioinformatics prediction tools.nucleotide composition of the target genomes (mers-cov, sars-cov, and neocov) was calculated as shown in table 2 using molecular evolutionary genetics analysis software version 7.0 (mega7; https://www.megasoftware.net/home). furthermore, pairwise alignment was done for each pair of target genomes using blast needleman-wunsch global align nucleotide sequences (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast. cgi) as it is presented in figure 1 .for the purpose of protein sequences comparison, first, the multiple sequence alignments (msa) was done using the clustal method implemented in clustal omega tool (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/tools/msa/clustalo/). following the alignment, phylogenetic relationships were depicted in phylogram using distance matrix methods (neighbor-joining [nj] and unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean [upgma]) in phylogeny server (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ tools/phylogeny/clustalw2_phylogeny/). 17, 18 once trees were constructed, they were viewed by treedyn viewer tool (http:// www.treedyn.org/) as shown in boxes b and c in figures 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 14 . by the same token, second scenario was as follows, and msa was done by multiple sequence comparison by log-expectation (muscle) method using muscle online tool (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/tools/msa/muscle/). after that, alignment results in phylip or clustal format were subjected to gblocks program version 0.91b (alignment curation tool). furthermore, phyml 3.0 (using maximumlikelihood method) and protpars (using parsimony method) were used to generate newick format tree files which have been viewed by treedyn viewer tool 19 to determine physical and chemical properties of the protein sequence, protparam tool http://web.expasy.org/protparam/) has been used (which gives the computation of various physical and chemical parameters for a given protein stored in swiss-prot or trembl databases or for a user entered sequence. the computed parameters are the molecular weight, theoretical pi, amino acid composition, atomic composition, extinction coefficient, estimated half-life, instability index, aliphatic index, and grand average of hydropathicity (gravy) as presented in tables 3 to 14. 28 pairwise alignment for protein sequences (primary structure) same type of protein sequences of the cov species of interest was compared using basic local alignment search tool (blast; https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast.cgi). pairwise alignment was done to determine the matched regions and the number of identical/similar amino acids as described in table 15 .for the purpose of converting the primary protein structure to secondary protein structure, gor iv tool has been used (version 4.0; https://npsa-prabi.ibcp.fr/cgi-bin/npsa_automat.pl?page=npsa_gor4.html), which was based on the information theory which gives the 2 outputs. the first output comprised the sequence and the predicted secondary structure in rows, h = helix, e = extended or beta strand, and c = coil. the second presents probability values for each secondary structure at each amino acid position. the program gives the predicted secondary structure with the highest probability compatible with a predicted helix segment of at least 4 residues and a predicted extended segment of at least 2 residues 29 as shown in figures 16 to 21 .the three-dimensional (3d) structure prediction of target structural proteins (e, m, n, and s) was obtained by using cph models and raptorx servers. in cph server, the template recognition is based on profile-profile alignment guided by secondary structure and exposure predictions (http://www. cbs.dtu.dk/services/cphmodels/). 30 proteins that do not have close 3d structures were subjected to raptorx server, which was developed by xu group. it is excelling at predicting 3d structures for protein sequences without close homologs in the protein data bank (pdb). additionally, it predicts secondary and tertiary structures, contacts, solvent accessibility, disordered regions, and binding sites with many confidence scores to indicate the quality of the predicted 3d model including p value for the relative global quality, global distance test (gdt) and un-normalized gdt (ugdt) for the absolute global quality, and modeling error at each residue. 31 then, for the purpose of protein 3d structures visualization, chimera software v1.8 has been used (http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/). it is a high-quality extensible molecular graphics program designed to maximize interactive visualization, analysis system, and related data 32 the tm-score is defined to assess the topological similarity of 2 protein structures. 33 zhang tool is designed to solve 2 major problems in the traditional metrics such as root mean square deviation (rmsd): (1) tm-score measures the global fold similarity and is less sensitive to the local structural variations and (2) magnitude of tm-score for random structure pairs is length-independent. tm-score has the value between 0 and 1, where 1 indicates a perfect match between 2 structures. following strict statistics of structures in the pdb, scores below 0.17 correspond to randomly chosen unrelated proteins, whereas with a score higher than 0.5 assume generally the same fold in scop/cath (https://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich. edu/tm-score/) 34 (table 16 ). the evolutionary history was inferred using the neighbor-joining method. 21 the optimal tree with the sum of branch length = 18.91227594 is shown. the tree is drawn to scale, with branch lengths in the same units as those of the evolutionary distances used to infer the phylogenetic tree. the evolutionary distances were computed using the maximum composite likelihood method 22 and are in the units of the number of base substitutions per site. the analysis involved three nucleotide sequences. all positions containing gaps and missing data were eliminated. there were a total of 29 690 positions in the final dataset. (c) the evolutionary history was inferred using the upgma method. 23 the optimal tree with the sum of branch length = 18.91227594 is shown. the tree is drawn to scale, with branch lengths in the same units as those of the evolutionary distances used to infer the phylogenetic tree. the evolutionary distances were computed using the maximum composite likelihood method 22 and are in the units of the number of base substitutions per site. the analysis involved 3 nucleotide sequences. all positions containing gaps and missing data were eliminated. there were a total of 29 690 positions in the final dataset. (d) the evolutionary history was inferred by using the maximumlikelihood method based on the tamura-nei model. 24 the tree with the highest log likelihood (−121 024.68) is shown. initial tree(s) for the heuristic search were obtained automatically by applying neighbor-join and bionj algorithms to a matrix of pairwise distances estimated using the maximum composite likelihood (mcl) approach and then selecting the topology with superior log likelihood value. the tree is drawn to scale, with branch lengths measured in the number of substitutions per site. the analysis involved three nucleotide sequences. there were a total of 29 693 positions in the final dataset. all msa of used sequences was curated by using gblocks, and evolutionary analyses were conducted in mega7. 25 . molecular phylogenetic tree of target coronaviruses "e" proteins by maximum-likelihood method (timetree). the timetree shown was generated using the reltime method. 26 divergence times for all branching points in the topology were calculated using the maximumlikelihood method based on the equal input model. 27 the estimated log likelihood value of the topology shown is −703.32. the tree is drawn to scale, with branch lengths measured in the relative number of substitutions per site. the analysis involved 4 amino acid sequences. there were a total of 86 positions in the final dataset. evolutionary analyses were conducted in mega7. 25 . the timetree shown was generated using the reltime method. 26 divergence times for all branching points in the topology were calculated using the maximum-likelihood method based on the equal input model. 27 the estimated log likelihood value of the topology shown is −59 576.47. the tree is drawn to scale, with branch lengths measured in the relative number of substitutions per site. the analysis involved 4 amino acid sequences. there were a total of 8041 positions in the final dataset. evolutionary analyses were conducted in mega7. 25 figure 21 . percent of secondary structure component of orf1ab proteins. blue color for alpha helix, brown for extended strand, and green color for the random coil. in this study, we have endeavored to provide a deep understanding of the relationship between mers-cov, sars-cov, and neocov at the amino acids level as the proteins are representing the functional unit of the genome and are directly involved in chemical processes essential for life. the proteins are species and organ-specific in which the proteins of one species or organs differ from those of another species or organs. however, proteins of similar function have similar amino acid composition and sequence. despite the difficulties in explaining functions of protein from its amino acid sequence, understanding the correlations between structure and function is the key role of protein function. with respect to the aim of determining the properties of amino acids that compose proteins of this study, table 1 shows the physical and chemical properties of these proteins' amino acids that are present in all cov species of interest. 35 we have found that the number of amino acids of e, m, n, and s proteins in addition to all other parameters including molecular weight, atomic composition, theoretical pi, and structural formula of mers-cov and neocov were close to each other if not identical, and this has supported the previous finding that neocov was closely related to mers-cov and suggested that mers-cov's ancestors may have evolved in bats. 12 this finding is in contrary to victor max corman et al 10 results which have reported that neocov and mers-cov belonged to one viral species and that the presence of a genetically divergent s1 subunit within the neocov spike gene indicated that intra-spike recombination events may have been involved in the emergence of mers-cov, because there were some differences regarding all 6 proteins and not s protein only. 9 in accordance with our results, agnihothram et al 1 have demonstrated that neocov shared essential details of genome architecture with mers-cov. but, however, disagreement in that 85% of the neocov genome is identical to mers-cov at the nucleotide level.in this study, we used 5 different methods of phylogenetic tree construction including maximum parsimony (mp), neighbor-joining (nj), unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean (upgma), maximum likelihood (ml), and reltime (rt) to depict the relatedness, evolution change, and relative time between the viruses of interest (in the level of genome and protein). according to phylogenetic results of the whole genomes which had relied on muscle alignment, results have shown that joining of mers-cov and sars-cov with the nearest common ancestor and mers-cov has the lowest evolutionary change (genetic distances). the reltime method showed that neocov was the oldest while mers-cov and sars-cov were belonged to the same time, based on the relative time. furthermore, according to phylogenetic results of protein sequences which had relied on muscle and clustalw alignment methods, in general, trees have shown that joining neocov and mers-cov proteins in same clades indicates that they arein december 2019, the seventh human coronavirus, termed 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) or severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), was found in wuhan, china. on february 8, 2020, the total number of infections and deaths due to 2019-ncov globally was 34,439 and 720, respectively, according to the johns hopkins university center for systems science and engineering.coronaviruses are enveloped rna viruses that infect many species, including humans, other mammals, and birds. after infection, the host may develop respiratory, bowel, liver, and neurological diseases (weiss and leibowitz, 2011; cui et al., 2019) . coronaviruses are members of the order nidovirales and subfamily orthocoronavirinae. this subfamily is divided into four genera: alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, gammacoronavirus, and deltacoronavirus. generally, alphacoronavirus and betacoronavirus tend to infect mammals, while gammacoronavirus and deltacoronavirus typically infect birds. however, some gammacoronavirus and deltacoronavirus can infect mammals under specific conditions (woo et al., 2012) .in immunocompromised individuals, infection with one of the four human coronaviruses-human coronavirus nl63 (hcov-nl63), human coronavirus 229e (hcov-229e), human coronavirus oc43 (hcov-oc43), and human coronavirus hku1 (ecov-hku1)-usually results in cold-like symptoms. these viruses can cause severe infections in some infants and the elderly. due to the frequent interaction between wild animals and humans, wild animals are a common source of human t zoonotic infections. sars-cov and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) are zoonotic coronaviruses that can cause severe respiratory diseases in humans; both belong to betacoronavirus (su et al., 2016; forni et al., 2017; cui et al., 2019; luk et al., 2019; ramadan and shaib, 2019) . 2019-ncov is the seventh coronavirus discovered that infects humans. it causes acute respiratory disease in respiratory infections. immediately after its discovery, the complete genome sequence of 2019-ncov was determined. the sequence (mn908947) was released by genbank on 05 january 2020 (lu et al., 2020) . the sequence of 2019-ncov is 96% identical, at the wholegenome level, to a bat coronavirus (zhou et al., 2020) .the genomic characteristics and epidemiology of 2019-ncov have been analyzed (lu et al., 2020) . nine inpatient culture isolates were subjected to next-generation sequencing, and individual complete and partial 2019-ncov genomic sequences were obtained. phylogenetic analysis of these 2019-ncov genomes and other coronaviruses was performed to determine the evolutionary history of the virus and to explore the origin of 2019-ncov. at the first onset, homology modeling investigated the potential receptor-binding properties of the virus. however, sars-cov and mers-cov showed approximate similarities of 79% and 50% with 2019-ncov, respectively. these findings indicated that there is not a close evolutionary relationship of 2019-ncov with sars-cov and mers-cov. thus, 2019-ncov is considered the seventh novel human betacoronavirus (lu et al., 2020) .in this study, we comprehensively characterized the relationship of the translated proteins of 2019-ncov to other species of orthocoronavirinae. this was done using a combination of the phylogenetic tree constructed from the genome sequences and the cluster tree developed from the profiles retrieved from the presence and absence of homologs of ten 2019-ncov proteins.the genomes and the combination of genome and protein sequences were used to develop a phylogenetic tree and phylogenetic profiling, respectively. the dataset of the genomes of the orthocoronavirinae subfamily was collected from the refseq database using the orthocoronavirinae ncbi taxonomy id (txid2501931). this dataset contains representative complete genomes from each species of that subfamily. (pruitt et al., 2007; federhen, 2012) (supplementary  table 1 ). additionally, we collected genome sequences from bat sarslike coronavirus (mg772934 and mg772933) from ncbi and betacov/ bat/yunnan/ratg13/2013 (epi_isl_402131) from gisaid (http:// www.gisaid.org). one species of the okanivirinae subfamily, the yellow head virus, was also collected as an outgroup (supplementary table 1 ). the genome sequences were aligned using mafft multiple sequence alignment program provided at the xsede portal in the cipres science gateway with an automatic selection strategy (miller et al., 2012; katoh and standley, 2013) . a phylogenetic tree was constructed using the maximum likelihood method with raxml-hpc blackbox in the cipres science gateway (stamatakis, 2006) . the analysis used an automatic bootstrapping option using a general timereversible substitution model with a gamma-shape parameter (gtr+ g). the model was selected as the best-fit model under the akaike information criterion using modeltest-ng (darriba et al., 2020) . phylogenetic trees were viewed using figtree v1.4 (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/ software/figtree/).the annotated protein sequences of 2019-ncov were collected from the data of one representative genome from ncbi (mn996527). we built a blast database with the retrieved genome sequences data using blast+ version 2.2.30 (camacho et al., 2009) . we then determined the presence and absence of homolog proteins of one representative set of annotated 2019-ncov proteins against other genome sequences in a database using tblastn with a threshold of > 50 and > 25 bits score for protein sequences > 50 amino acids (aa) and < 50 aa in length, respectively. the results of the presence and absence of homolog proteins were converted into a binary matrix and used to build a clustering tree using ward hierarchical clustering method (ward jr, 1963) (supplementary table 2 ). nonstructural protein (ns) 7b and ns8 local alignments were only positive in the sarbecovirus subgenus sample, excluding the sars coronavirus. additionally, we predicted the structural properties of the 2019-ncov ns7b protein, including the secondary structure and order-disorder propensity, using jpred4 and dichot, respectively (fukuchi et al., 2014; drozdetskiy et al., 2015) . we also predicted the structure using the contact assisted protein structure prediction (c-i tasser) composite approach (zhang et al., 2018) . additionally, we specifically collected the sequences that produced significant alignments of ns7b using the mega x software (kumar et al., 2018) .the phylogenetic analysis using complete genome sequences showed that 2019-ncov was the most closely related to batcov ratg13 and belonged to the sarbecovirus subgenus of betacoronavirus, together with sars coronavirus and bat-sars-like coronavirus (bat-sl-covzxc21 and bat-sl-covzc45) with the full support of reliability (fig. 1) . additionally, hibecovirus with bat hp-betacoronavirus/zhe-jiang2013, as the representative species, was the most closely related subgenus of betacoronavirus to sarbecovirus as compared to other subgenera, including merbecovirus (under which mers-cov has been classified), nobecovirus, and embecovirus. these findings agree with previous phylogenetic tree and similarity plot data (paraskevis et al., 2020) . 2019-ncov was found to be more closely related to the batinfecting sarbecovirus species, bat sars-like coronavirus, and betacov ratg13 than to the sars coronavirus that infects humans. this indicated that 2019-ncov more likely originated from bats. however, the wuhan outbreak was first detected in december, which is a time of year when most bat species hibernate. moreover, the huanan seafood market, which is considered as ground zero of the outbreak, does not sell bats. instead, it has been suggested that there is an animal mediator for virus transmission from bats to humans, similar to the previous cases of sars-cov and mers-cov, wherein the masked palm civet (paguma larvata) and dromedary camel (camelus dromedarius) act as intermediate hosts, respectively (lu et al., 2020) . although coronaviruses can exchange genetic material during coinfection, a recent report described the lack of a mosaic relationship of 2019-ncov to the closely related sarbecovirus, indicating the lack of a recombination event in the emergence of 2019-ncov (paraskevis et al., 2020) . hence, 2019-ncov likely emerged from the accumulation of mutations responding to altered selective pressures or from the infidelity of rna polymerase perpetuated as replication-neutral mutations. these speculations need to be studied further.a previously reported comprehensive similarity plot revealed notable mutational hotspots and conserved regions of the genome nucleotide positions of 2019-ncov against closely related coronaviruses (lu et al., 2020; paraskevis et al., 2020) . the present findings provide a different perspective of the similarity among orthocoronavirinae species, using a cluster tree developed from the profiles retrieved from the presence and absence of homologs of ten 2019-ncov proteins. this cluster was combined with the cladogram of a previously constructed phylogenetic tree (fig. 2) . both the trees were consistent in their heatmap distributions. the tree of 2019-ncov proteins comprised two clades. the first, indicated with a blue bar in fig. 2 , contained a group of conserved proteins in most orthocoronavirinae species. these comprised orf1ab polyprotein, nucleocapsid protein, spike glycoprotein, and membrane protein. spike and orf1a regions of 2019-ncov were previously shown to have the lowest sequence identity as compared to the closely related coronavirus species (lu et al., 2020; paraskevis et al., 2020) . however, since the translated spike glycoprotein and orf1ab polyprotein from these regions are very long, the sequence similarity is still sufficient to classify them as homologs. in contrast, another clade, indicated by the green bar in fig. 2 , comprised proteins specific to sarbecovirus for all proteins in this clade and hibecovirus for envelope protein only. this clade included proteins that were not completely conserved by all orthocoronavirus. two (ns7b and ns8) of five nonstructural proteins were specific for 2019-ncov and its closely related species, batcov ratg13 and bat-sars-like coronavirus (bat-sl-covzxc21 and bat-sl-covzc45). the other three nonstructural proteins (ns3, ns6, and ns7a) were also detected in the sars coronavirus. based on these results, we propose that the comprehensive analysis of nonstructural proteins, especially ns7b and ns8, may provide new insight into the properties of 2019-ncov.as shown in fig. 2 , ns7b and ns8 of 2019-ncov, batcov ratg13, and bat-sars-like coronavirus were distinct from other species of orthocoronavirus. in sars-cov, ns7b is an integral protein localized in the golgi compartment. the protein is packaged into sars-cov particles (schaecher et al., 2007) . interestingly, open reading frame (orf) 7b, but not orf 7b deletion, induces interferon (ifn)-dependent reporter gene expression as well as apoptosis and the type i ifn response (pfefferle et al., 2009 ). moreover, the deletion of orf 7b enhance virus growth (pfefferle et al., 2009 ). thus, we speculate that the property of the non-conserved ns7b in 2019-ncov may affect the human infective property of the virus. similarly, the existence of 29 nucleotide deletions in orf 8b has been described in sars-cov (oostra et al., 2007) . a study involving mers-cov described that orf 8b strongly antagonizes the inf-beta (β) promoter and orf4b and 8b significantly suppress ifn induction (lee et al., 2019b) . accessory proteins 8b and 8ab of sars-cov can suppress the inf-β signaling pathway (and thus interferon production) by their participation in the ubiquitin-mediated rapid degradation of inf regulatory factor 3 (irf3) (wong et al., 2018) . in contrast, when we focused on mers-cov from bats and camels, orf 8b antagonized melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5-mediated nuclear factor kappa b (nf-κb) activation. orf 8b strongly inhibited tank-binding kinase 1-mediated induction of nf-κb signaling, but not iκb kinase epsilon and irf3-mediated activations (lee et al., 2019a) . thus, we speculate that the properties of the accessory proteins, ns7b and ns8, in 2019-ncov may affect its ability to infect humans. further studies are required to confirm this speculation.ns7b is a short peptide of 43 residues. a three-dimensional structure is often difficult to obtain from such a short peptide. we predicted the three-dimensional structure of the queried ns7b amino acid sequence using dichot and c-i-tasser ( supplementary fig. 1, fig. 3 ) (fukuchi et al., 2014; zhang et al., 2018) ; a protein family (pf11395) was found, but no known three-dimensional structure was found. the fahmi, et al. infection, genetics and evolution 81 (2020) 104272 secondary structure of this query was also predicted using jpred4 ( supplementary fig. 2 ) (drozdetskiy et al., 2015) . the secondary structure was predicted to be an α-helix, but that this very likely does not occur depending on the environment (fig. 3) . the alignment of this protein revealed three polymorphism sites between 2019-ncov, batcov ratg13, and bat-sars-like coronavirus sequences (bat-sl-covzxc21 and bat-sl-covzc45) ( supplementary fig. 3 ).in summary, some nonstructural proteins were conserved and others were not conserved between 2019-ncov and sars-cov. by focusing on the 2019-ncov-specific proteins, ns7b and ns8, we proposed a combination of phylogenetic profiling analysis and structural characterization of the genes that were specifically expressed in 2019-ncov and the closely related bat coronavirus. the data provide insight for further characterization of the infective properties of this virus.supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104272.this work was supported by the mext-supported program for the strategic research foundation at private universities (grant number s1511028 to t.i) and the takeda science foundation.the authors declare no competing interest. okavirus as the outgroup. the heatmap indicates the binary matrix of the homolog proteins of 2019-ncov against other species in the dataset, with black and white colors as presence and absence, respectively. the bit pattern was arranged following the vertical and horizontal trees. the vertical tree is a phylogenetic profiling tree constructed from a binary matrix of the presence and absence of homolog proteins. it has two clades, indicated by blue and green bars. the horizontal tree is the cladogram of the maximum likelihood tree, as shown in fig. 1 , with a collapsed clade of 2019-ncov. (for interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) fig. 3 . the model of nonstructural-structural transition of 2019-ncov nonstructural protein 7b. the predicted protein structure of 2019-ncov nonstructural protein 7b by c-i tasser is shown as the helix structure protein.the ncov-19 was taxonomically classified as sars-cov-2 which belongs to the sarbecovirus subgenus (beta-coronavirus genus) (chan et al., 2020) owing to its phylogenetic affiliation with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) (paraskevis et al., 2020) . these belong to the family of rna virus transmitted from animals (fehr and perlman, 2015) . in this study, we infer the genome-based molecular evolutionary imprints of sars-cov-2 to identify its origin and replication mechanism and compare its proteomic regions with two new isolates of ncov-19 from india and its ancestral species.the complete genome sequence of wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus wuhan-hu-1 named as covid-19 (acc. no.: nc_045512.2) was retrieved from ncbi (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). the sequence similarity search was performed using the ncbi-blast (boratyn et al., 2013) to collect 250 complete genome sequences of sars-cov-2 with high similarity query coverage along with ancestral species (supplementary table s1 ). the phylogenomic tree was manually condensed and constructed with 1000 bootstrapping replicates to identify the origin and replication of covid-19 using mega x 10.1.7 version (kumar et al. 2018) . the phylogeographic large-scale supertree was constructed among the selected members using the interactive tree of life (itol) v4 (letunic and bork, 2019) . based on the appearance of the phylogenomic cluster, a single isolate was chosen for each cluster along with two newly sequenced indian strains (accession: mt012098.1, mt050493.1) to study the comparative proteomic analysis.furthermore, a statistical genomic diversity was computed for the selected species.the nucleotide and amino acid base pair compositional variations in mmol fraction unit were calculated in r statistical package. the phylogenetic hierarchical clustering was carried out with a library called gplots and rcolourbrowsers packages for plotting the heatmap and color key representation. the principal component analysis (pca) was performed in ggplots library to find the convergence and divergence between selected species. a dot plot comparison was carried out for functional coding regions using emboss dotmatcher (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/tools/seqstats/emboss_dotmatcher/).we performed a phylogenomic and phylogeographic tree for 250 isolates of sars-cov-2 genomes along with the out-groups. phylogenomic analysis or sequence-based phylogeny reveals the understanding of the evolutionary relationship between the biological species (yuan et al., 2014) . the phylogenomic tree was separated and grouped according to journal pre-proof j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f country wise isolates (color representation in clade) and inter-and intra-specific species variation (color representation in nodes) as shown in fig 1. the phylogenomic tree of our study indicates that the target wuhan-hu-1 genome was closely related to different isolates of sars-cov-2 genomes. bat coronavirus ratg13, bat-sars-cov zxc21, and pangolin-cov gx-p5l were found to be an ancestor. a separate phylogenomic tree of various isolates of sars-cov-2 was represented in supplementary fig s1. bat sars-like coronavirus was found to be an ancestor of newly identified covid-19. dataset used for the phylogenomic and phylogeographic tree construction and its closely related species are available in supplementary table s1 . based on the constructed genomic tree, we further summarized and select an isolate of phylogenetic neighbor from each cluster along with two newly sequenced indian isolates (accession: mt012098.1, mt050493.1), to identify proteomic differentiation between them. based on these criteria, a proteome-based phylogenetic analysis was performed. it also provides support evidence to the zoonotic evolution theory that sars-cov-2 might have evolved from bat sars-like coronavirus and pangolin coronavirus (as represented in fig 2a) . when compared with the previous study, the genome of sars-cov-2 was found to be about 82%, 96%, and 86.9% identical to the sars-cov, bat-cov-ratg13, and bat-sars like-covzc45, respectively (zhou et al. 2020).the genetic diversity analysis of our study revealed that wuhan-hu-1 was closely related to new isolates of two indian sars-coronavirus 2 with 100% query coverage and 99.98% sequence similarity respectively. the pair-wise genetic distance occurred in the range between 0.0 and 0.001. however, the sars-cov-2 genome was genetically distinct from sars-cov and has a relatively long branch length to the bat-cov ratg13 (0.014), bat-sars like-cov zxc21 (0.067), and pangolin-cov gx-p5l (0.073) (fig 2b) . a total of 99.98% similarity was found across the sars-cov-2 genomes obtained from different patients (lu et al. 2020) . genetic recombination events are complex and more likely occurring in bat-cov ratg13 and bat-sars like-cov zxc21than in sars-cov-2 (jaimes et al. 2020; lu et al. 2020; paraskevis et al. 2020) . the tajima's neutrality test (tajima 1989) was estimated to identify the mutations by dna polymorphism. it shows that the nucleotide diversity appears in the range 0.045977 with a high number of segregating sites (1123). it further confirms that the rate of gene duplication events may occur due to radical changes in the segregating sites with a high recombination rate, as described by clark et al. (2012) . the fluctuation of amino acid frequencies was estimated using jones-taylor- thornton (1992) are closely related to each other. and it can deviate when sars-cov-2/wuhan-hu-1 is compared to other ancestral species (fig 3a) . a low abundance of amino acid was found in pangolin cov gx-p5l and bat-sars-cov zxc21. it also indicates that several compositional variances are found in amino acid bases between the selected species. it was further proved by principal component analysis. it shows that the two indian isolates and bat-cov ratg13 were closely related to each other while compared to wuhan-hu-1 (fig 3b) .therefore, these variations may refer that the sars-cov-2 genome has been expanded in human hosts due to the establishment of a hyper-variable genomic hotspot population (wen et al. 2020). as per the previous investigation, magiorkinis et al. (2004) and paraskevis et al. 2020 stated that these may occur due to altered diverse lineages in the evolutionary rates or either by ancient recombination events.a dot plot comparison was performed for the function coding region between wuhan-hu-1 and selected phylogenetic neighbors and ancestors (fig 4) . it shows that 70% of sequences from the sars-cov-2 wuhan-hu-1 match with selected species (represented in the colored block as aligned regions 1, 2 and 3). interestingly, a few blocks were identified in wuhan-hu-1 isolates in the position 7096-11500 bp (stand for a white block as mismatch or gapped region). a total of 4404 amino acid bases were uniquely found in the wuhan-hu-1.while comparing to our analysis, approximately 30% of wuhan-hu-1 doesn't match with any isolates and it may offer new ancestry relationships within the subgenus of sarbecovirus (paraskevis et al. 2020) .we conducted a detailed genomic survey to understand molecular and functional diversity between sars-cov-2 and its phylogenomic neighbors. from our analysis, it is inferred that sars-cov-2 of indian origin has highly diverged from the sars-cov-2 of wuhan-hu-1 which might due to the high mutagenicity rate of covid. further high mutagenicity rate was occurred due to the variations of transition/transversion genetic ratio between the selected pairs. it is speculated that this divergence in the evolution of indian origin sars-cov-2 is responsible for the lower death rate scenario in india. hence, the present genomic andsince the discovery in wuhan in late 2019, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov2) virus has spread internationally to 213 countries with confirmed 6,194,533 cases and 376 320 deaths, at time of writing 1 . of these cases, 536 148 are from the eastern mediterranean 1 . the virus, which causes covid-19, is a betacoronavirus related to sars-cov and bat coronaviruses 2 . sar-cov-2 is easily transmittable due to mutations in the receptor-binding (s1) and fusion (s2) domain of the strain 2 . the rapid spread and high mortality due to the virus have elicited the global response, including the lockdowns and new vaccine development. while the efforts to understand the virus, dynamics of transmission and epidemiology are still underway, the virus is diverging from the wuhan strain. the initial wuhan stain could eventually evolve into a more deadly strain 3 . a recent study by t. koyama et al. 4 used 48 genomes to map variants and classify sub-strains from many locations including china, japan and the usa. we used koyama's study model and analysed the strains in the eastern mediterranean (emro) countries; namely, iran, jordan, kuwait, saudi arabia and uae. the variants were mapped to wuhan reference genome nc_045512.2 and were aligned using other wuhan strains. we found variants in 43 of 50 genomes studied.• to study the genomic and phylogenetic variation in the sars-cov2 in the eastern mediterranean region • to trace the pattern of spread of sars cov2 in the eastern mediterranean regionsample size: 50source of data-we obtained the data from the chinese national genomics data center (ngdc). data in the ngdc include those obtained from ngbdb, genbank, gisaid, gwh and nmdc databases 5 . ncbi genbank and the global initiative on sharing all influenza data (gisaid) were also used to extract data 6, 7 . table 1 shows the source of all 50 samples. 20 of the 50 samples were from wuhan and used for comparison and validation with the variant analysis performed by koyama et al. 4 the other 30 samples consisted of 5 samples from iran, kuwait, jordan, qatar, saudi arabia and the united arab emirates. these samples were all extracted from gisaid.sample selection: samples were selected from who emro countries with at least 5 high-quality genomes available. of all the countries, bahrain, iraq and syria were excluded to due to inadequate samples. lebanon was excluded due to poor quality samples.sample filing: we performed multiple sequence alignments (msa) using emboss clustal omega 8 and observed for conserved and consensus sequences to study the evolutionary relationship between the genomes. all the outputs were set for the pearson/fasta formats. the outputs were represented in sequence alignment file and phylogenetic tree.we performed variant calling to identify variants that co-occur in different groups and to track the strains in each country. the sequence alignment file from multiple sequence alignments was used to identify the location of variants. the snp-sites program was used to extract snp sites from a multi-sample alignment file 9 . we tabulated the output of the snp-sites analysis as a variant calling (vcf) file with the list of snps against the genotype for each sample. the snps in the vcf file were compared with the snps reported by koyama et al. for the validation.variant annotation: variant annotation was used to understand the genomic regions and functions affected by the snps. we used the galaxy web platform, and the public server at usegalaxy.org to facilitate variant annotation 10 . snpeff, a genetic variant annotation program in the galaxy server, was used to identify the protein level changes caused by snps 11 . the genome database for both sars-cov-2 nc_045512.2 and sars nc_004718 were built and compared using snpeff, and genbank 7 .we visualised the overlapping variants between populations using the genome alignment. the patterns of the emergence of covid-19 in each country were analysed. the annotated data was imported, manipulated and plotted using r v3.6.2 12 . dplyr v0.8.4 package was used to summarise and align the data 13 . the visualisation package ggplot2 13 was used to plot the graphs. the x-axis in the plots indicates the variant position along the sars-cov-2 genome; the left y-axis indicates the sample name and the right y-axis represents the country of origin for each sample. this plot is used to compare the genome in different populations.phylogenetic analysis: evolutionary and phylogenetic analysis is used to explore the evolutionary hypothesis for the strain emergence in each country. bayesian evolutionary analysis sample trees (beast) v1.10.4, is used to perform bayesian analysis of molecular sequences using mcmc 14 . the alignment file output from msa was used as the input data for bayesian analysis.the hky transition-transversion parameter, a burn-in of 1x10 6 iterations and a coalescent tree were used as models for molecular evolution here. the unrooted tree obtained from the models and the phylogenetic tree generated by clustal omega is used to predict the associations between samples.of the initial 50 samples, 20 of them were from wuhan, 4 of them did not contain any variants (gwhabki00000001, gwhabkl00000001, nmdc60013002_08 and mn908947),the sars-cov-2 had the best scoring variant annotation ( table 2 ). the results from the variant annotation are presented in figure 1 . however, ten variants caused errors and are not included in the figure. multi-allelic variants were included in figure 1 if the second alternative allele was likely due to poor reading.the distribution of snps across samples (studied using the snp genotypes from 442 sars-cov-2 strain) showed a vast difference between the sub-strains within each country. variant calling identified 379 variants. of these, 250 were modifier variants, 21 were modifier variants, 18 were low impact variants, and 10 were high impact variants. the variants had a missense/silent ration of 1.75. table 2 shows the distribution of variants by region, and table 3 shows the distribution of variants by their type. figure 3 shows the number of transitions and transversions observed in the sample. figure 2 shows the drift towards transition is evident with a ts/tv ratio of 3.36. one variant occurs for every 378 bases and 16 multi-allelic sites (all include indels). from the phylogenetic analysis and tree generation in figure 3 , we can infer that the iranian samples have the earliest common ancestor. saudi arabia samples are all form a distinct group compared to other samples. the samples from sa, qatar and kuwait have the most developed sars-cov2 genomes.four of the wuhan strains that did not have any variants matched with the variants identified by koyama phylogenetic-based approach: phylogenetic trees help in understanding the evolutionary relationships between groups. in the present context, they are used to identify the earliest strains and to track the spread of covid-19 across the middle east. we expected strains similar to wuhan to have emerged earlier than the other strains. saudi arabia has reported the highest number of cases in the middle east (who, 2020). this can be explained from our phylogenetic analysis. the four samples from saudi arabia (epi_isl_443181, epi_isl_443180, epi_isl_443179, epl_isl_443178) were more distantly related than samples from any other country. this distinction might be due to the swift response by the country leading to a unique and restricted strain. the remaining saudi arabian samples (epi_isl_443182) were in a separate clade with one sample from wuhan (gwhabkm00000001), one from kuwait (epi_isl_422426), and one from uae (epi_isl_435143).jordan has adopted a stringent pandemic response strategy. they imposed restriction and closed the non-essential services early on. the same is reflected in the genome variation. four out of the five jordan samples (epi_isl_430015, epi_isl_430014, epi_isl_430013, epi_isl_430012) were in a separate clade with only one sample (mn908947) similar to wuhan. the jordan samples clusters at one of the final tree branching, indicating that they are the most evolved variants. their sample divergence might be the reason for their most distinctive genome. the remaining jordan sample (epi_isl_434516) and a qatar sample (epi_isl_427419) diverge from a kuwait sample (epi_isl_421652), and all of these have emerged from the common wuhan ancestor (gwhabkj00000001) one of the earliest lineage divergences are found in five samples from iran (epi_isl_445088, epi_isl_442044, epi_isl_442523, epi_isl_437512, epi_isl_424349), two from wuhan (gwhabkn0000001, nmdc60013002-07), one from uae (43519) and one from kuwait (epi_isl_416543). it strongly reiterates our hypothesis that the iranian's introduced covid-19 to other middle eastern countries. the only branchings that precede the cluster of iranian samples are four samples from wuhan (nc_044512.2, nmdc60013002-04, nmdc60013002-08, gwhabks00000001) and one sample from the uae (epi_isl_435141). the uae reported the first case of covid-19 in the middle east 15 .here we trace the spread of covid-19 using variant and phylogenetic analysis. this study reveals the structure of spread among populations. we conclude that the earliest strains are found in iranian samples. iran was exposed to the virus earlier than in other countries. kuwait and qatar have a high frequency of novel variants due to small populations size, which leads to an accumulation of mutations. as bahrain also has the highest number of infections per million, it is expected that bahranian genomes would also have a high variant rate. as all the samples from saudi arabia are experiencing some differentiation and saudi arabia reports a high death rate, more vigilance is necessary to prevent these outgroups from contributing to a more severe sub-strain with higher mortality rate. to clarify the evolutionary relationships among betavoronaviruses that infect bats, we analyzed samples collected during 2010-2011 from 14 insectivorous bat species in china. we identified complete genomes of 2 novel betacoronaviruses in rhinolophus pusillus and chaerephon plicata bats, which showed close genetic relationships with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronaviruses.t he 2003 outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) was caused by a novel betacoronavirus and rapidly spread globally, causing ≈8,000 cases and nearly 900 deaths (1, 2) . in june 2012, a novel betacoronavirus (called human coronavirus emc [hcov-emc]) also was isolated from the sputum of a patient from saudi arabia who died of pneumonia and renal failure (3) . similar viruses were detected in 2 additional patients who had severe pneumonia in qatar in september 2012 and in saudi arabia in november 2012 (4, 5) . the clinical picture was remarkably similar to that of sars and illustrates the epidemic potential of a novel coronavirus (cov) to threaten global health. sars-covs and hcov-emc were suspected of spreading from bats to humans because these covs were most closely related to bat covs (1, 4) . to clarify the evolutionary relationships among betavoronaviruses that infect bats, we analyzed samples collected during 2010-2011 from 14 insectivorous bat species common in 8 provinces in china.we obtained pharyngeal and anal swab specimens of 414 insectivorous bats. samples of each species were pooled and then processed with a viral particle-protected nucleic acid purification method (6) . the extracted rna and dna were amplified by sequence-independent pcr. the amplified viral nucleic acid libraries of the bat species were then sequenced with the illumina/solexa gaii sequencer (illumina, san diego, ca, usa). those reads generated by the illumina/solexa gaii with length of 80 bases were directly aligned to the protein sequences in the national center for biotechnology information nonredundant protein database by the blastx program in the blast software package, version 2.2.22 (www.ncbi. nlm.nih.gov/blast) with parameters "-e 1e-5 -f t -b 10 -v 10." no assembly was performed before alignment. sequence similarity-based taxonomic assignments were conducted as described (7) . we found 1,075 reads of betacoronavirus in rhinolophus pusillus bats in shaanxi and 92 reads of betacoronavirus in chaerephon plicata bats in yunnan.we estimated the approximate locations of those reads on the cov genome and their relative distances on the basis of alignment results exported with megan 4-metagenome analyzer (http://ab.inf.uni-tuebingen.de/ software/megan/). the located reads were then used for reads-based nested pcr to identify genomic sequences. we established the complete genome sequences of 2 betacoronaviruses (bat rp-coronavirus/shaanxi2011 and bat cp-coronavirus/yunnan2011), which are 29,484 nt and 29,452 nt, respectively. the g+c content of bat rp-coronavirus/shaanxi2011 and bat cp-coronavirus/ yunnan2011 is 41.6% and 40.9%, respectively.we conducted complete genome comparison and phylogenetic analysis on the basis of polymerase and spike protein. pairwise genome sequence alignment was conducted by using emboss needle software (www.ebi.ac.uk/tools/psa/emboss_needle/) with default parameters. the overall nucleotide sequences between bat rp-coronavirus/shaanxi2011 and bat cp-coronavirus/ yunnan2011 indicated 88.7% nt identity. they shared 87.4%-89.5% nt identity with sars-cov, 88%-89.9% nt identity with the bat sars-like cov (bat sars-cov rm1), and 87.6%-89.6% nt identity with the civet sars-like cov (civet sars-cov sz16). on the other hand, comparison between the betacoronavirus genomes and human betacoronavirus (hcov-oc43) showed only 49.9%-50.4% nt overall identity, whereas the betacoronavirus genomes and hcov-emc showed 52.1% nt overall identity.the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp, the 12th nonstructural protein codified to open reading frame 1a,b) is a highly conserved gene of covs, which is frequently used for phylogenetic comparison (8, 9) . mega5.0 (www.megasoftware.net) was used to construct the phylogenetic trees on the basis of the nucleotide sequences and deduced amino acid sequences. first, we used the muscle package and default parameters (www. megasoftware.net/) to construct the alignment. the best substitution model was then evaluated with the model selection package implemented in mega5. finally, we used the maximum-likelihood method with an appropriate model to process the phylogenetic analysis with 1,000 bootstrap replicates. we constructed a phylogenetic tree based on the nucleotide sequences of the rdrp gene to show the evolutionary relationship between these 2 betacoronaviruses and other covs (figure 1 ). reference cov genome sequences were downloaded from genbank and aligned with the fragments of the newly discovered covs. the rdrp genes of bat rp-coronavirus/ shaanxi2011 and bat cp-coronavirus/yunnan2011 were highly similar, sharing 93.1% nt identity. the phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that betacoronaviruses and the bat sars-like covs in our study are clustered (93.1%-93.4% nt identity) and are close in distance to sars-covs (92.9%-94.8% nt identity) and civet sars-like covs (93.1%-94.8% nt identity) but that bat cov (btcov-hku9) and hcov-oc43 are placed among the relatively distant groups (65.8%-65.9% and 62.9%-63.5% nt identities with the betacoronaviruses, respectively). therefore, collectively we called these betacoronaviruses and bat sars-like covs the bat sars-like cluster of covs. bat rp-coronavirus/shaanxi2011 and bat cpcoronavirus/yunnan2011 showed little genetic similarity (<66.2%-67.3% nt identity) to hcov-emc.the spike proteins of covs are responsible for receptor binding and host species adaptation, and their genes therefore constitute one of the most variable regions within cov genomes (10, 11) . the phylogenetic tree based on the amino acid sequences of spike protein ( figure 2 ) suggests that the selected betacoronaviruses were mainly divided into 5 clusters: sars cluster; bat sars-like cluster; civet sars-like cluster; human betacoronavirus cluster; and emc cluster. bat rp-coronavirus/shaanxi2011 and bat cp-coronavirus/yunnan2011 shared 89.4% aa identity in spike proteins, which consisted of 1,240 aa and 1,241 aa, respectively. the spike proteins of the covs in our analysis have 89.8%-92.7% aa identity with those of bat sars-like covs, with substantial similarity in the receptor-binding domain. the close relationship also was observed with the sars-covs (79.2%-79.4% aa identity) and civet sars-like covs (78.9%-79.1% aa identity). in contrast, the human betacoronaviruses and emc cluster formed separate clusters distinct from sars-related covs that showed only 27.8%-29.4% aa and 28.8%-30.5% aa identities with the betacoronaviruses, respectively, in our analysis. the genome sequences reported here have been deposited into genbank (accession nos. jx993987-jx993988).the recent fatal human infection caused by hcov-emc has boosted interest in the discovery of novel covs in humans and animals. hcov-emc is a novel betacoronavirus, and its closest known relatives are btcovs hku4, and hku5, which have been detected in hong kong only in bats (12) , the same animal from which sars is believed to have originated. bats are increasingly recognized as natural reservoirs of covs and may serve as intermediate hosts for interspecies transmission of sars-covs (10, 13) . different bat populations from various countries harbor diverse covs that have a high frequency of recombination and mutation rates that enable them to adapt to new hosts and ecologic niches (14, 15) . therefore, continuous studies of covs from different bat species and different countries would help better prevent the new global pandemics resulting from novel viral infection. we detected and characterized 2 novel betacoronaviruses-bat rp-coronavirus/shaanxi2011 in r. pusillus bats and bat cp-coronavirus/yunnan2011 in c. plicata bats-in china. the high similarity shown by phylogenetic analysis confirmed the close genetic relationship among the covs (sars-like covs and sars-covs) that we analyzed. in contrast, bat rpcoronavirus/shaanxi2011 and bat cp-coronavirus/ yunnan2011 showed little genetic similarity with human betacoronaviruses and hcov-emc. although several covs are found in horseshoe bats (rhinolophus spp.), to our knowledge, the sars-like covs in r. pusillus and c. plicata bats in china have not been identified. the description presented here will further the understanding of covs distribution in different bat species found in human habitats and provide clues for rapid response to potential public health threats. a pneumonia outbreak with unknown etiology was reported in wuhan, hubei province, china, in december 2019, associated with the huanan seafood wholesale market. the causative agent of the outbreak was identified by the who as the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2), producing the disease named coronavirus disease-2019 (covid-19). the virus is closely related (96.3%) to bat coronavirus ratg13, based on phylogenetic analysis. human-to-human transmission has been confirmed even from asymptomatic carriers. the virus has spread to at least 200 countries, and more than 1,700,000 confirmed cases and 111,600 deaths have been recorded, with massive global increases in the number of cases daily. therefore, the who has declared covid-19 a pandemic. the disease is characterized by fever, dry cough, and chest pain with pneumonia in severe cases. in the beginning, the world public health authorities tried to eradicate the disease in china through quarantine but are now transitioning to prevention strategies worldwide to delay its spread. to date, there are no available vaccines or specific therapeutic drugs to treat the virus. there are many knowledge gaps about the newly emerged sars-cov-2, leading to misinformation. therefore, in this review, we provide recent information about the covid-19 pandemic. this review also provides insights for the control of pathogenic infections in humans such as sars-cov-2 infection and future spillovers.the covid-19 pandemic: a comprehensive review of taxonomy, genetics, epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment, and controlcoronaviruses are enveloped, single-strand rna viruses that can infect a wide range of hosts including avian, wild, domestic mammalian species, and humans. coronaviruses are well known for their ability to mutate rapidly, alter tissue tropism, cross the species barrier, and adapt to differentcoronaviruses are enveloped, icosahedral symmetric particles, approximately 80-220 nm in diameter containing a non-segmented, single-strand, positive-sense rna genome of about 26-32 kb in size [34] . coronaviruses (covs) are one of the largest groups of viruses that belong to the order nidovirales, suborder cornidovirineae, and family coronaviridae. coronaviridae is classified into two subfamilies, namely, letovirinae and orthocoronavirinae. letovirinae includes the alphaletovirus genus, while orthocoronaviridae is further classified on the basis of phylogenetic analysis and genome structure into four genera: alphacoronavirus (αcov), betacoronavirus (βcov), gammacoronavirus (γcov), and deltacoronavirus (δcov), which contain 17, 12, 2, and 7 unique species, respectively (ictv 2018). the most recent classification of the coronaviridae is shown in table 1 . corona in latin means crown, and this name was attributed to the virus due to the presence of spike projections from the virus envelope that give it the shape of a crown under the electron microscope; nido means nest and refers to the ability of the viruses of this order to make a nested set of subgenomic mrna [25, 35] .coronaviruses infect a wide range of wild and domestic animals; αand βcovs infect mammals, while γand δcovs primarily infect birds (table 1) . a human coronavirus (hcov) was first isolated in 1960 from hospitalized patients who suffered from common cold symptoms and was named b814 [36] . so far, the seven different hcovs that infect humans are 229e, nl63, which belong to α covs, and hku1, oc43, sars, mers, sars-cov-2, which belong to βcovs. in 2002-2003, a pandemic caused by sars-cov (lineage b βcov) originated in china [37] . in the middle east, mers-cov (lineage c βcov) emerged in 2012 [27] . in 2019, a newly emerged sars-cov-2, closely related to bat sars-related covs, was clustered with lineage b βcov. chan et al. [13] demonstrated that sars-cov-2 represents a distinct lineage in the subgenus sarbecovirus (previously, lineage 2b of βcov) [38] . additionally, other coronaviruses have caused pandemic diseases in domestic and wild mammals and birds, leading to high mortality rates and severe economic losses. these viruses include ibv in chickens [40] , beluga whale coronavirus sw1 (bwcov-sw1) [41] , bat coronaviruses cdphe15 and hku10 (ictv 2018), porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (pedv), tgev, and sudden acute diarrhea syndrome (sads-cov) [42] .since the emergence of sars-cov-2 in wuhan city, china, in december 2019, many laboratories have been working on sequencing the genome of the causative agent. as of 14 april 2020, there are a total of 7655 complete genomes from 67 countries in the global initiative on sharing all influenza data (gisaid) database [43] (table 2) . a reference genome is now available in the ncbi genome database (29,903 nucleotide, reference sequence: nc_045512.3) [44] . to date, there are a total of 875 sequences including one refseq sequence and 768 complete genomes at ncbi. sars-cov-2 is a monopartite, single-stranded, and positive-sense rna virus with a genome size of 29,903 nucleotides, making it the second-largest known rna genome. the virus genome consists of two untranslated regions (utrs) at the 5 and 3 ends and 11 open reading frames (orfs) that encode 27 proteins (table 3) . the first orf (orf1/ab) constitutes about two-thirds of the virus genome, encoding 16 non-structural proteins (nsps), while the remaining third of the genome encodes 4 structural proteins and at least 6 accessory proteins. the structural proteins are spike glycoprotein (s), matrix protein (m), envelope protein (e), and nucleocapsid protein (n), while the accessory proteins are orf3a, orf6, orf7a, orf7b, orf8, and orf10, as shown in figure 1 [2, 13, 38, 45] . the 5′utr and 3′utr of sars cov-2 are comprised of 265 and 229 nucleotides, respectively. orf1ab is 21,290 nucleotides and encodes either replicase proteins pp1a of 4405 amino acids (aa) (nsp1-nsp11) or pp1ab of 7096 aa (nsp1-nsp16), according to ribosomal frameshift. of these proteins, (1) nsp1 suppresses the antiviral host response, (2) nsp3 is a papain-like protease, (3) nsp5 is a 3clpro (3c-like protease domain), (4) nsp7 makes a complex with nsp8 to form a primase, (5) nsp9 is responsible for rna/dna binding activity, (6) nsp12 is an rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), (7) nsp13 is confirmed as a helicase, (8) nsp14 is a 3′-5′ exonuclease (exon), 9) nsp15 is a poly(u)-specific endoribonuclease (xendou). the remaining nsps are involved in transcription and replication of the viral genome [13, 46, 47] .single-stranded rna viruses exhibit a faster biological mutation rate due to the lack of proofreading activity of viral rna polymerases [48] ; however, unlike other mutation-prone rna viruses, with the exception of the arenaviridae family, covs do have limited proofreading capabilities, with the nsp14 protein allowing for the enhanced genome size of cov family members [49] .recombination is another mechanism of evolution in coronaviruses [50] . a high recombination frequency was demonstrated in murine hepatitis virus during mixed infection, where the majority of viruses recovered after three passages were recombinants [51] . recombination was also reported for mers-cov and sars-cov. seven putative recombination regions were detected in orf1ab and s protein between sars-cov and six other coronaviruses by in silico analysis of their genomes [52] . similarly, bioinformatic analysis of mers-cov genomic data revealed 28 recombinant sequences from humans and camels [53] . recombination in sars-cov-2 is not yet clearly understood. initial studies suggested that it may have occurred in the course of sars-cov-2 evolution [9] , while other researchers excluded the possibility of recombination based on a full genome evolutionary analysis investigating putative recombination events [11] .to better understand the evolution of sars-cov-2, we performed a phylogenetic analysis of 45 representative coronaviruses from 18 countries including sars-cov, sars-cov-2, hcov, bat sars . the other third of sars cov-2 includes four genes (in green) that encode four structural proteins (s, m, e, n), and six accessory genes (in blue) that encode six accessory proteins (orf3a, orf6, orf7a, orf7b, orf8, and orf10).the 5 utr and 3 utr of sars cov-2 are comprised of 265 and 229 nucleotides, respectively. orf1ab is 21,290 nucleotides and encodes either replicase proteins pp1a of 4405 amino acids (aa) (nsp1-nsp11) or pp1ab of 7096 aa (nsp1-nsp16), according to ribosomal frameshift. of these proteins, (1) nsp1 suppresses the antiviral host response, (2) nsp3 is a papain-like protease, (3) nsp5 is a 3clpro (3c-like protease domain), (4) nsp7 makes a complex with nsp8 to form a primase, (5) nsp9 is responsible for rna/dna binding activity, (6) nsp12 is an rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), (7) nsp13 is confirmed as a helicase, (8) nsp14 is a 3 -5 exonuclease (exon), 9) nsp15 is a poly(u)-specific endoribonuclease (xendou). the remaining nsps are involved in transcription and replication of the viral genome [13, 46, 47] .single-stranded rna viruses exhibit a faster biological mutation rate due to the lack of proofreading activity of viral rna polymerases [48] ; however, unlike other mutation-prone rna viruses, with the exception of the arenaviridae family, covs do have limited proofreading capabilities, with the nsp14 protein allowing for the enhanced genome size of cov family members [49] .recombination is another mechanism of evolution in coronaviruses [50] . a high recombination frequency was demonstrated in murine hepatitis virus during mixed infection, where the majority of viruses recovered after three passages were recombinants [51] . recombination was also reported for mers-cov and sars-cov. seven putative recombination regions were detected in orf1ab and s protein between sars-cov and six other coronaviruses by in silico analysis of their genomes [52] . similarly, bioinformatic analysis of mers-cov genomic data revealed 28 recombinant sequences from humans and camels [53] . recombination in sars-cov-2 is not yet clearly understood. initial studies suggested that it may have occurred in the course of sars-cov-2 evolution [9] , while other researchers excluded the possibility of recombination based on a full genome evolutionary analysis investigating putative recombination events [11] .to better understand the evolution of sars-cov-2, we performed a phylogenetic analysis of 45 representative coronaviruses from 18 countries including sars-cov, sars-cov-2, hcov, bat sars cov, bat sars-like cov, and mers-cov. the viral genomes were obtained from the gisaid and ncbi databases. multiple sequence alignment was performed using kalign 3 [54] . a phylogenetic tree was constructed based on whole-genome sequences (coding sequences of all genes) in iq-tree, using the maximum likelihood method, ultrafast bootstrap approximation, and modelfinder [55, 56] . the tree was drawn to scale, with branch lengths measured in the number of substitutions per site.the bootstrap values were determined by 1,000 replicates. the tree was visualized in mega x [57] ( figure 2 ).cov, bat sars-like cov, and mers-cov. the viral genomes were obtained from the gisaid and ncbi databases. multiple sequence alignment was performed using kalign 3 [54] . a phylogenetic tree was constructed based on whole-genome sequences (coding sequences of all genes) in iq-tree, using the maximum likelihood method, ultrafast bootstrap approximation, and modelfinder [55, 56] . the tree was drawn to scale, with branch lengths measured in the number of substitutions per site. the bootstrap values were determined by 1,000 replicates. the tree was visualized in mega x [57] ( figure 2 ).in the analysis we performed, all sars-cov-2 samples from the 18 countries clustered together and were close to bat sars or sars-like coronaviruses, with wuhan bat cov ratg13 being the closest virus. in addition, mers-cov and human cov hku1 were very distant from sars-cov-2 ( figure 2 ). within mers-cov samples, the south china mers-nl13892 clustered separately from other mers-covs. the two bat sars-like covs (bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21) were the second closest viruses from bats to sars-cov-2 ( figure 2 ). all sars-covs from china, canada, england, and the us were in a single cluster. the tree was constructed in iq-tree using the maximum likelihood method, modelfinder, and ultrafast bootstrap approximation (1000 replicates). the tree is drawn to scale, with branch lengths (numbers below the branches) measured in the number of substitutions per site. branch lengths less than 0.3 are not shown. numbers above the branches represent the percentage of replicate trees in which the associated viruses clustered together in the bootstrap test. the tree is rooted with two human coronavirus species from the genus alphacoronavirus as an outgroup (hcov-229e and hcov-nl63).in the analysis we performed, all sars-cov-2 samples from the 18 countries clustered together and were close to bat sars or sars-like coronaviruses, with wuhan bat cov ratg13 being the closest virus. in addition, mers-cov and human cov hku1 were very distant from sars-cov-2 ( figure 2 ). within mers-cov samples, the south china mers-nl13892 clustered separately from other mers-covs. the two bat sars-like covs (bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21) were the second closest viruses from bats to sars-cov-2 ( figure 2 ). all sars-covs from china, canada, england, and the us were in a single cluster.zhou et al. [9] conducted a phylogenetic analysis of sars-cov-2 against previously identified coronaviruses based on their whole-genome sequences, main structural protein genes, and non-structural protein genes. sars-cov-2 clustering was different depending on whether the whole genome or specific genes were used in the analysis. for example, sars-cov-2 clustered with the members of the subgenus sarbecovirus including the sars-cov (79.5% identical) that caused the global pandemic in 2003 and other bat sars-like viruses (96% identical at the whole-genome level), but the topological position within the sarbecoviruses changed when individual genes (orf1ab, s, e, m, and n) were used for clustering [2, 9] .based on the whole-genome sequence alignment, sars-cov-2 shares 89% identity with bat sars-like covzxc21, 82% with sars-cov, and 96.3% with bat cov ratg13 [11, 13] . alignment of the predicted protein sequences of sars-cov-2 to those of sars-cov or sars-like coronaviruses revealed a total of 380 amino acid substitutions between these viruses [2] . these amino acid substitutions were distributed as follows: 348 mutations in nonstructural proteins (orf1ab, 3a, 3b, 7a, 7b, 9b, and orf14), 27 in s protein, and 5 in n protein. no amino acid substitutions were detected in e or m proteins, indicating that e and m proteins are highly conserved among these viruses.it has been reported that sars-cov-2 uses the same cellular receptor, hace2, as sars-cov to gain entry into the cell [9, 58, 59] . the analysis of the receptor-binding domains (rbd) of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 s protein revealed similar binding affinities [60] . wu et al. [2] found a total of 27 amino acid substitutions in the s protein but not in the receptor-binding motif (rbm) that directly interacts with hace2, which may affect host tropism. these 27 substituted residues were distributed as follows: 17 in the s1 subunit [6 in the rbd and 6 in the subdomain (sd)] and 10 in the s2 subunit. wan et al. [58] reported similarity in the spike protein rbd, including rbm, of both sars-cov and sars-cov-2, in addition to the presence of several residues in sars-cov-2 rbm that favor the interaction with human ace2. these results agree with the genomic analysis of sars-cov-2, according to which the s2 subunit of the spike protein shares 99% identity with those of two bat sars-like covs (sl-covzxc21 and zc45) and of human sars-cov [13] . while the sars-cov-2 s2 subunit was conserved, the s1 subunit shares an overall 70% identity with those of bat and human sars-cov. the rbd core domain of s1 is highly conserved, with most of the amino acid differences located in the external subdomain that is responsible for the direct interaction with host receptors [13] . investigators have also reported the presence of a polybasic cleavage site and predicted o-linked glycans that are unique to sars-cov-2 s protein. differences in sars-cov-2 s protein and the high contagious nature of this virus suggest that sars-cov-2 has evolved via natural selection for binding to human ace2 receptor [61] .orf3b also differs in sars-cov-2. orf3b deletion mutations in sars-cov do not affect viral replication in vitro [62] . orf3b may play a role in viral pathogenicity in addition to its inhibitory effects on interferon (ifn) expression and signaling [63, 64] . recently, a novel short putative protein was identified in orf3b of sars-cov-2 [13] ; however, the function of this novel protein is still not known. sars-cov-2 orf8 is closer to those of bat sars cov zxc21 and zc45 and distant from that of human sars-cov [13] .the assessment of genetic diversity among 86 complete or semi-complete genomes of sars-cov-2 viruses revealed three deletions in the genome of isolates from japan, usa, and australia in addition to many other substitution mutations. the deletion mutations were in the orf1ab gene (3-nucleotide and 24-nucleotide deletion) and at the 3 end of the genome (10-nucleotide deletion). of the 93 substitution mutations, 42 changed the amino acid sequence of structural and non-structural proteins [65] . the 3and 24-nucleotide deletions in orf1ab are expected to reduce the protein sequence by 1 and 8 amino acid residues, respectively, without changing the reading frame, but the functional effects have yet to be investigated.the alignment of sars-cov-2 reference s protein gene against all sars-cov-2 sequenced genomes from china, usa, japan, australia, and taiwan revealed 99.97-100% identity, with 100% query coverage (also confirmed by our phylogenetic analysis, figure 2 ), while the identity and coverage for sars-cov s protein gene were 74.5% and 91%, respectively. also, the s protein gene from bat sars and sars-like coronavirus isolates shared 76.5-83% identity with that of sars-cov-2. this agrees with previous conclusions regarding the evolutionary analysis of sars-cov-2 [11, 44] . in the phylogenetic analysis we performed, sars-cov-2 viruses were in the same cluster regardless of the geographic region ( figure 2 ). these results strongly suggest the possibility of a recent common ancestor for all sars-cov-2 or the transmission of the same virus strain across countries.the outbreak of covid-19 originated from wuhan city, hubei province, in china. fifty-five percent of the infected cases before 1 january 2020 were linked to the huanan seafood wholesale market. however, the first human-to-human case of sars-cov-2 infection reported on 1 december 2019 did not have any exposure to this market [66, 67] . in mid-january 2020, sars-cov-2 spread to other provinces of china due to the spring festival travel season. sars-cov-2 was transmitted from china to other countries via international travelers. on 13 january 2020, the first case of sars-cov-2 infection was confirmed outside china in thailand, and on 16 january 2020 the first infected case was confirmed in japan. these cases were also linked to the huanan seafood wholesale market. by 25 january 2020, the number of confirmed cases had risen to 2062, including 2,016 in china, thailand, hong kong, macau, australia, malaysia, singapore, france, japan, south korea, taiwan, the us, vietnam, nepal, and sweden. on 30 january 2020, china reported a sharp rise in the number of infected cases, with the presence of infection in more than 18 countries. therefore, who declared the sars-cov-2 outbreak to be a public health emergency of international concern [68] .as of 16 march 2020, more than 150 countries and territories have been affected, with major outbreaks in central china, south korea, italy, iran, france, and germany [69] . there were 167,511 confirmed cases of sars-cov-2 infections, with 6606 deaths and about 8% estimated mortality rate. more than 73% of these cases have been reported in mainland china [69] . at this time, the number of global cases has shown a drastic increase within a short time, confirmed cases and deaths in china have not increased too much, while confirmed cases and deaths in other countries have drastically increased ( table 4 ). the number of confirmed cases increased from 2798 to 17,391 in one week (between 27 january and 3 february), and the number of infected countries doubled (from 12 to 24). due to the rapid increase of the number of infected cases and infected countries, the who declared sars-cov-2 a pandemic on 11 march 2020 and on 13 march 2020, the who declared europe to be the new center of the pandemic due to the massive increase of confirmed cases there [70] . on 15 ,889, were in italy). one week later (13 april 2020), the number of confirmed cases of sars-cov-2 increased 1.7 times (up to 524,514 confirmed cases), and the number of deaths increased 2.5 times (up to 20,444 deaths) in the usa alone. the number of confirmed cases, deaths, and infected countries are shown in table 4 . the origins of more than 75% of coronavirus infections are considered zoonotic, i.e., animals are the main source of the outbreaks. for example, sars-cov was transmitted from palm civets to humans, and mers-cov from dromedary camels to humans. bats are currently considered a reservoir for all human coronaviruses, as mentioned above [5, 71] . many coronaviruses are circulating in animals but have not yet infected humans. the type of animal that sars-cov-2 originated from is still unclear. at the beginning of the outbreak in wuhan, china, many patients were linked to the huanan seafood wholesale market, suggesting animal-to-person spread. after retrospectively studying case reports, the number of patients that did not have exposure to animal markets has risen, indicating person-to-person spread was also occurring at that time [66] . sars-cov-2 is closely related to bat coronaviruses and sars-cov [8] . a group of researchers reported early in the outbreak that the novel sars-cov-2 has the highest similarity of codon usage bias with snakes [72, 73] ; however, this method to determine initial host origins is dubious. interestingly, researchers also reported one amino acid difference in the receptor-binding domain of the s protein of pangolin-cov compared to that of sars-cov-2, suggesting that pangolins might play a role as an intermediate host (xiao et al., data currently under review). another group of researchers reported that the virus originated from bats based on the genome sequence of sars-cov-2, which is 96% identical to bat coronavirus ratg13. there were speculations that sars-cov-2 is a laboratory-engineered cov and leaked directly from a laboratory in wuhan where a bat cov (ratg13) was recently reported. however, there is no evidence to support this allegation [74] . recently, a group of researchers found that sars-cov-2 replicates poorly in dogs, pigs, chickens, and ducks but efficiently in ferrets and cats [75] . scientists are still trying to find the main source of the disease outbreak and identify the definitive intermediate hosts.both established (sars-cov, mers-cov) and novel (sars-cov-2) coronaviruses were reported to spread from an infected person to a non-infected person through direct or indirect contact. sars-cov-2 infection was reported to be transmitted directly from person to person like most respiratory viruses via close contact with an infected person or through respiratory droplets (aerosol) produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes. these droplets can be inhaled to reach the lung. the virus can be indirectly transmitted via touching a surface or an object that was previously contaminated with the virus and then touching the face, eyes, or mouth [76] and possibly via the fecal-oral route [77, 78] . asymptomatic carriers (during the incubation period of the virus) and patients after recovery from the acute form of the disease are also considered a potential source of virus transmission to healthy persons [10, 12] . interestingly, human coronaviruses are able to survive on steel, metal, wood, aluminum, paper, glass, plastic, ceramic, disposable gowns, and surgical gloves for 2-9 days. high temperature (≥30 • c) can reduce the persistence period, while low temperature (4 • c) increases the persistence time up to 28 days [79] . transmission of the virus vertically from mother to fetus or via breast milk has not been confirmed yet [80] . the transmission cycle of coronavirus among animals and humans is shown in figure 3 . both established (sars-cov, mers-cov) and novel (sars-cov-2) coronaviruses were reported to spread from an infected person to a non-infected person through direct or indirect contact. sars-cov-2 infection was reported to be transmitted directly from person to person like most respiratory viruses via close contact with an infected person or through respiratory droplets (aerosol) produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes. these droplets can be inhaled to reach the lung. the virus can be indirectly transmitted via touching a surface or an object that was previously contaminated with the virus and then touching the face, eyes, or mouth [76] and possibly via the fecal-oral route [77, 78] . asymptomatic carriers (during the incubation period of the virus) and patients after recovery from the acute form of the disease are also considered a potential source of virus transmission to healthy persons [10, 12] . interestingly, human coronaviruses are able to survive on steel, metal, wood, aluminum, paper, glass, plastic, ceramic, disposable gowns, and surgical gloves for 2-9 days. high temperature (≥30 °c) can reduce the persistence period, while low temperature (4 °c) increases the persistence time up to 28 days [79] . transmission of the virus vertically from mother to fetus or via breast milk has not been confirmed yet [80] . the transmission cycle of coronavirus among animals and humans is shown in figure 3 . there are many factors that affect sars-cov-2 transmission and spread. these factors include, but are not limited to: (1) travel to or contact with individuals who have recently visited wuhan, china, or other places experiencing an outbreak; (2) close contact with persons who are diagnosed positive for the disease, such as healthcare workers caring for patients with sars-cov-2; (3) contact with droplets and secretions (produced by sneezing or coughing) from an infected person and eating or handling wild animals native to china such as bats. additionally, the risk of infection is higher for the elderly and for patients suffering from pre-existing illnesses such as cardiovascular disease, hypertension, diabetes, and chronic respiratory disease [66] . the reported fatality rate based on age is 14.8% for people ˃80 years of age, 8% for people between 70 and 79 years, 3.6% for people between 60 and 69 years, 1.3% for people between 50 and 59 years, 0.4% for people between 40 and 49 years, there are many factors that affect sars-cov-2 transmission and spread. these factors include, but are not limited to: (1) travel to or contact with individuals who have recently visited wuhan, china, or other places experiencing an outbreak; (2) close contact with persons who are diagnosed positive for the disease, such as healthcare workers caring for patients with sars-cov-2; (3) contact with droplets and secretions (produced by sneezing or coughing) from an infected person and eating or handling wild animals native to china such as bats. additionally, the risk of infection is higher for the elderly and for patients suffering from pre-existing illnesses such as cardiovascular disease, hypertension, diabetes, and chronic respiratory disease [66] . the reported fatality rate based on age is 14.8% for people >80 years of age, 8% for people between 70 and 79 years, 3.6% for people between 60 and 69 years, 1.3% for people between 50 and 59 years, 0.4% for people between 40 and 49 years, 0.2% for people between 10 and 39 years; no fatalities have been reported for children under 10 years of age. notably, the fatality rate is higher in males (2.8%) than in females (1.7%) [81, 82] .the estimated incubation period of the novel coronavirus ranges from 2 to 14 days. however, some cases had an incubation period of 21, 24, or 27 days [83] . the complete clinical picture of sars-cov-2 is still unclear. the disease begins with flu-like symptoms that include fever, fatigue, dry cough, sore throat, shortness of breath, headache, chest tightness, chest pain, and muscle pain. some of sars-cov-2 patients have runny nose, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea [84] . people can be infected without showing symptoms, which allows the virus to spread more effectively from person to person. complications can occur due to covid-19 leading to severe infections, such as pneumonia (infection of the lungs), kidney failure, and death [8] . the mild phase of the disease can last up to 2 weeks, while severe or critical disease lasts approximately 3 to 6 weeks (this analysis was conducted on 55,924 confirmed cases). additionally, the time from the disease onset to the development of severe disease is one week, while the time from the onset of symptoms to death ranges from 2 to 8 weeks [82] .based on the data analysis of 72,314 confirmed cases of sars-cov-2 in wuhan city, china, by 11 february, 80.9% of the cases were mild with flu-like symptoms, and patients recovered at home, 13.8% were severe with pneumonia and shortness of breath, 4.7% were critical with respiratory failure and septic shock resulting in organs failure, and approximately 2% of the cases were fatal [85] . another study was conducted on 99 hospitalized patients, and symptoms were classified as follow: fever (83%), cough (82%), shortness of breath (31%), muscle ache (11%), confusion (9%), headache (8%), sore throat (5%), runny nose (4%), chest pain (2%), diarrhea (2%), and nausea and vomiting (1%) [8] .the rapid diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infection is the cornerstone of disease control. it depends on several criteria including case history, clinical symptoms, serology, molecular diagnosis, and computed tomography (ct) imaging. on 2 march 2020, who published interim guidance for laboratory testing of suspected human cases, with precautions for specimen collection, packing, shipment, and amplification of nucleic acid to detect viral genes (n, e, s, and rdrp) [82] . sars-cov-2 uses the same cell entry receptor, hace2, as sars-cov. therefore, oral swabs, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (balf), blood, as well as anal swabs are the best samples used for virus diagnosis [86] . a proper diagnosis depends primarily on the factors described below.the strict monitoring of case history in clinically suspicious patients is considered the first step in the early diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infection. clinically suspicious patients are those who suffer from fever and lower respiratory tract infection symptoms (for details, see the clinical characteristics section) and reside within or have traveled to endemic regions or had close contact with a confirmed or suspected case. additionally, sars-cov-2 can be transmitted by symptomatic and asymptomatic patients especially to the high-risk group mentioned above (for details, see the risk assessment section) [13] .the blood profiles of patients suffering from sars-cov-2 infection revealed the following: (1) increased c-reactive protein and erythrocytes, (2) increased myohemoglobin, liver enzymes, and muscle enzymes, with a high level of d-dimer in severe cases, and (3) normal or decreased white blood cell counts and lymphocytes in the early stage of the disease, with advanced lymphocytopenia in severe cases [13] . in icu patients, high levels of plasma granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (gcsf), ip10, il2, il7, il10, tnf-α, and mip1a were reported [38] .electron microscope examination of sars-cov-2 revealed the typical coronavirus morphology. further, sars-cov-2 was successfully isolated from human respiratory epithelial cells or balf samples of infected patients using huh7 cells and vero e6 cells. the isolated strain was confirmed by immunofluorescent antibody techniques using the cross-reactive nucleoprotein (np) antibody. serum neutralization tests (snt) using vero e6 cells were conducted to confirm the neutralization activity in igg-positive viral samples [87] .igm and igg elisa detection kits using bat sarsr-cov rp3 np were developed with no cross-reaction against human coronaviruses except sarsr-cov [80] . using these serological tools, viral antibody titers were increased in sars-cov-2-infected patients [38] . the procedures of elisa for the determination of sars-cov-2 igg were described before [86] . nucleic acid detection is the main, fastest, and most sensitive test for the diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infection. recently, two nested rt-pcr and two real-time rt-pcr assays have been developed with successful detection of the first 25 positive cases of infection in japan [88] . three real-time rt-pcr techniques have been designed based on the e, rdrp, and n genes [89] . also, scientists established molecular detection tools for sars-cov-2 based on the s gene [86] .chest x-ray examination in the early stage of the disease shows interstitial changes and multiple small plaque shadows. chest ct scans play an important role in the diagnosis of acute respiratory disease syndrome (ards) and pneumonia as well as in the early detection of lung parenchymal abnormalities in patients at risk and provide an impression of secondary infection (figure 4 ). electron microscope examination of sars-cov-2 revealed the typical coronavirus morphology. further, sars-cov-2 was successfully isolated from human respiratory epithelial cells or balf samples of infected patients using huh7 cells and vero e6 cells. the isolated strain was confirmed by immunofluorescent antibody techniques using the cross-reactive nucleoprotein (np) antibody. serum neutralization tests (snt) using vero e6 cells were conducted to confirm the neutralization activity in igg-positive viral samples [87] .igm and igg elisa detection kits using bat sarsr-cov rp3 np were developed with no cross-reaction against human coronaviruses except sarsr-cov [80] . using these serological tools, viral antibody titers were increased in sars-cov-2-infected patients [38] . the procedures of elisa for the determination of sars-cov-2 igg were described before [86] . nucleic acid detection is the main, fastest, and most sensitive test for the diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infection. recently, two nested rt-pcr and two real-time rt-pcr assays have been developed with successful detection of the first 25 positive cases of infection in japan [88] . three real-time rt-pcr techniques have been designed based on the e, rdrp, and n genes [89] . also, scientists established molecular detection tools for sars-cov-2 based on the s gene [86] .chest x-ray examination in the early stage of the disease shows interstitial changes and multiple small plaque shadows. chest ct scans play an important role in the diagnosis of acute respiratory disease syndrome (ards) and pneumonia as well as in the early detection of lung parenchymal abnormalities in patients at risk and provide an impression of secondary infection ( figure 4 ). assessing these lungs parenchymal abnormalities conveys disease severity to clinicians. using artificial intelligence models in the future may be useful in mass screening, to allow risk prioritization and help to minimize turnaround time [90] . pan et al. [91] conducted a retrospective study to elaborate the time course of lung changes during recovery from infection. they described assessing these lungs parenchymal abnormalities conveys disease severity to clinicians. using artificial intelligence models in the future may be useful in mass screening, to allow risk prioritization and help to minimize turnaround time [90] . pan et al. [91] conducted a retrospective study to elaborate the time course of lung changes during recovery from infection. they described findings using international standard nomenclatures such as ground-glass opacity (ggo), consolidation, and crazy paving patterns. they established a semi-quantitative scoring system of 5 grades to quantify the degree of involvement based on an area ranging from 0% to >75%. the total score ranged from 0 to 25 (max), and involvement was subpleural, random, or diffuse. they found that in early stages (0-4 days after the onset of symptoms), ggo was the main finding in lower lung lobes; in progressive stages (5-8 days), the progression of lung disease involved three patterns of ground-glass, consolidation, and crazy paving, while in peak stages (9-13 days) , dense consolidation became the prevalent feature; in absorption stages (>14 days), ggo was detected with no crazy paving and resolution of consolidations [91] . more than 75% of sars-cov-2-affected patients suffered from bilateral lung involvement, and 71% have multilobe involvement. ct examinations of 21 patients showed 29% consolidation and 86% ggo in the chest [8, 9, 92, 93] . another study examined 51 cases by ct and reported that 77% showed pure ggo, 75% exhibited ggo with reticular and/or interlobular septal thickness, 59% had ggo with consolidation, while 55% revealed pure consolidation. bilateral lung involvement was reported in 86% of cases; in 80% of the cases the posterior part of the lung was involved, while in 86%, the periphery was involved [94] .in january 2020, the who issued guidance for the clinical management of sars when sars-cov-2 infection was suspected. in this guidance, the start of emergency treatments, immediate implementation of prevention and control strategies, early supportive therapy and prevention of sars-cov-2 complications were described in detail [15] . so far, there are no approved specific antiviral drugs for sars-cov-2 infection. therefore, preventive measures and inactivation of the virus are essential to stop and control the spread of the disease. human coronaviruses can be inactivated using 0.5% hydrogen peroxide, 62-71% ethanol, 0.1% sodium hypochlorite, 0.7-1% formaldehyde, 2% glutaraldehyde, or 0.23% povidone iodine within 1 minute. other disinfectants such as 0.02% chlorhexidine digluconate, 0.55% orthophtalaldehyde, or 0.05-0.2% benzalkonium chloride are less effective [79] .in light of the urgent clinical demand, many drugs are approved to be used for clinical trials against sars-cov-2 infection, such as lopinavir/ritonavir, arbidol, interferon-alpha, favipiravir, chloroquine phosphate, darunavir/cobicistat, oseltamivir, and methylprednisolone. the most used antiviral drugs [95] are summarized in table 5 .generally, coronaviruses are not sensitive to current antiviral drugs, and high concentrations of drugs effective on these viruses cannot be used in vivo.therefore, combinations of different therapies have been used for the treatment of coronavirus infections [96] . some drug combinations that could be successful for the treatment of sars-cov-2 patients are lopinavir and ritonavir [97, 98] , lopinavir/ritonavir plus arbidol [99] , and ribavirin and interferon [100, 101] . the use of anti-inflammatory drugs such as glucocorticoids, il-6 antagonist, janus kinase inhibitors (jak), and choloroquine/hydrocholoroquine in sars-cov-2 patients is a dilemma, especially in patients suffering from an impaired immune system. balancing the risk-benefit ratio is a critical issue. corticosteroids may delay the elimination of the virus and increase the risk of secondary infection. in addition, drugs targeting pro-inflammatory cytokines can only inhibit specific inflammatory factors and thus may not be very effective in curbing the cytokine storm (excessive and uncontrolled release of pro-inflammatory cytokines). moreover, some anti-inflammatory drugs such as jak block inf-α production, which is important in fighting the virus [102] .additionally, fecal transplantation was approved for clinical trials as a therapeutic option for sars-cov-2-related pneumonia based on the promising results obtained from fecal microbiota transplantation in patients suffering from antibiotic-associated diarrhea, active ulcerative colitis, and other viral infections [103] [104] [105] [106] . recently, it was found that intestinal microbiota-derived ifn in lung stroma confers protection against viral diseases such as avian influenza and respiratory syncytial virus [103] . moreover, based on historical records of the effect of antiviral herbs on sars and influenza h1n1, chinese herbal formulas could be an alternative approach for the prevention of sars-cov-2 in a high-risk population [107] , if no scientifically based therapeutics are available. it was found that sambucus formasana nakai exhibited a strong antiviral effect against human coronavirus nl63 [108]. increases ph in host cell lysosomes and negatively influences virus-receptor binding, as well as interferes with the glycosylation of cellular receptors of sars-cov -exhibited a promising antiviral effect against sars-cov-2 in vitro -improved covid-19-pneumonia patients and shortened the course of the disease [114] remdesivir a monophosphoramidate of adenosine prodrug that incorporates into nascent viral rna chains causing pre-mature termination -used against a wide range of rna viruses such as filoviridae, paramyxoviridae, pneumoviridae, and coronaviridae; used successfully in covid-19 treatment in the united states and showed no adverse events [115] darunavir and cobicistat inhibit 3 c-like protease (3clpro).-used for the treatment of mers-cov in experimental animals -used for the treatment of hiv-1 patients [116] to date, there is no vaccine to prevent sars-cov-2 infection, and trials for vaccine development are in the preliminary stages of research. several vaccine candidates such as live attenuated, adenovirus-vectored, recombinant protein, and nucleic acid (dna and mrna) vaccines are in the pipeline [123] .the epidemiology of sars-cov-2 is still unclear, and data availability is limited. therefore, it is imperative to follow preventive measures and safety precautions issued by health authorities to limit exposure to the virus and to reduce further spread. general hygienic measures should be implemented, such as (1) washing hands often with soap and water or an alcohol-based hand sanitizer, (2) cough or sneeze etiquette, recommending covering of the mouth, (3) avoiding touching eyes, nose, and mouth if the hands are not clean, (4) avoiding close contact with sick persons, (5) avoiding sharing dishes, glasses, bedding, and other household items with sick people, (6) cleaning and disinfection of surfaces that are often touched, and (7) staying home from work, school, and public areas when feeling sick.the transmission route of sars-cov-2 is probably not only through cough, respiratory droplets, and/or contaminated surfaces [13, 124] , but also through fecal-oral transmission [78] . therefore, strict hygienic measures should be followed, especially in dense cities or agricultural spaces [125] .since the sars-cov-2 spread is primarily driven by travel, screening of travelers who arrive at airports from pandemic areas for possible sars-cov-2 infection and entry-screening procedures are necessary. also, general hygienic precautions during travel are highly recommended. travelers who suffered from acute respiratory infection should be tested and reported to the respective public health authorities [73] . in addition, people should be motivated to notify and report about travel history and close contacts in case of sars-cov-2 infection.asymptomatic carriers (during the incubation period) and patients after recovery from the acute form are also considered potential sources of the virus [12, 13] . strict hygienic measures should be implemented to avoid virus transmission to healthcare workers and other contacts, i.e., placement of sars-cov-2 suspected or confirmed patients in single-person rooms and wearing personal protection equipment (ppe) such as masks, goggles, and protective gowns. because early diagnosis and detection of asymptomatic carriers of sars-cov-2 are successful factors for the treatment and prevention of transmission, health authorities should designate laboratories to implement tests for a rapid and accurate diagnosis [126] . the control of coronaviruses is based on biosecurity regarding animals as well as on shifts in food habits, including discouraging the consumption of bushmeat and of animal products without appropriate cooking [127] . ban of wet marketplaces where live or dead animals are handled should be implemented. surveillance among people who have contact with wildlife and improvement of biosecurity regarding wildlife trade are urgently needed to prevent the next pandemic outbreak [128] .the epidemiology of sars-cov-2 is still unclear. many unresolved questions related to sars-cov-2 epidemiology and pathogenicity pose great challenges for researchers. these unresolved questions include: what is the origin of sars-cov-2? what is the intermediate host that transmitted the virus from bats? why does the virus cause severe disease and mortality in the elderly or those with co-morbidities, while it is milder in children? are aerosol, saliva, feces, urine, and foodborne the only routes of transmission? what are the other unknown routes of transmission?control of the sars-cov-2 outbreak and future epidemics requires global efforts among medical and veterinary clinicians, diagnosticians, epidemiologists, public health experts, vaccinologists, pharmaceutical industries, economists, and governments to implement a one-health approach [128, 129] . these measures must include: (1) writing policies and supporting funds required for the implementation of one health, prevention, and control measures, (2) hiring well-trained and professional personnel, (3) performing rapid and accurate diagnosis and treatment of infected persons, (4) developing and providing vaccines for virus control in humans, (5) conducting surveillance among wildlife for the identification and characterization of possible reservoirs and surveillance among people who are in contact with wildlife to identify risk factors in human behaviors and living environment, (6) improving hygienic measures, (7) assessing the social and economic impacts of covid-19 on the population, (8) utilizing veterinary experience in the disinfection of premises and gatherings under the supervision of health authorities to decrease outbreaks in humans, (9) providing antiviral drugs for the treatment of the disease in humans, and (10) increasing public health awareness about the virus and its transmission.the sars-cov-2 outbreak started in wuhan city, china, in december 2019. it is now a global pandemic, with 1,773,084 confirmed cases, 111,652 deaths, and 467,074 recoveries (as of 13 april 2020). the virus has the potential for rapid and extensive spread between people and countries. there are a lot of misleading information and knowledge gaps on the newly emerged sars-cov-2. therefore, we reviewed the latest updates about different aspects including epidemiology, source of infection, transmission dynamics, zoonotic potential, virus characteristics, and discovery of novel strategies for disease control to avoid spillover of infection in the future. bats play an important role in the transmission of the infection to humans. coronaviruses are genetically diverse and have a high tendency towards frequent genetic mutations and gene recombination, which increases the risk of interspecies transmission. information about the incubation period can help in establishing an effective quarantine for asymptomatic carriers, thus preventing the virus spread. from our perspectives and based on the currently available information about the virus and its epidemiology, the control of the sars-cov-2 requires an effective and global disease coordination effort including multidisciplinary research efforts (one-health approach) through collaboration between governments, epidemiologists, virologists, health authorities, veterinarians, and physicians. at this stage of the disease outbreak, developing vaccines is crucial to limit the spread of the infection.the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) is an ongoing pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [1] . the symptom onset of the first case of covid-19 was reported in december 1, 2019 in the city of wuhan (china) and the initial outbreak was related to the huanan seafood market [2] [3] [4] . sars-cov-2 infections have been reported in all the countries of europe, causing from hundreds to thousands deaths in almost all them [5] . according to gisaid database, three larger clades of sars-cov-2 have been identified so far, based on marker variants [6] . thus, s clade is characterized by the presence of l84s in orf8 and mostly comprises sequences from north america. v clade is characterized by g251v in orf3 and mostly comprises asian and european sequences. finally, g clade is characterized by d614g in s protein and largely comprises sequences from europe. other sequences have not been included in any of these clades because they lack the mentioned markers [6] . the situation in europe seems to be dominated by the three clades, although g clade is the largest one in gisaid so far. more than 5000 whole genome sequences of viruses collected in europe have been already sequenced with high coverage, allowing the performance of phylogenetic and evolutionary analyses to better understand the transmission dynamics within the most affected countries in europe.according to the european centre for disease prevention and control (ecdc), the first cases of sars-cov-2 infections in europe were reported in the week of 26 january-1 february 2020, with 5 cases in france (one locally transmitted), 4 cases in germany (all locally acquired), two imported cases in italy, two imported cases in uk and one imported case in finland [7] . in spain, the first two cases were reported during the following week (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) , the first one in la gomera (canary islands) related to a known cluster in germany and another one in mallorca (balearic islands) from a british citizen who was initially in contact with a confirmed case in france returning from singapore [8, 9] . the next 5 reported cases in spain had all a travel history to italy and were detected in tenerife (canary islands), catalonia, castellon (valencian community) and madrid before 26 february [10] . the following two days, spain reported 18 new cases in canary islands, catalonia, andalusia and the valencian community and in the week of 1-7 march 2020, a total of 261 confirmed cases were reported in all the country [11] . the increasing number of whole genome sequences of sars-cov-2 circulating in europe allows the development of phylodynamic studies to better understand these transmission dynamics of the virus in spain and europe and ideally to evaluate the proper functioning of surveillance systems.in order to investigate the transmission dynamics of sars-cov-2 in the most affected european countries, different datasets were retrieved from gisaid [6] . first, all the whole genome sequences (>29,000 bp) of the virus with high coverage were obtained (n=1590) to evaluate how the samples from spain are distributed. then, another dataset was analyzed including only whole genome sequences from europe and from wuhan, the city of the outbreak onset, to study the viral transmission dynamics within europe. the last dataset was retrieved with whole genome sequences from spain and from the countries where the first positives cases were reported, i.e. france, germany, italy and finland. sequences were aligned using mafft software and sequences were manually edited using aliview v1.26 [12, 13] .phylogenies of large alignments were inferred by fasttree software v2.1.11 [14] . rootto-tip genetic distances against sample collection dates were measured with tempest v1.5.1 and bayesian time-scaled phylogenetic analyses were performed with beast v1.10.4 to estimate the date and location of the most recent common ancestors (mrca) as well as to estimate the rate of evolution of the virus [15, 16] . beast priors were introduced with beauti v1.10.4 including an uncorrelated relaxed molecular clock model with a lognormal rate distribution and the exponential growth coalescent model of population size and growth [16] . duplicated sequences were discarded from all the datasets. markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) runs of 100 million states sampling every 10,000 steps were computed. the convergence of mcmc chains was checked using tracer v.1.7.1, ensuring that the effective sample size (ess) values were greater than 200 for each parameter estimated [17] . the maximum clade credibility (mcc) trees were obtained from the tree posterior distribution using treeannotator after 10% burn-in [16] .discrete trait evolutionary histories associated with phylogenies were analyzed with spread3, generating klm files for visualizations in virtual globe software like google earth [18] . well-supported rates between locations in the phylogeographic reconstructions were identified through a bayes factor by using the bayesian stochastic search variable selection (bssvs) procedure implemented in beast [19] .a total of 28 whole genome sequences have been obtained from samples from spain, including 14 from madrid (12 of them sequenced by the university hospitals 12 de octubre, la paz and ramón y cajal), five from the valencian community (sequenced by the fisabio foundation), four from castille and leon, 2 from castille-la mancha and one each from andalusia, galicia and the basque country. these sequences branched in 3 different phylogenetic clusters ( figure 1a ), 13 included in the g clade, two in the v clade and other 13 in the ancestral s clade ( figure 1b ).the phylogenies obtained for the dataset only comprising sequences from european countries revealed that the sequence epi-isl-406862, collected from a patient from munich, germany, in january 28, 2020, was basal to the g clade and at least six sequences from spain, branched in the monophyletic g-spain cluster ( figure 2a ). in the case of the v clade, the sequences from spain are integrated in a cluster where two sequences from sweden (february 7, 2020) and france (january 23, 2020) were basal to the cluster formed by european sequences ( figure 2b ). the rest of the sequences from spain branched in the s clade and 11 of them were found in s-spain cluster along with a basal sequence to this cluster from a virus collected in shanghai on february 1, 2020 ( figure 2c ).the mrca estimated for the dataset including sequences from wuhan and from the first european countries reporting cases was located in wuhan (pp=0.99) around november 24, 2019 (95% highest posterior density (hpd) interval october 30-december 17, 2019). bf analysis revealed highly probable diffusions from wuhan to all the european countries included in the dataset, i.e., england (bf>100; pp=1.00), germany (bf>100; pp=1.00), france (bf>100; pp=1.00), spain (bf>100; pp=1.00), finland (bf>100; pp=0.99) and italy (bf=29.1; pp=0.93). this dataset was also used to estimate the rate of evolution of sars-cov-2, which was 1.47x10 -3 substitutions per site and per year (95% hpd interval 1.08x10 -3 -1.87x10 -3 ). results of the root-to-tip genetic distances against sample collection dates were measured for different phylogenetic clusters (supplementary figure 1) .the most probable origin of the s phylogenetic cluster in spain (spain-s) was located in shanghai (pp=0.65) around january 28, 2020 (95% hpd interval january 21-february 2, 2020). the mrca of the s-spain cluster, which also included 8 sequences from 6 other countries (usa, netherlands, chile, brazil, georgia and france) was located in spain (pp=0.79) around february 14, 2020 (95% hpd interval february 4-23, 2020) ( figure 3 ; supplement s1). the bf test indicated that the only probable diffusion between asia and europe was from china to the netherlands (pp > 25; pp=0.87). in a different analysis where only sequences from europe where included, the mrca of this cluster was located in england (pp=0.95) and was dated around january 18, 2020 (95% hpd interval january 9-27).the origin of the v clade is uncertain, since no location reached values of pp>0.40. the tmrca of the v clade in our analyses was around december 23, 2019 (95% hpd november 26, 2019 -january 11, 2020). the mcc of the v-clade revealed an earlier subcluster mainly transmitted in asia and australia and a more recent subcluster dominated by sequences from europe ( figure 4 ).sequences from spain were found in different subclusters of the v clade. specifically, the sequences epi-isl-418243 and -417975 from madrid and andalusia, respectively, were found in a subcluster where the mcra was located in england (pp=0.85) and dated around february 5, 2020 (95% hpd interval february 1-9, 2020). the other subcluster included the sequence epi-isl-417952 from madrid, although the location of the mrca of this group is uncertain between norway (pp=0. the mrca of g clade in europe was located in england (pp=0.93) and dated on january 20, 2020 (95% hpd interval january 10-29, 2020). the sequence from the bavarian patient (epi-isl-406862) was found at the root of the mcc, confirming the results obtained by the phylogenetic analysis. this clade includes approximately 50% of the whole genomes sequenced so far and the sequences from spain are distributed throughout the clade rather than being clustered all together, indicating that several transmissions have been produced (figure 6; supplement s3) . the mrca of g-spain cluster comprising the sequences epi-isl-418251, -417963, -417954, -417978, -417956, -417967 from spain was located in spain (pp=0.95) and was dated on february 18, 2020 (95% hpd interval february 9-25, 2020) ( figure 5 ).the global analysis on the origin of the ongoing pandemic of sars-cov-2 indicated that the tmrca was around november 24, 2019, with a 95% hpd interval from october 30 to december 17, 2019. this result is compatible with the epidemiologic information about the first case of covid-19 reported in wuhan, which dated the symptom onset in this patient on december 1, 2019 [3] . the estimated rate of evolution for sars-cov-2 was in the range of 1.08x10 -3 -1.87x10 -3 substitutions per site per year, which is also comparable with the rates estimated for other epidemic coronaviruses, i.e. sars-cov (0.80x10 -3 -2.38x10 -3 ) and mers-cov (0.88x10 -3 -1.37x10 -3 ) [20, 21] .taking into account the outbreak onset in wuhan, it is worth pointing out that the city of wuhan had direct flight connections with different european cities, including paris (six weekly flights), london (three weekly flights) and rome (three weekly flights) [22] . regarding the v clade, five sequences from france are among the first representatives of this clade in europe and were collected on january 23-28, 2020, from at least a couple of chinese tourists from wuhan [23] . in the present study two subclusters containing sequences from spain were identified and the tmrca was dated at the beginning of february and the mrca of at least one of them was located in england. however, there is no scientific evidence supporting the association of the introduction of this clade in spain to any known transmission cluster in europe.the origin of g clade in europe has been associated with a known cluster of transmission in the state of bavaria, germany [24] . this outbreak began in january 19-22, 2020, with the contact of a "healthy german businessman" with a shanghai resident who tested positive for sars-cov-2 on january 26 [9] . this cluster comprised at least 12 cases in bavaria [24] . the present study dated the tmrca of this clade on january 19, 2020, which is clearly compatible with the epidemiologic information. however, england was estimated as the origin of this cluster in spite of the fact that one representative sequence of the bavarian cluster was included in the analysis (epi-isl-406962). this possible artifact could be explained by the low number of whole genome sequences available so far from germany (n=8) compared with the sequences from england (n=58). a new cluster named g-spain comprised of at least 6 sequences from madrid, spain, has been identified and the mrca was located in spain and dated around february 18, 2020.the mrca of the s phylogenetic cluster in spain was located in shanghai and dated around january 28. however, bf analyses did not support a direct transmission from shanghai to spain, suggesting that an ancestor of these viruses that are circulating in spain was transmitted some time in the past in shanghai but the introduction in spain came from a different location. according to the same analysis, it is probable that the virus reached different european countries, including spain, directly from asia. the mrca of the s-spain clade was located in spain and dated around february 14. this clade includes sequences from other 6 countries, suggesting its dissemination from spain to usa, netherlands, chile, brazil, georgia and france. epidemiologic investigations based on positive contact tracing have recently revealed that the first case detected in europe was from a patient returning to france from shanghai airport after a business trip in various cities, including wuhan, in january 24 [23, 25] .a well-traced case transmitted in europe is the cluster of the french skiing resort of contamines-monjoie. this cluster includes at least 13 infected individuals who are among the first cases reported in uk, france and spain between 6 and 15 february, 2020 [9] . recently, one of the sequences from this cluster has been released (epi-isl-410486) and its analysis revealed that it branches outside of g, v, and s clades. none of the sequences from spain included in the present study has this topological feature, since all of them branch in one of the major clades. however, the second case reported in spain (from mallorca, balearic islands) is related to this cluster, so there is a possibility that a virus with these characteristics is also circulating in spain but has not been sequenced yet [8, 9] .the main limitations of the present study are related to the fact that genomic sequences are being generated by diverse strategies following different steps that could affect the quality of the sequences. different sample preparation techniques are being used, including overlapping amplicons, targeted capture where the viral rna is enriched and metagenomic total rna sequencing of rrna depleted samples. the first two methods require less sequencing effort, but the possibility that some rna molecules could be missed cannot be ruled out. on the contrary, the metagenomic approach is hypothesis-free, but implies a high number of sequencing reads. another point to take into account is the sequencing strategies per se, since several approaches are being used, including sanger sequencing and next generation sequencing platforms, such as iseq, miseq, nextseq and novaseq from illumina, minion and gridion from nanopore and iontorrent from thermofisher [6] . all these technologies also have their own biases. finally, the informatics employed to analyze the data is the step where more diversity of options are being identified. for all these reasons, some of the genetic differences observed between samples could be attributable to the error rate of sequencing platforms, indicating that genomes may be more similar than observed. on the other hand, the use of a reference genome to align the reads instead of following a de novo approach could mask some real genetic differences. in this sense, initiatives in nf-core are trying to provide best practice pipelines for the analysis of sars-cov-2 data in a peer-reviewed platform that includes some pipelines developed by the bioinformatics unit of the instituto de salud carlos iii [26] [27] [28] [29] . moreover, due to the public health threat caused by sars-cov-2, more genomic and epidemiologic data are generated every day and the results obtained in the present study should be seen as an early report about the current situation at the end of march 2020. however, studies like this about the dynamics of viral transmission are crucial to mitigate the pandemic because of phylodynamic analyses could help the public health authorities, identifying viral transmission routes and guiding the response measures. figure 1 . phylogeny of the 1,590 whole genome sequences of sars-cov-2 with high coverage (>29,000 bp) and high quality available in gisaid [9] in march 20. the location of each sample is indicated by colors, differentiating sequences from wuhan from the rest of sequences from asia. sequences from spain are colored yellow in this figure to more easily distinguish them. fasttree2 software was used to build the phylogeny. the sequences epi-isl-410721 and -402131 of pangolin and bat coronaviruses were included to root the tree (a). genetic characteristics on cladedefining markers for the 28 sequences from spain available at the end of march. g clade contains d614g marker in the spike protein, v clade contains g251v in orf3 and s clade contains l84s in orf8 (b). node support values are indicated by node size (only nodes with pp>0.9 are considered wellsupported). scale axis represents estimated dating of the mrca for each cluster and label spacing defines exactly 9.16 days from the most recent sample included in the analysis (march 16, 2020, in this case).severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has emerged in wuhan 22 (li, et al. 2020) , spread across continents and eventually resulted in the covid-19 23 pandemic. although there are significant differences between the current and previously 24 known sars-cov genomes, the reason behind it's pandemic behaviour is still unclear.genome sequences around the world were revealed and deposited into public databases the sars-cov-2 virus is homologous to sars-cov, and its closer versions were 32 characterized in bats and pangolins (li, et al. 2020) . the virus has been under a strong 33 purifying selection (li, et al. 2020) . with the isolates obtained so far, the sequences of 34 sars-cov-2 genomes showed more than 99.9% percent identity indicating a recent shift 35 to the human species (tang, et al. 2020 ). yet, there are unambiguous evolutionary clusters 36 in the genome pool. various studies use snp (tang, et al. 2020) or entropy (zhao, et al. 37 2020) based methods to identify evolving virus types to reveal genomic regions cluster evolving virus genomes (zhao, et al. 2020) . another study defined a competitive 43 subtype based on the d614g mutation in the spike protein which facilitates binding to 44 3 ace2 to receptor on the host cell surface (bhattacharyya, et al. 2020 to perform our analyses we retrieved virus genomes, aligned them to each other and 58 revealed the evolutionary relationships between them through phylogenetic trees. we 59 assigned the clusters based on the mutations for each genome. we further analyzed the 60 phylogenetic tree with respect to neighbor samples of our genomes of interest to identify 61 possible transmission patterns. the entire sars-cov-2 genome sequences, along with their metadata were retrieved 65 from the gisaid database (table-s1 bootstrapping option and 1000 bootstraps.the sub-tree consisting of turkey isolates ( information was used to assign amino acid substitution information to the variations.eventually, the variants were categorized as non-synonymous, synonymous, non-coding one of the genomes isolated in turkey (epi-isl-428718) clustered together with the 207 early subtypes of the virus. this isolate contains t at the position 8782, which is a 208 characteristic of the s-type; however, it has t at the position 28144, which coincides 209 with the l-type. therefore, we characterized this sample as neither s-nor l-type. in the 210 phylogenetic tree, this genome is placed between s and l strains, which suggests a was isolated in turkey, the l-strain had started to spread in europe, primarily in italy.although the isolation date of this early sample is one week later than the first reported 217 case, the existence of an ancestral genome sequence suggests an earlier introduction of 218 sars-cov-2 to turkey. the divergence of the samples from to tree root was calculated for each sub-cluster. the we used the turkey isolates (30) to analyze their mutational patterns and their 239 corresponding clusters. from the master tree, we pruned all the leaves except for the 240 samples of interest. we rooted the subtree at the transitioning sample. we aligned the 241 assigned clusters and all the mutations relative to the reference genome (figure 4) , 242 illustrating a correlation between the mutation pattern and the phylogenetic tree clades. (figure 4) . besides 614g, three more amino acid substitutions were identified in the 251 spike protein (table 2) . g206a, t951i, g227s, s911f, a1420v, a3995f in orf1a 252 and v772i, t1238i in spike protein, v66l in orf5 and s54l in orf8 were found to 253 be specific to some isolates in turkey (table 2) the phylogenetic analysis of the circulating genomes in a country is necessary to identify 311 the specific groups and their unique mutational patterns. abstract sars-cov-2, the causative agent of covid-19, emerged in wuhan, china in december 2019 and spread rapidly throughout the world. understanding the introductions of this new coronavirus in different settings may assist control efforts and the establishment of frameworks to support rapid response in future infectious disease outbreaks.we investigated the first four weeks of emergence of the sars-cov-2 virus in scotland after the first case reported on the 1st march 2020. we obtained full genome sequences from 452 individuals with a laboratory-confirmed diagnosis of covid-19, representing 20% of all cases until 1st april 2020 (n=2310). this permitted a genomic epidemiology approach to study the introductions and spread of the sars-2 virus in scotland.from combined phylogenetic and epidemiological analysis, we estimated at least 113 introductions of sars-cov-2 into scotland during this period. clusters containing multiple sequences suggestive of onward transmission occurred in 48/86 (56%). 42/86 (51%) clusters had no known international travel history indicating undetected introductions.the majority of viral sequences were most closely related to those circulating in other european countries, including italy, austria and spain. travel-associated introductions of sars-cov-2 into scotland predated travel restrictions in the uk and other european countries. the first local transmission occurred three days after the first case. a shift from travel-associated to sustained community transmission was apparent after only 11 days. undetected introductions occurred prior to the first known case of covid-19. earlier travel restrictions and quarantine measures might have resulted in fewer introductions into scotland, thereby reducing the number of cases and the subsequent burden on health services. the high number of introductions and transmission rates were likely to have impacted on national contact tracing efforts. our results also demonstrate that local real-time genomic epidemiology can be used to monitor transmission clusters and facilitate control efforts to restrict the spread of covid-19. the pandemic virus severe acute respiratory system coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has spread rapidly throughout the world, including europe, following its emergence in wuhan, china in december 2019 (1-4). sars-cov-2 is a highly transmissible betacoronavirus, related to the first sars virus (5) . it causes the clinical syndrome coronavirus disease-2019 (covid-19), characterised by nonspecific respiratory or gastrointestinal viral symptoms and anosmia. in severe cases, acute respiratory distress syndrome, cardiovascular disease, neurological manifestations, thrombosis and renal failure may occur (6, 7) . a rare kawasaki-like disease has recently been described in children (8) . despite the mobilisation of significant resources to contain the outbreak, covid-19 was declared a public health emergency of international concern (pheic) by the world health organisation on 30th january 2020 and a pandemic on 11th march 2020 (9, 10). many countries are now responding to large outbreaks triggering unprecedented social and economic disruption and challenges to local healthcare systems.the who has declared a pheic on five occasions since 2009, all as a result of rna virus outbreaks (h1n1 influenza, zika, polio and ebola). pathogen genomic sequencing is now established as a core component of the modern epidemiological response to such outbreaks, driven by modern nucleic acid sequencing technologies that can immediately yield entire pathogen genomes from clinical samples (11) . the integration of viral genomic data with spatial, temporal and other metadata in a genomic epidemiology framework has allowed enhanced inference of the origin and transmission dynamics of disease outbreaks (12) (13) (14) . such an approach is particularly applicable to rna viruses, as their relatively low-fidelity replication cycle generates mutations in the viral genome at a rate observable over the rapid time scale of an outbreak (15) .in this study, we sequenced laboratory-confirmed positive cases of covid-19 in scotland, and analysed them alongside available international data, in order to estimate the number of introduction events and early spread of sars-cov-2 in the country. we also aimed to investigate outbreaks in health-care settings in real-time. during the sampling period, 2310 positive cases of covid-19 were detected (https://statistics.gov.scot), associated with 1832 hospital admissions, 207 intensive care admissions and 126 deaths. applying a genomic epidemiology approach to the data, we demonstrate the outbreak is the result of multiple separate introductions of the virus associated with international travel, and that community transmission was quickly established in scotland, well before the introduction of 'lockdown' countermeasures on the 23 rd march.samples. up to 300 samples per week were selected prospectively following ethical approval from the relevant national biorepository authorities (16/ws/0207nhs and10/s1402/33) between 1 st march and 1st april 2020. 50% of samples were randomly selected to achieve a representative target for all scottish health boards and 50% to cover suspected healthcarerelated nosocomial infections as they occurred. health boards with a small population size were reported at a minimum of 5 sequences per region to avoid deductive disclosure. the royal infirmary of edinburgh and west of scotland specialist virology centre, nhsggc conducted diagnostic real-time rt-pcr to detect sars-cov-2 positive samples, following nucleic acid extraction utilising the nuclisens® easymag® and roche mg96 platforms (16) . residual nucleic acid from 452 samples underwent whole genome next generation sequencing at the mrc-university of glasgow centre for virus research (cvr) and the royal infirmary of edinburgh. clinical details including recent travel history were obtained from assay request forms submitted to the diagnostic laboratory and where available electronic patient records.sequencing: oxford nanopore technologies (ont) following extraction, samples underwent dnase treatment (am2222) and libraries were prepared utilising protocols developed by the artic network (v1 and v2) https://artic.network/ncov-2019. 50 fmol of library pools were loaded onto each flow cell (r9.4.1). sequencing was conducted in minknow version 19.12.5. raw fast5 files were basecalled using guppy version 3.4.5 in high accuracy mode using a minimum quality score of 7. rampart v1.0.5 was used to visualise read mapping in real-time. reads were size filtered, demultiplexed and trimmed with porechop (https://github.com/rrwick/porechop), and mapped against reference strain wuhan-hu-1 (mn908947). variants were called using nanopolish 0.11.3 and accepted if they had a log-likelihood score of greater than 200 and minimum read coverage of 20.sequencing: illumina miseq. amplicons were generated as described above. dna fragments were cleaned using ampure beads (beckman coulter) and 40 ng used to prepare illumina sequencing libraries with a dna kapa library preparation kit (roche). indexing was carried out with nebnext multiplex oligos (neb), using 7 cycles of pcr. libraries were pooled in equimolar amounts and loaded on a miseqv2 cartridge (500 cycles). to estimate sequencing error rate, seven samples were processed in duplicate from extracted rna with a target enrichment protocol using nimblegen probes (roche). reads were trimmed with trim_galore (http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/trim_galore/) and mapped with bwa (17) to the wuhan-hu-1 (mn908947) reference sequence, followed by primer trimming and consensus calling with ivar (18) and a minimum read coverage of 10.sequence data. consensus sequences with >90% coverage were included. all consensus genomes are available from the gisaid database (https://www.gisaid.org), the cog-uk consortium website (https://www.cogconsortium.uk/data/) and bam files from the european nucleotide archive's sequence read archive service, bioproject prjeb37886 (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/prjeb37886). see supplementary table 1 for ids and dates of sampling.phylogenetic analysis. sequences from gisaid were downloaded on the 10 th april and aligned in cov-glue (http://cov-glue.cvr.gla.ac.uk). consensus sequences were aligned using mafft (19) . a maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree was constructed using iq-tree with the hky nucleotide substitution model as determined by modeltest-ng (20, 21) and visualised with figtree. pangolin (https://github.com/hcov-2019/pangolin) was used for assigning phylogenetic lineages with the additional step of removal of identical sequences (22) . the estimated number of introductions into scotland was calculated by combining lineage assignment with travel history and date of sampling to allow for multiple travelassociated introductions with identical sequences. a scottish-specific cluster analysis was carried out using the following rules: identical sequences from individuals residing in scotland were assumed to be linked unless there was a history of travel outside scotland. scottish lineages were identified where a basal scottish sequence was present. clusters including at least two scottish sequences were included as evidence of onward transmission if no travel history was present for at least one individual. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.08.20124834 doi: medrxiv preprint findings multiple introductions of sars-cov-2 in scotland. 452 sars-cov-2 genomes were generated with >90% genome coverage, representing 20% of laboratory-confirmed scottish covid-19 cases. the median ct value was 28.98 (range . of 452 individuals, 272 (60%) reported no travel, and 61 (14%) reported travel outside scotland. no travel history was recorded for 119 (26%) individuals. countries visited included italy (n=37), spain (n=7), austria (n=5), switzerland (n=3), france (n=2), england (n=1), ireland (n=1), poland (n=1) and thailand (n=1). three individuals returned from caribbean cruise holidays.the first case of covid-19 in scotland was a 51-year-old male from tayside with mild respiratory symptoms who was tested on the 28 th february 2020 (and reported positive on the 1 st march 2020). he had returned from italy after attending a rugby match 9 days earlier (23). the first confirmed case who had not travelled occurred three days later, on 2 nd march 2020. reflecting the change from returning travellers to an older disease-susceptible demographic, the median age of cases increased from 44 (iqr 32-51) in the first week of the epidemic to 62 (iqr 47-76) in the fourth, as infections moved from travel-associated to local community transmission (figure 1 ; p<0.001).all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . to determine the relationship of the viruses identified in scotland to circulating sars-cov-2 variants, we inferred an evolutionary tree using viruses sequenced in this study against all complete genomes available from gisaid (figure 2; supplementary figure 1 ). overall limited variability in the genome was observed in keeping with the lower evolutionary rate of all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.08.20124834 doi: medrxiv preprint coronaviruses compared to other rna viruses and the recent introduction of the virus into the human population. the 452 genomes displayed an average of 3.4 nonsynonymous and 1.8 synonymous nucleotide substitutions in comparison to wuhan-hu-1 (figure 3 ). analysis of sequencing error indicated that one genome out of seven re-sequenced using target enrichment contained a single insertion error, which would not have impacted clustering in the phylogenetic analysis. the strains introduced into scotland are diverse with the majority fitting within the b lineage (n= 432) and only 20 from lineage a (22) (figure 2 ). two common amino acid replacements encoding 614d/g and 323p/l in spike and nsp12 respectively were observed. d614g has been hypothesised to be associated with increased transmissibility (24) . similarly another spike replacement n439k (reported by the covsurver receptor binding surveillance gisaid, https://www.gisaid.org/covsurver) occurs with d614g and is circulating in a scottish cluster of 12 sequences. introductions were estimated based on both the phylogeny (22) and by travel history and date of sampling. the phylogenetic analysis combined with the epidemiological history permitted the identification of least 113 introductions into scotland. notably if identical basal sequences and singleton sequences without a significant travel history were to be counted as separate introductions, the phylogeny was suggestive of as many as 276 introductions into scotland. given some of the latter are probably linked infections the true number in our sample will be between these two numbers.many of the introductions of covid-19 into scotland were from known returning travellers from europe, mostly italy (37 out of 113 introductions). 38/86 (44%) of inferred introduction clusters were single cases not linked with further cases over time. several singleton lineages were not associated with travel, likely corresponding to undetected community transmission clusters. 48 of the introductions resulted in clusters of at least two individuals and were associated with transmission in varied settings (figure 4) , for example, in the shetland islands with travel links to italy (figure 4a) , within a care home facility, community transmission across central scotland and transmission related to an international conference event in edinburgh at the end of february, prior to the first documented sars-cov-2 case in scotland ( figure 5 ). the latter demonstrates the extent to which conferences and other large gatherings may contribute to the spread of the virus, supporting findings from similar events in china and singapore (25, 26).all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . the mutations are plotted in a grid format where each column is a sample and each row is a unique mutation at a given genome position; mutations have been filtered to only display those observed in more than one sample and labelled according to what orf they are located in. the plot was created using the d3heatmap package in r, and the phylogram (top) displays the samples (columns) ordered according to ward's clustering.shift to community transmission. while early cases were most often associated with travel, later cases were almost all associated with community transmission in scotland. of 113 introductions, 50 (44%) had no associated travel links, 58 (51%) were linked to travel in europe, three (3%) were linked to a caribbean cruise and one was related to travel to thailand and italy. of 86 phylogenetic clusters, 44 (51%) were linked to sequences from within the uk, outside scotland. the first case of documented community transmission occurred on the 2 nd march 2020 and community transmission was well-established by the 11 th march (figures 1, 4) . a cluster occurring between the 12 th and 24 th march from greater glasgow contained an index case with travel history to spain ( figure 4d ) but all subsequent cases in the cluster did not report travel. this shift to community transmission is evident in other example clusters: figure 4b represents a cluster from a care home, figure 4c figure 2) . while the phylogenetic signal is low owing to the low levels of variation in sars-cov-2 genome, this analysis demonstrates it is possible to exclude transmission events with high certainty. such information is useful in complex settings such as health and care facilities where a case might indicate infection acquired elsewhere or a breakdown in control measures.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . our study indicates that sars-cov-2 entered the scottish population through at least 113 separate travel-related introductions, leading to at least 48 clusters of sustained community transmission and 38 singleton sequences with no evidence of onward transmission. 44/86 (49%) of phylogenetic clusters included sequences from individuals with a known history of international travel. the majority returned to scotland from europe at the end of february and early march following travel to italy and less commonly to spain, austria, switzerland, france, england, ireland, poland, the caribbean and thailand.travel to continental europe in february and march 2020, the epicentre of the global covid-19 pandemic, was a clear driver of the scottish outbreak; the majority of the lineages detected in this study were related to european sequences. cases with direct links to south-east asia were rare. 20 lineage a sequences, a lineage present in china at the beginning of the outbreak (but which is now globally distributed) appear to have been introduced to scotland via spain. on the 28th january, the uk government recommended against all but essential travel to china and for returning travellers to self-isolate for two weeks upon their return regardless of symptoms (27). however, despite evidence of local transmission in italy as early as february 21st, advice from the scottish government for returning travellers from italy to self-isolate was issued only on the 25 th of february and was limited to those having returned from specific lockdown areas (28-30). by the time this advice was extended to all travellers on 10 th march, the covid-19 outbreak within scotland was already being driven by community transmission. a lack of robust measures to manage ingress of infected travellers from emerging pandemic hotspots may have accelerated the course of the outbreak in scotland and the uk as a whole.our data suggest that sars-cov-2 was introduced to scotland on multiple occasions, including at an international conference held in edinburgh several days before the first scottish case was confirmed. whilst multiple local cases are linked to this event, the last case within the cluster in the uk occurred on the 27 th march, suggesting that the local public health response to this event may have been effective and did not account for the majority of cases in scotland. however, the geographical distribution of other sequences is striking, spanning four continents and ten countries. the role of this event in dispersing the virus locally and internationally, before a single case had been identified in scotland, demonstrates that governments should be wary of prematurely relaxing restrictions on large gatherings and international travel.importantly, we identified viral lineages with no epidemiological link to travel as early as two days after the first detection of infection, indicating earlier introduction to scotland than the first detected case, reported on the 1 st march 2020 (23) . 42/86 (49%) clusters were linked to sequences within the uk but outside scotland. the majority of individuals had no recorded link to travel by the 12 th march, only 2 days after substantial travel and physical distancing restrictions were put in place. importantly these data are suggestive of introductions and community spread before initial detection. the epidemic in the uk expanded rapidly, prompting the government to respond with restrictive public health measures or "lockdown" to disrupt transmission. as the number of cases subside, this phylogenetic data will provide a baseline for granular real-time sequencing of infections. this will be used as a measure of the success of current measures and has the potential to contribute to decision-making around the easing (or tightening) of public health measures.integration of genomic sequence data with traditional case-finding and contact tracing has the potential to enhance descriptive epidemiology and deliver more targeted control measures. however previous interventions of this type have been largely retrospective. the challenge will be to develop a framework where phylogenetic information is delivered in real-time in an easily actionable format to public health and infection control teams.this study has some limitations. we sampled only 20% of those detected during the initial outbreak, therefore some introduction events will have been missed. further, public health records were not accessed to record linkage with sequence data. while introduction of erroneous variation during sequencing or genome assembly is possible, we estimated experimentally that such rates were extremely low and should not affect clustering patterns in phylogenetic analyses. this analysis, based on the available phylogeny, is most likely to be an under-estimate, despite dense sampling of the beginning of the outbreak.linkage of sequences do not categorically prove that transmission events have occurred and require correlation with epidemiological information. many events may be linked to an identical sequence because sars-cov-2 is a slowly evolving rna virus. exclusion of linkage may be inferred with more certainty. as the variation present in the global diversity is well-represented in scotland, reflecting a high number of near simultaneous introductions, tracking of the outbreak is feasible and can be used to refine public health interventions. our analysis may also have been affected by a shift in sampling all symptomatic individuals to hospitalised patients only during mid-march. some travel-related introductions may therefore not have been detected (as evidenced by several clusters with no evidence of travel related infection after this time).the utility of genomic epidemiology to inform local level policy is highlighted by the case of a healthcare worker in this study who tested positive for covid-19 whilst working on a high-risk ward. the sequence from the healthcare worker was clearly distinct from those from the patients on the ward (supplementary figure 2) , suggesting that nosocomial transmission was unlikely. such information can inform targeted infection control interventions such as the effectiveness of personal protective equipment (ppe). in contrast, several healthcare associated clusters were detected later in the outbreak that included healthcare workers.in summary, the first month of the covid-19 outbreak in scotland was associated with multiple introductions related to returning travellers from europe, increased evidence of ongoing non-travel related transmissions as time passed, and clusters related to events and healthcare facilities. since the onset of lockdown interventions, introductions into the community have subsided. an earlier lockdown from countries with a high burden of cases such as italy and other measures such as quarantine of travellers from high-risk areas might have prevented escalation of the outbreak and multiple clusters of ongoing community transmission.(roslin institute, university of edinburgh) for the loan of sequencing reagents. glasgow also thanks scott arkison for hpc maintenance. 2020); two of these viruses (h1n1 and sars-cov2) have resulted in pandemics within 10 years (who, 2020) .the sars outbreak of 2002-2004, the mers outbreaks since 2012 and the current covid-19 outbreak since 2019 demonstrate the potential of coronaviruses, especially bat-derived betacoronaviruses (zhou et al., 2020) , to cause pheics, with covid-19 having escalated to a global pandemic. viruses in a new host (humans) have the potential to evolve rapidly and present quasispecies diversity (eigen, mccaskill, & schuster, 1988) , which is a hallmark of rna viruses that exist as a 'cloud of variants' due to low fidelity, high polymorphism and viral polymerases lacking the capability to correct errors (drew, 2011; wilke, wang, ofria, lenski, & adami, 2001) . as a result, most variants are a random accumulation of errors, useful for tracing aetiology, but typically without substantial functional change (grubaugh, petrone, & holmes, 2020) . unlike most other rna viruses, coronaviruses express a 3′-to-5′ exoribonuclease that enables the high-fidelity replication of their relatively large 26-32 kb ssrna(+) genome (minskaia et al., 2006; snijder et al., 2003) . coronaviruses have a moderate mutation rate (0.80-2.38 × 10 -3 nucleotide substitutions per site per year for the sars-cov genome; zhao et al., 2004) allowing a wider evolutionary space to be explored more deliberately. this can complicate the outbreak response in terms of rapid development and evaluation of diagnostics, vaccines, antivirals and antibody therapies as many diverse strains with unknown functional differences exist (figure 1 ). this is particularly exacerbated by increased movement of people (enabled by global air travel), animals and goods spreading new viruses across the world's population and exposing them to huge variations in environment, demographics, age structure, socio-economic status, co-morbidities and equitable access to health care.the sheer number of these inter-connected influencing factors often makes an unfolding situation hard to comprehend fully and challenges the traditional virology and public health disciplines by rendering them less effective in coping with the spread of the virus.bioinformatic approaches may be able to better inform epidemiology and responses to trans-boundary viruses, by synthesizing complex information more effectively and systematically. enabled by the advances in genomic sequencing technology (e.g. oxford nanopore, illumina) and the willingness to share the sequenced information in the public domain (e.g. genbank, gisaid), bioinformatic approaches developed in the human domain have enabled comparative analysis of the emerging genomic diversity of a virus as it spreads throughout a host population.for the ongoing covid-19 outbreak, as illustrated in figure 1 , applying in silico approaches can rapidly provide answers to questions like: is the first sequenced sars-cov-2 genome (often called the 'reference genome' in gisaid, genbank, etc.) closest to the original or 'true reference' strain which entered humans (which may not have been sequenced and/or which may still be circulating with minimal mutations)? combined with epidemiological or experimental evidence, bioinformatics can help address questions like 'are there one or multiple circulating strains and are they different to the most virulent ones' (if yes can we identify the molecular basis)? finally, f i g u r e 1 illustration of coronavirus spread while it accumulates mutations. the dark blue arrows represent the main volume of transmissions, while the nucleic acid symbol illustrates mutations acquired by the different viral strains as they enter humans from a primary/reservoir host (represented by the bat symbol) through an intermediate host (which is yet to be identified for sars-cov-2). the first human sars-cov-2 isolate sequenced (with orange and pink mutation) may not have been the original strain that first infected humans (grey). it is possible that a strain sequenced later (green) may be genetically closer to the original strain. in this scenario, the original strain has not been captured through sequencing at all. it also shows that there may be two currently circulating strains (orange-pink-purple and orange-pink-brown), which in turn might be different from the most virulent one (orange-pink-blue). in the absence of clinical data correlated with sars-cov-2 genome isolates, bioinformatic analysis (represented by the computer symbol) can identify clusters and consensus sequences to investigate the genetic diversity of the emerging sars- answers to these questions are not just of academic interest; they can help inform outbreak response and development and evaluation of diagnostics, vaccines and countermeasures. for instance, outbreak response efforts including vaccine evaluation should focus on the most prevalent circulating strain (lest we may end up rejecting acceptable candidates by raising the efficacy threshold too high), but it would be desirable to evaluate therapeutics against the most virulent strain. however, with the field not yet using bioinformatic tools to their fullest potential, current data collection practices are not capturing the information necessary for advanced analysis. for example, pathogen sequences derived from patients are typically not annotated with deidentified disease progression and other clinically relevant information, and this in turn hampers the identification of the most virulent strain or associating pathogen properties with genomic modifications.here, we use bioinformatic analysis to identify emerging trends among the sars-cov-2 isolates. from this, we sought to identify the most representative strains for animal models and pre-clinical research, in particular, which strains among the emerging australian isolates are good choices for animal model development and which ones are not representative.two australian isolates (betacov/australia/vic02/2020 and betacov/ australia/sa01/2020) were sequenced with the miseq platform (illumina, inc). in brief, rna was purified from each isolate using a directzol rna miniprep kit (zymo research). purified rna was reverse transcribed using a taqman reverse transcription kit (applied biosystems) with random octamers linked to a specific primer sequence, followed by second-strand cdna synthesis using klenow dna polymerase i (promega). complementary dna was further amplified (using primers specific to the sequences added to the random octamers used for reverse transcription) with a kapa hifi hotstart kit (roche). resulting dna was purified using a dna clean and concentrator kit (zymo research).fragmentation and dual-index library preparation was conducted using a nextera xt dna library preparation kit (illumina, inc), and denatured libraries were sequenced using a 300-cycle miseq reagent kit v2 (illumina, inc). sequencing reads were trimmed for quality and mapped to the published reference sequence (betacov/wuhan-hu-1/2019; genbank accession number nc_045512.2) using geneious 11.1.4. consensus genome sequences for the isolates were generated for analysis.all available viral sequences were downloaded from gisaid (on 05/03/2020, see appendix s3 (elbe, & buckland-merrett, 2017) ), filtering for complete sequences of human origin (187 genomes in total). low-quality sequences (defined as sequences with an n content greater than 1%) were filtered out leaving 178 strains in total.we also included one recently reported viral sequence from the european virus archive global (ref-sku: 026v-03883) and the two australian sequences in the full data set.this data set of 181 sequences was aligned against each other using muscle (v3.8.31) (madeira et al., 2019) . based on the alignments, we could see significant variation at the ends of the sequences ( figure s1 ), likely due to sequencing artefacts and errors preventing the full viral genomes from being sequenced. to reduce the impact of potential sequencing errors, we wrote a custom perl script to trim the sequences such that only positions with 95% coverage were retained. this trimming entailed removing the first 101 and last 72 bp from the alignments.once trimmed and converting all 'u' to 't', we identified 54 sequences that were identical. to limit the effect of duplicate sequences on subsequent analysis, we collapsed these into a single entry. these collapsed sequences are summarized in table s1 . the maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree was generated from the above alignments using raxml-ng (kozlov, darriba, flouri, morel, & stamatakis, 2019 ). the evolutionary model used was a general time reversable model with gamma-distributed rate heterogeneity and invariant sites (gtr + g + i). we use this mode since it is the most general model and has been proposed to produce equal trees to optimally selected models (abadi, azouri, pupko, & mayrose, 2019) . the tree was visualized using itol (letunic & bork, 2019 ) as a midpoint rooted tree and shows the likely evolutionary relationships between the sampled strains.every organism and potentially isolate can have a unique genomic signature based on the composition of their genomic sequence.to quantify this signature, we determined the k-mer frequency.counting of all possible strings of length k in the sequence of the virus has emerged as an alternative to phylogenetic trees in other disciplines (sims, jun, wu, & kim, 2009 ). the conceptual distance between all isolates can then be visualized by running a principal component analysis (pca) over all genomic signatures to reduce this high-dimensional k-mer frequency vector into a two-dimensional space (jolliffe & cadima, 2016) . please see appendix s1 for more details of this method.custom scripts were used to calculate the k-mer frequency for each sequence using a k of 10 (sims et al., 2009 ). k-mers containing ambiguous bases (i.e. n's) were removed. we then calculated the relative proportion of each k-mer, resulting in a frequency vector.we used the pca implementation of python scikit-learn to reduce the genomic signatures containing 1,048,576 10-mer proportions into a vector containing two principal components. finally, custom scripts were used to compare the genomic signatures for all aforementioned coronavirus sequences.the evolutionary structure of the 181 isolates as determined by the phylogenetic tree reveals three major clusters (c1-c3) ( figure 2 ). the c1 cluster mainly represents wuhan and isolates captured early on; c2 and c3 contain later isolates, such as sydney/3, australia/vic01 and france/idf0372 in c2 and australia/nsw01, australia/qld01-3, australia/vic02 and usa/wa1 in c3. the three clusters are separated by distinct mutations (table 1) but contain a substantial number of other unique mutations, which we define as diversity within the cluster. these individual mutations are outside of the established hotspots of diversity as shown in figure s4 , which are predominantly of concern for pcr primer design rather than aetiology. there may also be three additional clusters emerging (c4-6) with c4 capturing the suspected community spread from lombardy ('narrative: genomic analysis of covid-19 spread', n.d.), c5 regionally mixed (asia and north amerika) and c6 from australia and asia, notably australia/nsw05-7 (see fully annotated tree in figure s5 ). this finding is different to tang et al. (2020) , who postulate two clusters (s and l). their analysis was only on 103 gisaid isolates and includes betacoronaviruses from bats, which roots the tree differently and merges c1 and c2. however, as the aetiology is not fully demonstrated, especially with the intermediate vector yet unknown, f i g u r e 2 phylogenetic tree highlighting isolates of interest with branch points of the six clusters labelled to indicate mature (orange) and emerging (yellow) disease clusters (full list of identical sequences for these branch points are in table s1 and complete image in figure  s5 ) j a p a n /a i/ i-0 0 4 irrespective of the root placement, both trees allow the assessment of individual isolates that are not part of major branches by being genetically divergent offshoots. for example, sydney/2 appears to be an off-shoot from wuhan-hu-1. upon further inspection of the sydney/2 strand, we discovered a 41-bp deletion, which overlaps the infectious bronchitis virus' (ibv) motif at the 3′ end (goebel, cluster mutations in common note: table lists the isolate of note for this paper and collects the information from tables s1 and s2 for easy access. the third column counts the number of differences to wuhan-hu-1 for the full and (core sequences), in a condensed (deletions count as 1)/and full way. taylor, & masters, 2004) . inspecting other isolates, australia/vic01 has also a 10-bp deletion within the genomic location of the 41-bp deletion ( figure s3 ). despite this similarity, australia/vic01 was placed into c2 and sydney/2 in c1 since australia/vic01 contains the g26144t mutation indicative of c2 which sydney/2 lacks (see table 2 for a list of referenced isolates).a more systematic sequence analysis revealed that many isolates have deletions in their core genome (table s2) . while these deletions appear to be specific to each isolate ( figure s4 ), their effect on virus structure or function might be pronounced. for example, australia/ vic01 and sydney/2 may have the ibv motif disrupted with implications for replication, while usa/ca6 and japan/ai-004 may have disruption in the non-structural protein 1 (nsp1), with implications for host gene expression ( figure s3 ).while the full impact of these genomic variations can only be confirmed through functional genomics experiments, coronaviruses'proof-reading ability likely lifts them above random accumulation of errors. as such, having a methodology able to take deletions into consideration when calculating genomic distance is desirable.aiming to overcome the limitations of phylogenetic tree approaches, we also investigated whether an alignment-free approach can be used to understand how the genomic content of different sars-cov-2 isolates changes over time and with respect to each other by also taking deletions into account. we therefore calculated the frequency of all possible 10-mers across each viral genome followed by principal component analysis (pca) to reduce the high-dimensional k-mer vector space into a two-dimensional image for visual comparison.we first demonstrate the methods' ability to faithfully separate distant coronavirus strains by comparing all sars-cov-2 against 17 sars and 6 mers isolates. as shown in figure 3 ( c3 g e rm a n y /b a v p a t + h u m a n 2 0 1 9 -n c o v phylogenetic results and reflects the fact that these sequences have only mutational changes in their core sequences compared to wuhan-hu-1 (table s2) . however, this alignment-free method positions isolates with deletions (viz. australia/vic01 and canada/on-vido-01) further away from wuhan-hu-1 than in the phylogenetic tree, demonstrating the ability of the k-mer method to represent deletions accurately (see supplemental table 7) .of the 181 isolates, we found that singapore/4, taiwan/ntu01, finland/1, usa/il1 and shenzhen/szth-001 were among the furthest from wuhan-hu-1 (data not shown). for both singapore/4and taiwan/ntu01, this is due to these being shorter than the core sequences, so the k-mer fingerprint accurately reflects the missing sequences. meanwhile, usa/il1 and finland/1 contained several ambiguous bases effectively shortening the length of similar sequence, so the method correctly places them further from the other isolates.while the k-mer approach is not as suggestive as phylogenetic trees with respect to visualizing the potential transmission route (e.g. lombardy), it may more accurately reflect the fluidity of changes ('cloud of variants') and capture recombination events (graham & baric, 2010 ). an example is italy/inmi1, which has mutations in common with both sydney/3 (c1 cluster, g26144t) andchongqing/ivdc-cq-001 (c3 cluster, g11083t) making it impossible to definitively place it in the discrete phylogenetic tree (it was placed in the c2 cluster, figure 2) , while the pca plot shows the fluid evolution placing it between the italian and australian isolate ( figure 3 ).more generally, phylogenetic analysis is based on the presence of shared mutations; for example, two strains which share mostsnps are likely to be closely related and therefore exist on neighbouring branches in the phylogenetic tree. in comparison, an alignment-free method (such as k-mer signatures) is more concerned with global similarities and difference, for example changes averaged across the whole genome rather than at specific locations.this can be informative about high-level similarities between genomes, for example evolution of distinct genomic islands with common functions or recombination events. while this does not create visually clear clades, it offers a more holistic representation of pair-wise distances between all isolates. together with clinical information, this could hence help determine the most virulent strains (figure 1 ).currently, the process of determining which isolate to use for animal models is less informed than it could be due to the lack of shared genomic information and readily available bioinformatic methodologies, especially towards the beginning of an outbreak. for example, while china published the genomic sequence of sars-cov-2 (zhou et al., 2020) , patient samples or virus isolates were not made available, and with reverse genetics of a large rna virus taking time (thao et al., 2020) , countries had to wait for imported cases.australia's doherty institute was the first in the world to isolate the virus (australia/vic01) and made it available for pre-clinical animal models to the authors (csiro, 2020), public health england, etc.this practical consideration dictated the initial choice, however, with more isolates to choose from subsequently a more informed approach can be taken (figure 1 according to the phylogenetic tree shown in figure 4a , the main clusters are represented by the current animal models. that is, c1 is represented by germany/bavpat1 and human 2019-ncov (whose core sequence is identical), though they seem to be half-way to the c4 cluster (suspected lombardy cluster). c2 is represented by australia/vic01 and france/idf0372, and c3 is represented by usa/wa1. note that scotland/cvr01 was removed due to its high n content (2.3%). however, with phylogenetic methods focusing on the presence of shared mutations rather than the overall genomic similarity (e.g. shared evolved functionality), the assumption that current animal models adequately cover the evolutionary space of the actively circulating virus might be misleading as the pca plot indicates ( figure 4b) . here, the top-left and bottom-right areas seem to be underrepresented.to join the strain-etiology of phylogenetic approaches with the more fluid distance measure of alignment-free methods, we created the consensus sequences of the major and emerging clusters (appendix s2) and re-ran the pca analysis to find more robust and future relevant isolates (figure 4b ). (callaway, 2020) . moving away from purely practical considerations towards a more deliberate approach that assesses current and future characteristics of isolate choices will lead to a better coverage of actively circulating strains ( figure 1 ). with more sharing of isolates internationally and information collected about patient-deidentified details of case severity and outcome, more sophisticated machine learning approaches can be generated to assist in triaging and treatment choices. additional information, such as co-morbidities, socio-economic and smoking status, may also help in anticipating public health demand. furthermore, releasing the full high-throughput sequencing data sets rather than the consensus sequences would allow a more detailed exploration of the existing quasispecies to further improve isolate selection.the two australian isolates not yet in gisaid were kindly pro- the authors declare no conflict of interest.ethical statement is not applicable.the data that support the findings of this study are available in gisaid at https://www.gisaid.org/.denis c. bauer https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8033-9810seshadri s. vasan https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7326-3210(25 february 2020). sars-cov-2 belongs to genus betacoronavirus, subgenus sarbecovirus. the polyprotein 1ab (pp1ab) remains unstudied thoroughly since it is similar to other sarbecoviruses. in this short communication, we performed phylogeneticstructural sequence analysis of pp1ab protein of sars-cov-2. the analysis showed that the viral pp1ab has not changed in most isolates throughout the outbreak time, but interestingly a deletion of 8 aa in the virulence factor nonstructural protein 1 was found in a virus isolated from a japanese patient that did not display critical symptoms. while comparing pp1ab protein with other betacoronaviruses, we found a 42 amino acid signature that is only present in sars-cov-2 (as-scov2). members from clade 2 of sarbecoviruses have traces of this signature. the as-scov2 located in the acidic-domain of papain-like protein of sars-cov-2 and bat-sl-cov-ratg13 guided us to suggest that the novel 2019 coronavirus probably emerged by genetic drift from bat-sl-cov-ratg13.the implication of this amino acid signature in papain-like protein structure arrangement and function is something worth to be explored. the polyprotein 1ab (pp1ab) is the largest protein of coronaviruses that through proteolytic cleavage is divided into 16 mature nonstructural proteins (nsps). the nsps are involved in replication and transcription of the viral genome and are responsible for the cleavage of the polyprotein, thus making them attractive antiviral drug targets. 7 due to the lack of remarkable differences between pp1ab of sars-cov-2 with those from other sarbecoviruses, 3,5 pp1ab of sars-cov-2 has not been thoroughly analyzed. despite the high similarity between pp1ab proteins, it could be possible to identify distinguishable regions representing molecular signatures for the specific detection of virus strains or to track its evolutive history.in this short communication, we expound a comparative sequence analysis of pp1ab protein of sars-cov-2.the analysis was performed using the phylogenetic-structural sequence analysis; sequence comparisons were made in a phylogenetic order. 8 thus, pp1ab from sars-cov-2 isolates are compared first, then the polyprotein of sars-cov-2 is contrasted against those from clade 2 of sarbecoviruses. finally, the protein is set against those from clade 1 and 3. protein alignments were performed using the alignment tool according to the phylogenetic-structural sequence analysis, first, we compared pp1ab proteins with 144 isolates of sars-cov-2 from patients around the world (table s1 ). the analysis displayed that most pp1ab proteins have not changed; only six amino acid changes were detected (table s2) . we consider an amino acid change if two or more sequences have the same mutation. one of these mutations (l3606f), placed in the position 37 of nsp6 protein (l37f), is shared by ten sequences from viruses isolated in china, usa, france, hong kong, italy, and singapore (table s2) . coronavirus nsp6 is a transmembrane protein that is associated with nsp3 and nsp4 proteins to form the organelle-like replicative structures (double-membrane vesicles). 9 prediction of transmembrane helices (tmhs) segments in nsp6 protein showed that l37f does not alter the secondary structure of the adjacent transmembrane domains ( figure s1 ). in fact, the mutation l37f is predicted to be outside of the membrane as part of an unstructured coil segment (32slfffl/fyen) that connects the first (12-31 residues) and the second (41-60 residues) tmhs ( figure s1 ). strikingly, the position 37 of nsp6 protein is a val residue that is conserved in all analyzed sarbecoviruses (data s1), except in sars-cov-2 (leu). so the mutation of the aliphatic leu residue for the aromatic phe residue in this conserved position probably has functional implications;although leu and phe are both hydrophobic residues, the phe residue could also perform cation-π interactions that could affect the protein-protein interactions in the l37f mutant. the structural impact of this mutation can not be determined since experimental data in the protein data bank are not available for homology modeling of nsp6 using a single or multiple templates (eg, swiss-model server, phyre2, etc.).interestingly, a virus isolated from a japanese male (gisaid: epi_isl_407084), with no critical pneumonia (patient status described in gisaid database), has eight deleted amino acids at position 32 to 39 aa of pp1ab (nsp1) ( table s2 ). since nsp1 is a virulence factor that inhibits host gene expression, 10 (figure 1) . we found the same results when we compared the pp1ab of members of the genus betacoronavirus (table s3 ; data s1). figure 1 ). these findings suggest that the pp1ab of sars-cov-2 is more closely related to pp1ab of bat-sl-cov-ratg13 than to pp1ab of coronaviruses isolated from chinese pangolins. since the region that encodes the pp1ab protein represents about 71% of sars-cov-2 genome, we suggest that it is less likely that the novel human coronavirus has been arising directly from the viruses isolated from pangolins.first reports focused on the genetic characterization of sars-cov-2 suggested that this virus has a recombinant origin. 2 our results indicate that most probably, a recombination event did not happen in the first half of the viral genome (orf1ab). under this idea, an alternative explanation for sars-cov-2 origin is that bat-sl-cov-ratg13, collected 6 years ago, is the progenitor of sars-cov-2, which has evolved since the collection date by genetic drift before infecting humans. three observations support the hypothesis: 1. the high pairwise identity of pp1ab from sars-cov-2 and bat-sl-cov-ratg13 is preserved throughout its length ( figure s2 ). 2. the exclusive as-scov2 of the novel f i g u r e 1 alignment of pp1ab proteins from sarbecoviruses. pp1ab proteins of sarbecoviruses (green: clade 1; blue clade 2: blue; clade 3: red) were aligned using the multiple sequence alignment program mafft v7 and manually edited for maximizing coincidences. the figure shows the ac domain of pp1ab. conserved residues are yellow highlighted. as-scov2 conserved residues are blue highlighted. n-terminal region of the papain-like protein is represented above the alignment. as-scov2, sars-cov-2; sars-cov-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 coronavirus is conserved in bat-sl-cov-ratg13 (figure 1 ). 3. the high pairwise identity (96.3%) shared by sars-cov-2 and bat-sl-cov-ratg13 is preserved in its whole genome, only a slight dissimilarity region is displayed in the orf of spike protein. 6 although the origin of sars-cov-2 does not appear to be caused by recent genetic recombination, at least acquisition of genetic material must have given place to as-scov2. since members of subgenus the current emergency of covid-19 arose after the end of 2019 in wuhan (china) and was officially declared a pandemic by the world health organization (who) on march 11, 2020.its causative agent was called novel coronavirus (ncov), with a round or oval shape of this 60 to 140 nm enveloped structure 1 . then, the coronaviridae study group of the international committee on taxonomy of viruses named it as sars-cov-2 2 based on genomic and phylogenetics analysis. sars-cov-2 is closely related to the bat coronavirus isolate ratg13, due to its homology in phylogenetics analysis 3 . hence, sars-cov-2 is a betacoronavirus with more homology to ratg13 (around 96% sequence identity) andpangolin-cov (91.02% identity) than to sars-cov (79% identity) or mers (51.8% identity) viruses 1,3-6 .sars-cov-2 genome sequences allowed us to understand the organization of this virus, which has nearly 29,890 base pairs (genbank nc_045512.2), with genes that produce 29proteins. these proteins are encoded by ten open reading frames (orfs), the most important viral proteins are spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m) and nucleocapsid (n) proteins. in addition, the orf1ab can translate 16 non-structural proteins (nsp) 3 .genomic studies from china, allowed us to understand that the virus could accumulate mutations meanwhile spreading across the world, with a probable moderate mutation rate 7 .for instance, substitutions in positions 8750, 28112 were the hotspots and were useful to define two groups of strains, and nt29063 was used by scientists to subdivide these groups 8 .furthermore, another study evaluated 95 sars-cov-2 complete genomes and reported 13 february 9th 2020, and in a position of rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp or nsp12) 9 .these authors also found that positions 17746, 17857 and 18060 were points of recurrent mutations in viruses isolated from american or canadian patients. 10 . conversely, little information was collected with next generation sequencing (ngs) methodology in these countries.a huge amount of sars-cov-2 genomes has been sequenced in a short time around the globe, and a lot of research was published. nevertheless, south american countries have poor genomic information and lack of genomic analysis. to this date, there is only one official report of sars-cov-2 in south america 11 , and another online publication from brazil. thus, we aim to show a first overview of phylogenetics relationships and genetic variations of sars-cov-2 in south america.analyses were performed to obtain an overview of genomic sars-cov-2 mutations of circulating strains in south america; we download a total of 30 complete genomes of south this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.american countries from the gisaid (https://www.gisaid.org/) database. the alignment was carried out with mauve 12 software, using the reference nc_045512.2 (from the initial report from wuhan, china). the alignment was displayed in mega6 13 to extract nucleotide and amino acid mutations, for extracting the ten orfs regions the positions were assessed according to a previous study 7 .additionally, we downloaded 688 genomes from the gisaid database 14 , the genomes were complete (>29,000bp) and with high coverage according to this public resource. furthermore, to obtain representative sequences of the seven different continents we chose 5 to 7 day intervals of the first strain isolated in each continent. the alignment of the genomes was performed using mafft 15 . all gaps were replaced with n. the inference phylogenetics was used raxml 16 with the model gtrcat, with three rate categories and rapid hill-climbing to accelerate computations. the treetine 17 software was used for phylodynamic analysis using an approximate maximum likelihood approach with defaults parameters, and a time clock model was used. finally the tree obtained from raxml was analyzed with grapetree 18 using a minimum spanning algorithm to explore the fine-grained population structure of south american genomes, related to continent expansion.we have analyzed a total of 691 sars-cov-2 complete genomes from a wide variety of geographical sites. only 30 genomes from south american countries ( this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.we aligned 30 sars-cov-2 genomes from south american isolates with the reference, demonstrating high homology with 29846 sites conserved, representing 99.98% of identity.genomes have 57 snps sites in total ( phylogenetics analysis of 688 genomes (figure 1 ) was colored according to tang et al. 19 , the mutation a23403g permits to assign 17 genomes related to clade g (light purple), and the nucleotide change t28144c classify 8 genomes in the clade s (light pink). on the other hand, five genomes did not belong to any clade. figure 2 shows that clade g diverse and contains subtypes. at least one south american strain belongs to a subgroup of clade g. it seems that 11 , and we assume the 02 other isolates could have been sampled from relatives or close people to patient zero. we hypothesize that our findings are related to the amount of samples of viral sequences which could not be done for other south american countries yet, or any other bias of sample selection. furthermore, we were unable to include in our phylogenetic analysis viral genomes from ecuador and colombia, due to genome sequence quality. however, the gisaid sars-cov-2 portal (url at: https://www.gisaid.org/epiflu-applications/next-hcov-19app/) depicts the close relationship between an isolate from oceania (epi isl 417211) and the strain sequenced in ecuador. this online tool also shows that one of the strains sequenced from colombian patients was related to an australian origin (epi_isl_419834)-closely related to the chilean strain epi_isl_414578--whereas the other closely related to european origin from germany or switzerland.we were able to classify strains according to previous suggestions 19 . we demonstrate that strains from clade g were the most common throughout south america; with 68.75%, 14.29%, 50%, 100% of strains in brazil (11/16), chile (1/7), colombia (1/2) and the latter percentage for peru (1/1) and argentina (3/3). up to this report, we only have an official publication from chile and we were able to confirm analysis from this group, except the change of an amino acid (g196v in our analysis) reported in one strain of clade s as g193v 11 . currently, 85.71% of chilean strains pertain to s clade followed by 50% and 6.25%for colombian and brazilian isolates, respectively. all of s clade chilean strains were related this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.to asian origin, whereas brazilian and colombian isolates were related to viruses from oceania.infectivity and pathogenicity of sars-cov-2 is related to s protein, mainly due to the human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (h-ace2) binding ridge structural changes of the rbd domain, on residues 482-485: gly, val, glu, gly 20 . thus, novel mutations on s protein, especially on these residues or nearly of them could be of importance. our report highlights two strains with novel variants on the s region, with no amino acid change in nt24022 (e1207e) whereas another non-synonymous alteration in nt25182 (e1207v), for peru (epi_isl_415787) and ecuador (epi_isl_417482), respectively. however, these changes seem far away from the critical region of s protein for h-ace2 affinity.due to its prevalence across the world as in our sample of south american isolates, researchers are suggesting that clade g strains could be more contagious than other subtypes; zhang et al. 8 suggested that it could be related to synonymous changes due to nucleotide changes in orf1ab (nt8750) and n (nt29063) genes, which could enhance viral replication due to higher translational efficiencies compared to other clades. furthermore, another study showed that there are some positions where mutations could arise more frequently in subsequent sars-cov-2 strains, corresponding to nt8782 of orf1a, nt28144 of orf8 and nt29095 of n region 7 . we highlight differences with this report because we found variations 8 (8/30) in both of nt8782 and nt28144 positions. conversely, other regions seem to be hotspots in south american strains, with 11(36.67%) of these portraying changes at 5'utr (nt241), nsp3 (nt3037), nsp12 (nt14408), n/orf9 (nt28881, nt28882 and nt28883).this is relevant because changes in nsp1, nsp3 and nsp5 could be related to some functions of the viral incubation period and immune response evasion of sars-cov-2 21 .we found amino acid alterations in both of these regions, such as g392d (nsp1), a876t and a1043 (nsp3) and nsp5 (g3334s); and should be tested in further studies. strikingly, we this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.have been correlated to more mutations (3-4 per genome) than their counterparts without it 9 .all south american viruses of clade g analyzed in this report have concomitantly mutations on 14408 and 23403 positions. compared to the reference genome, we found an average of 5 mutations per genome of the overall south american strains.our study represents the first overview of sars-cov-2 strains genomic comparison and phylogenetic analysis in south america. surprisingly, five of the studied strains lack current classification, and we were not able to track all the global distribution of this virus due to our sampling methodology. however, we consider that our study highlights important findings such as two novel mutations in the s region, and novel hotspots positions. in addition, some external limitations such as primers design variations of the orf1b 23 or n regions, could have influenced the sequencing process on some isolates from south america 7, 24 . some other limitations are the lack of epidemiological data for all patients (we mostly used media information or government's official websites), poor quality of some viral genome sequences;and specially the limited number of viral genomes reported in south america after almost two months of the arrival of sars-cov-2 to this part of the world. this must improve to identify mutations that could have an effect on the design of diagnostic and therapeutic measures, including vaccines or antiviral drugs 25 .we should take into account that this is a novel virus and could have higher mutation rates than currently expected 7 , and genetic drift and founder effect could influence specific sars-cov-2 subsequent strains and mutations which would be geographically constrained for a while. moreover, south america should urgently strengthen the genomic epidemiology field for the current and further pandemics.we gratefully acknowledge the authors, originating and submitting laboratories of the sars-cov-2 sequences from gisaid's epiflu™ database 14 (see supplemental 1) . moreover, weone of the great challenges in the ecology of infectious diseases is to understand what drives the emergence of new pathogens including the relationship between viruses and their hosts. in the case of the emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), several studies have shown coronavirus diversity in bats as well as the existence of sars-cov infection in apparently healthy bats, suggesting that bats may be a crucial host in the genesis of this disease. to elucidate the biogeographic origin of sars-cov and investigate the role that bats played in its emergence, we amplified coronavirus sequences from bat species captured throughout thailand and assessed the phylogenetic relationships to each other and to other published coronavirus sequences. to this end, rdrp sequence of coronavirinae was targeted by rt-pcr in non-invasive samples from bats collected in thailand. two new coronaviruses were detected in two bat species: one betacoronavirus in hipposideros larvatus and one alphacoronavirus in hipposideros armiger. interestingly, these viruses from south-east asia are related to those previously detected in africa (betacoronavirus-b) or in europe (alphacoronavirus & betacoronavirus-b) . these findings illuminate the origin and the evolutionary history of the sars-cov group found in bats by pushing forward the hypothesis of a betacoronavirus spill-over from hipposideridae to rhinolophidae and then from rhinolophidae to civets and human. all reported betacoronaviruses-b (sars-cov group) of hipposideridae and rhinolophidae respectively cluster in two groups despite their broad geographic distribution and the sympatry of their hosts, which is in favor of an ancient and genetically independent evolution of betacoronavirus-b clusters in these families. moreover, despite its probable pathogenicity, we found that a betacoronavirus-b can persistently infect a medium-sized hipposiderid bat colony. these findings illustrate the importance of the host phylogeny and the host/pathogen ecological interactions in the description and the understanding of pathogen emergence. the host's phylogeny, biogeography and behaviour, combined with already described roles of pathogen plasticity and anthropic changes are likely to be co-factors of disease emergence. elucidating the common ancestor of hipposideridae and rhinolophidae is key to understanding the evolutionary history of actual betacoronaviruses and therefore to get an insight of the deep origin of sars-cov.ó 2011 elsevier b.v. all rights reserved.pathogens mostly emerge in densely human populated areas as did the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), which had the potential to cause the first viral pandemic of the xxist century (who, 2003; jones et al., 2008) . sars-cov most likely originated from bats through an intermediate species that could be the masked palm civet paguma larvata (viverridae) or another bridge-host, itself very probably contaminated by a sars-like cov from horseshoe bats (song et al., 2005; li et al., 2006; cui et al., 2007) . several elements indicate that this bridge-host could presumably be a carnivora as suggested by both detections in wild animals from markets or experimental infections (guan et al., 2003; van den brand et al., 2008) . several other mammalian or avian species are susceptible to coronaviruses infection (displaying enteric, hepatic, neurological, or respiratory tropism), but little is known about their viral ecology and host interactions. coronaviruses are members of the order nidovirales which contains three families of single stranded positive rna viruses: arteriviridae, coronaviridae and roniviridae. coronaviridae are divided in two subfamilies: coronavirinae and torovirinae. because of serological and genotypic differences, coronaviruses were traditionally divided into three groups labeled group i, ii and iii (gonzález et al., 2003; gorbalenya et al., 2004) . these three groups have recently been elevated at the genus level and named respectively alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus and gammacoronavirus by the coronavirus study group of the international committee for taxonomy of viruses, thus invalidating the ''coronavirus'' genus name (http://talk.ictvonline.org/media/p/1230.aspx). as other nidovirales, coronaviridae such as sars-cov possess a mutation prone rna-dependent rna-polymerase (rdrp) associated with high genome mutability (castro et al., 2005) . furthermore, they frequently recombine in vivo (lai et al., 1985; makino et al., 1986; keck et al., 1987; jia et al., 1995; herrewegh et al., 1998; lee and jackwood, 2000; stadler et al., 2003) . this genetic variability confers to coronaviruses a high potential of evolution that allows them to sometimes overcome species barriers and host specificity (baric et al., 1995 (baric et al., , 1997 (thackray and holmes, 2004) . from a more general viewpoint, these characteristics are known to account for the frequent involvement of rna viruses in disease emergence (domingo and holland, 1997; chomel, 1998; daszak et al., 2000; cleaveland et al., 2001; woolhouse and gowtage-sequeria, 2005) .until now, asian sars-related coronavirus (sarsr-cov, from betacoronavirus-b group - fig. 1a ) rna has been detected in only one bat family: the rhinolophidae gray, 1825 (table 2) . therefore, this monogeneric bat family is considered as the host at the origin of the deadly sars-cov outbreak (lau et al., 2005) . however, other bat families are involved in the maintenance and the diversification of a wide range of coronavirus species belonging to both alphacoronavirus and betacoronavirus genera (i.e. vespertillionidae, phyllostomidae, pteropodidae, molossidae, and hipposideridae families have been positively tested for coronavirus nucleic acid) (chu et al., 2006; tang et al., 2006; dominguez et al., 2007; carrington, 2008; brandao et al., 2008; tong et al., 2009; pfefferle et al., 2009 ). whether or not another bat family could be involved (in addition to rhinolophidae) in the natural history of betacornaviruses would have been an interesting question but since the discovery of sarsr-cov in wildlife, most of the attention and sampling efforts have been focusing on rhinolophidae (table 2) . several species from this family were shown to carry different sarsr-cov such as sarsr rhinolophidae bat coronavirus strain rp3 in rhinolophus pearsoni and sarsr rhinolophidae bat coronavirus strain rf1 in rhinolophus ferrumequinum in the chinese provinces of guangxi and hubei, respectively (lau et al., 2005; li et al., 2005; tang et al., 2006) . the sampling pressure on both rhinolophidae (1148 samples in 12 species - table 2 ) and vespertilionidae (900 samples in 17 species - table 2 ) has induced an over representation of these families compared to others (lau et al., 2005; li et al., 2005; tang et al., 2006) . by contrast, hipposideridae (206 samples in 6 species) were under-represented in previous studies (poon et al., 2005; woo et al., 2006) . the higher northern distribution limit of rhinolophidae (versus hipposideridae) may partially explain the sampling bias in non-southern chinese provinces (fig. 1b) . this bias illustrates the need for testing other sympatric species for betacoronaviruses to study their natural history and emergence process.the biogeography and the natural history of the betacoronavirus-b species, among which are sarsr-covs, remain poorly described. however, betacoronavirus have been detected in china, africa, europe and even australia (guan et al., 2003; lau et al., 2005; li et al., 2005; müller et al., 2007; tong et al., 2009; quan et al., 2010; drexler et al., 2010) (fig. 1b) . the biogeographical origin of the ancestors of sarsr-covs (from betacoronavirus-b subgroup) is therefore far more extended than the epicentre of the human epidemic (southern china). understanding the biogeography of this group would be essential for assessing the risk for emergence of another sars-cov like agent. south-china and its pearl river delta combined various ecological and anthropic factors that have led the sars-cov to emerge but the distribution of the viral clade at the origin of sars-cov is much wider than this region and many locations still remain to be investigated.emergence results from a combination of numerous factors. environmental changes (ecological, climatic and agricultural), whether they are man-driven or not (schrag and wiener, 1995; kuiken et al., 2003) , globalization (trade or travel) and societal changes (land-use, demography), are among the most reported ones (reperant, 2010) , but others have been highlighted recently like the hosts' phylogenetic relationships (daszak, 2010; streicker et al., 2010) , the variation of biodiversity (keesing et al., 2010) and species interactions in ecological communities whether between hosts or between hosts and pathogens (cleaveland et al., 2001; woolhouse and gowtage-sequeria, 2005; reperant, 2010) . consequently, the biogeography and host-pathogen relationships of betacoronavirus-b are pivotal to understanding their radiation. the diversity of the sarsr-cov has been described by an increasing number of published studies and the number of discovered and sequenced viral taxa has improved the accuracy of the phylogenetic reconstruction of this group.in this study we explored the biodiversity and the ecology of coronavirinae, enriched the current phylogeny and challenged the biogeography of this clade. more particularly, we focused on the ecology of the betacoronavirus-b sub-group (fig. 1a ) by testing hypotheses on the origination of these viruses not only in rhinolophidae but also in their sister taxa hipposideridae. considering that hipposideridae might host a diverse community of coronaviruses comparable to that of rhinolophidae because of their phylogenetic proximity and comparable diversity (nunn et al., 2004; simmons, 2007) , it is very probable that the prevalence and diversity of coronaviruses hosted by this family has been underestimated because of biased sampling (table 2 - lau et al., 2005; li et al., 2005; tang et al., 2006) . we hypothesize also that some bat taxa could play a refuge role for betacoronaviruses and therefore constitute a source of infection for other species, consistently with the recent application of the theory of island biogeography (macarthur and wilson, 1967) to emerging pathogens (reperant, 2010) . this study is particularly focused on, but not restricted to, betacoronavirus in hipposideridae in south-east asia (table 1) .to test our hypotheses, we targeted, by rt-pcr, the coronavirinae rdrp rna sequence (more precisely a coding fragment of a subunit of the rdrp, the non-structural protein 12 -nsp12 -) in bat samples and compare it with the published sequences downloaded from public online databases. the sras-cov nsp12 and nsp13 exhibit the highest conservation profiles among proteins from all coronaviruses (stadler et al., 2003) . moreover, as rdrps (nsp12) are involved in replication and transcription processes and therefore play a central role in the virion offspring genome synthesis (the vertical information transmission), its relatively conserved ribonucleic acid sequence is appropriate for both viral detection and phylogeny reconstruction.from 2006-2008, samples (feces, urine and oral swabs) were collected from bats at 26 sites in thailand ( fig. 1b and table 1 ). sampling locations were selected considering land cover and geological data as forests are known to enhance biodiversity (harvey et al., 2006; trisurat et al., 2010) and limestone hills harbour numerous caves. the rocky forest-covered hills surrounded by cultivated lowlands, considered as potential refuge areas, were particularly sought. sampling sessions covered an area of approximately 800 km from north to south thailand by 300 km from west to east. dates and locations are described in table 1 and fig. 1b . sites were sometimes sampled several times to confirm the results, to table 1 detection of coronaviruses in saliva (oral swab), feces and urine in bats from thaïland. screen another population or species of bats or to assess a putative long-lasting infection of a given colony (table 1) . samples were collected from 25 species of bats and were divided and preserved in two different media: (i) modified minimum essential medium antibiotic supplemented (viral transportation medium) to preserve entire virus particles integrity and (ii) rnalater (rna preservation medium) to limit rna degradation, both kept on ice before and immediately after collection (prior to liquid nitrogen conservation in the field). each sample was immediately aliquoted into four tubes (including absolute backup) and kept at à80°c before rna extraction. traceability was assured by assigning a unique number to each sample. handling of animals was conducted in accordance with the american society of mammalogists guidelines for the capture, handling and care of mammals (gannon and sikes, 2007) . trapping sessions were performed using harp-traps, flip-nets and hand-nets. bats were transferred to individual clean cotton bags immediately after being captured and kept in a dark, cool and quiet place for one to a few hours. immediately after sample collection, bats were released where they were trapped. particular attention was paid: (i) to avoid disturbance inside the cave and near the colony; (ii) to disinfect material and shoes between sampling sessions and study sites; and, (iii) to preserve the surroundings as first encountered.qiamp viral rna mini kit (qiagen) was used for rna extraction following the manufacturer's instructions. rna was eluted in 60 ll rnase-free saline buffer, 7 ll were immediately used for the reverse transcription reaction and the remaining 53 ll were aliquoted and kept at à80°c for subsequent detection assays. the amount and quality of the extracted rna was measured using nanodrop and agilent techniques prior to reverse transcription (mueller et al., 2004; gallagher and desjardins, 2006) .complement dna synthesis was performed with m-mlv reverse transcriptase (bio-active) and random hexamer primers.random hexamer primers were used at a final ratio of 0.15 lg for 1 lg of rna. then, 5 ll of rt products were used in 25 ll final volume pcr reaction targeting a 438 nucleotide fragment of the rdrp coding region. pcr primers were designed from the rdrp coding region by selecting a highly conserved region (nsp12) among all coronavirinae sequences available from online public databases in august 2007. assuming a higher mutation rate for the third codon position and according to the published sequence variations, degenerate primers were designed: batcov pol 15197 (forward primer: 5 0 -ggttgggaytayccwaartgtga-3 0 ) and bat-cov pol 15635 (reverse primer: 5 0 -ccatcrtcmgaharaatcat cata-3 0 ), respectively at position 15197 to 15219 and 15635 to 15614 on bat sars-cov rf1 reference sequence (dq412042). in order to increase both the sensitivity and the specificity of the detection, a third primer were designed and combined with the previous ones in a semi-nested pcr: batcov pol nested 15419 (forward nested primer: 5 0 -gcnaatwstgtntttaacat-3 0 ), at the position 15419 to 15438 on the same reference sequence. the first pcr produced a fragment of 438 nucleotides and the semi-nested pcr confirmed the detection and enhanced significantly the detection limit of the semi-nested pcr by amplifying a 216 base pairs fragment from the first amplicon. contaminations were avoided by observing strict lab procedures, carrying out at each step (mix, pcri, pcrii) in a uv cabinet and using bleached plastic-ware. manipulations included extraction negative controls at the beginning and at the end of each sample series as well as several pcr negative con-trols per run. the sequencing of the 438 nucleotides pcr products was performed in both directions using the external primers.fifty microliters of sample preserved in modified minimum essential medium antibiotic supplemented (viral transportation medium) were inoculated into 12 wells plates where subconfluent cell monolayers were grown. madin-darby canine kidney (mdck), vero and vero clone e6 cells were used in these assays. mdck were chosen because carnivora are highly suspected to have efficiently contributed to the transmission from bats to humans (paguma larvata, nyctereutes procyonides, melogale moschata) (guan et al., 2003) and several species are susceptible to sars-cov infection (martina et al., 2003) . the vero cell line is known to efficiently replicate sars-cov (qinfen et al., 2004) . cells were cultivated in minimum essential medium supplemented with 120 lg/ml of streptomycin, 120 units/ml of penicillin and 10% of foetal calf serum (fcs). once confluence was nearly reached, the supernatant was removed and samples were added on the cell monolayer and left at 20°c on a rocking agitator for 60 min. then, 2 ml of the same medium (2% fcs) were added to each well. plates were then incubated at 37°c and daily checked on a phase contrast inverted microscope for cpe occurrence.a 304 or 333 nucleotide region was selected within the sequences from both amplicons (ha acov r for 304 or hl bcov t, respectively). the corresponding region from 60 taxa available in databases were added to the matrix used in the phylogenetic reconstructions.1/ firstly a dynamic homology approach implemented in poy v.4.1.2 was used (wheeler, 1996; janies and wheeler, 2002; varón et al., 2010) . this method did not need any prior alignment because this step was performed during the cladogram diagnosis and therefore established the putative homology statements during the tree reconstruction. poy was used under parsimony as the optimality criterion (wagner algorithm), complemented with the tree bisection reconnection swapping algorithm (tbr), perturbation injection, ratcheting and fuse iterations steps (nixon, 1999) . these combined steps provided a reasonably fast and accurate way to better explore the tree space by escaping from local optima. although rdrp is a conserved gene and the matrix included a great number of taxa, resampling taxa tests were used to evaluate whether this matrix was subjected to the long branch attraction phenomenon which could constitute a limitation of some phylogenetic reconstructions. this limitation could be particularly true in the case of high evolution rate and very limited number of taxa when combined with static homology approach of molecular characters. the over-representation of sub-groups by several similar sequences was avoided as it could artificially report changes on branches located between internal nodes, leading to the long branch attraction issue.2/ secondly, a probabilistic approach (bayesian) implemented in beast (drummond and rambaut, 2007) was applied to the same data set. sequences were previously aligned using sea-view (gouy et al., 2010) under the muscle algorithm (edgar, 2004) and resulted in a frank border matrix showing a unique gap of three codons for four sequences (bulbul, trush, munia and asian leopard covs, position 33 to 36). then the adequacy of the matrix to 88 substitution models was evaluated using jmodeltest (posada, 2008) . the three codons partition model of evolution was specified (under hyu substitution model with a gamma site heterogeneity distribution), so that each of the three codon position could follow its own evolution rate. yule speciation model showed similar estimates as the table 2 asian bat species sampled in coronavirus studies. some values should be considered cautiously because the related data were not always available and were in some cases extrapolated: ( ⁄ ) details not available, supposedly two samples per bat (respiratory and fecal numbers extrapolated here). ( ) expressed as number of bats in original publication, details not available.(continued on next page) constant population size coalescent model. thus, the yule speciation model was chosen as tree prior. the mcmc chain was set to 10,000,000 states to get an adequate posterior ess value superior to 300.the support of the nodes was evaluated via a bootstrap analysis (felsenstein, 1985) for the direct optimization method and posterior probabilities we assessed for the bayesian method ( fig. 1 and  s1 ). except for the sequences of hipposideros larvatus betacoronavirus tata (hl bcov t) and hipposideros armiger alphacoronavirus ratcha (ha acov r) which were newly identified in this study, all other sequences used in phylogenetic reconstructions were downloaded from the national center for biotechnology information database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nucleotide/). each genbank sequence identification number is indicated directly on trees ( fig. 1 and s1 ).in the case of coronavirus phylogeny, rooting with one member of the sister group (bafinivirus or torovirus, the two genus of torovirinae sub-family) would have been a good choice to study the relation within the in-group coronavirinae. unfortunately, the region that we used here was too divergent and hardly comparable to torovirinae sequence. however, as torovirinae sequence can not be used to root the trees in this case, we used the results provided by a published study (snijder et al., 2003) , that used torovirinae as root. this study, based on an amino acid matrix, inferred a coronaviridae phylogeny, and verified the monophyly of coronavirus and the basal branching of gammacoronavirus clade. according to these conclusions, we chose an avian coronavirus taxa to root our trees and therefore study the alphacoronavirus and betacoronavirus genera phylogeny. an additional taxon, from the same clade of the taxa used as root (gammacoronavirus -avian coronavirus beaudette), was included in the analysis to allow the polarization of the characters (ancestral versus apomorphic) along the tree.a genome comprises ribonucleic acid fragments that can independently be submitted to various selection pressures of different intensity. the history of these fragments can be deeply shaped by the function they encode, eventually resulting in incongruent phylogenetic signals. the only way to fully recover and clearly exploit the phylogenetic signal of a given fragment (by comparison to the putative homolog fragment of other taxa) is to analyze it independently. therefore, the combination of several fragments in a same analysis should be carefully thought and documented as mixing the information they provide can produce a blurred signal and therefore can lead to an inaccurate phylogeny. here we focused on a fragment of the polymerase sequence only for phylogenetic reconstruction of coronaviruses because: (i) the key function of this protein involved in vertical transmission and consequently in viruses filiation is likely to regulate variation and provide a phylogenetic signal that reflects the filiation and, (ii) its relatively short length, genome position and associated transcription characteristics make it unlikely to be a putative recombination site. moreover, the analysis of this region by the rdp3 package (martin et al., 2010) did not detect any putative recombination sites.during the inference of a species tree, the identification of the appropriate vertical transmission of information, is one of the classical pitfalls of phylogenetic reconstruction. therefore, careful attention must be paid in the choice of a genetic fragment that reflects the species phylogeny and not only the gene history. a given genetic fragment, coding for a positively selected function which appeared in one species, may benefit another one by horizontal transfer (recombination), increasing the fitness of the recombinant virus and its progeny. this phenomenon have happened also between viruses that are actually recognized as members of separated families as described for the two independent recombination events that occurred between a torovirus (coronaviridae, torovirinae), a coronavirus and an orthomyxoviridae (influenzavirus c) (snijder et al., 1991) . these particular events did not involve the rdrp sequence. all these reasons lead us to rely on the analysis of this rdrp fragment for the phylogenetic reconstruction of coronavirus. according to the distribution of both the known mammalian host families, the rhinolophidae gray, 1825, and its sister family the hipposideridae lydekker, 1891, betacoronavirus-b might be widespread over asia and most of the old world. moreover, the biodiversity of these two mammalian families is surely higher than what has been currently described (s.j. puechmaille, unpublished data), which in turn induces a potential greater coronavirus diversity than is currently described. in discordance to what has been reported to date and based on the phylogenetic proximity of these sister families, hipposideridae might harbour an equal or richer diversity of coronaviruses (at least of the betacoronavirus genus) compared to the rhinolophidae. furthermore, the fragmentation of the forested habitat, produced by human activities such as land use practices and agriculture, leads to the isolation of preserved biodiversity spots (surrounded by cultivated fields) that have the potential to maintain both host and viral populations, preserving by this way the footprints of the natural history of coronaviruses in wildlife.twenty-five species of bats belonging to the rhinolophidae (n = 8), hipposideridae (n = 8), emballonuridae (n = 1), molossidae (n = 1), megadermatidae (n = 2), pteropodidae (n = 2), miniopteridae (n = 1) (table 1) , craseonycteridae (n = 1) and vespertilionidae (n = 1) families were sampled. species were identified using morphological and acoustic characters.a total of seven samples among 552 (265 feces, 97 urine collections and 190 oral swabs), were positive using the rt-pcr on the rdrp region described in the material and methods section. this amount rose to 28 when the results from the second sampling at the study site 17 were included (table 1 and fig. 1b) . all of the positive samples came from two species: hipposideros larvatus ( fig. 2a) and hipposideros armiger (fig. 2b) . two new viruses were detected in this study but the isolation trials on cell cultures remained unsuccessful: no cytopathic effect was observed after three passages on cell cultures and no viral material was amplified from the third passage supernatants with the semi-nested pcr described in material and methods.the ha acov r was detected in bat feces from a unique colony (hipposideros armiger hodgson, 1835). among 10 bats tested, four were positive (36% -study site 4 - table 1 ). the blast 78% identity value indicated that the sequence was related to a bat alphacoronavirus reported to infect rhinolophus ferrumequinum and rhinolophus pearsoni in the chinese shandong region in 2005 (table 2) and (tang et al., 2006) . for this sequence, 30 bases from the 5 0 side of the pcr products were ambiguous and therefore removed from the analysis because the sequencing with one degenerated primer gave low quality results.concerning hl bcov t, the sequences were free of ambiguous sites and identical among the molecular isolates amplified from feces collected from 22 specimens of bats from the same colony (table 1 ). the 391 nucleotides long sequences obtained showed that this new virus was related to the sars-cov clade and shared 75% nucleotide identity (online blast analysis) with the bat sarsr coronavirus rf1 from rhinolophus ferrumequinum. hl bcov t was detected in fecal samples from one colony of hipposideros larvatus (hipposideridae lydekker, 1891), in one sampling site among 26.in this colony (estimated to 250 individuals), 3/11 (27%) bats tested were positive, then, eighteen months later, 21/40 (52%). this is the first evidence of sarsr-cov long-lasting infection in a bat colony (table 1) .besides the detection of ha acov-r in one site, no other alphacoronavirus was detected from the other study sites. hipposideros armiger individuals positive for ha acov-r shared their roost with hipposideros larvatus individuals, which were negative for the detection of ha acov-r. similarly, besides hl bcov-t detected in one site, no other betacoronavirus-b was detected from the other study sites even if they were populated by the same species as the positive site and in two instances (cave 3 and 14 - table 1) , with comparable sample sizes. the other species sampled, taphozous longimanus and hipposideros armiger, that were sharing the same roost with hipposideros larvatus (cave 17 - table 1 ), were all negative for the detection of hl bcov t.the same global topology was obtained from both direct optimization (poy) and probabilistic methods (beast) as apparent differences mostly concerned nodes that are not supported by respective bootstrap or posterior probability values (inferior to 95%) ( fig. 1a and s1 ). indeed, direct optimization supported betacoronavirus paraphyly but basal nodes exhibited low bootstrap support values. accordingly, the separation between alphacoronavirus and betacoronavirus is not significantly supported in the bayesian phylogeny (posterior probablility value: 0.69 < 0.95). several other nodes remained weakly supported by the data in each method. moreover, the hku4/hku5/btcov 133 group significantly segregated in basal position of the betacoronavirus in both reconstructions. alphacoronavirus exhibited mainly nodes with low support in both methods of reconstruction despite comparable topologies. the alphacoronavirus detected in this study, ha acov r, rooted two alphacoronaviruses reported to infect bats in bulgaria (drexler et al., 2010) . concerning betacoronavirus-b topology, most of the nodes were well supported. our rdrp gene based phylogenetic reconstructions placed hl bcov-t as a sister taxon of an african hipposideros betacoronavirus-b ( fig. 1a and s1 ). these taxa formed together the sister group of all other betacoronaviruses-b, which comprised the monophyletic group of rhinolophidae betacoronaviruses-b. these were rooted by one hipposideridae betacoronavirus-b: the australian bat coronavirus r. aur, detected in rhinonicteris aurantia. even paraphyletic, hipposideridae betacoronaviruses mainly grouped together and rooted the rhinolophidae betacoronaviruses among which is the sars-cov (fig. 1a and s1).the species demarcation criteria proposed to the ictv by the coronavirus study group (http://talk.ictvonline.org/media/p/ 1230.aspx) recommend a minimal 90% amino acid sequence identity threshold over seven domains of the replicase (nsps 3, 5, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16) . only one domain is available in our data (nsp12) but it is located in one of the three most conserved and contiguous regions of the replicase (nsp11, 12 and 13) (stadler et al., 2003) . the relatively low identity values obtained by the blast analyses (78% for the ha acov-r, and 75% for the hl bcov-t) in the most conserved region of the coronavirus genome suggests that hl bcov t and ha acov r are new species, even though there was only one fragment available, instead of the ad hoc set of seven regions pro-posed by the ictv working group. more investigations are necessary to fully characterize these coronaviruses and to get the identity values of the seven replicase domains to rule on these two taxa description in complete accordance with the ictv recommendations. for clarity and non-ambiguous taxonomy, these two putative new species are proposed to be named hipposideros larvatus betacoronavirus tata (hl bcov-t) and hipposideros armiger alphacoronavirus ratcha (ha acov r). these betacoronavirus and alphacoronavirus were detected from the same bat genus hipposideros (super-family: rhinolophoidea sensu teeling et al. (2005) , family: hipposideridae lydekker, 1891). considering the diversity of both chiroptera and coronavirinae, we explicitly implied the host species and the virus species within the name, thus avoiding further possible confusion once other coronaviruses will be discovered and described within these genera (betacoronavirus and hipposideros).sampling bias could explain the uneven distribution of coronavirus detection among bat families, more specifically concerning sarsr-cov in rhinolophidae versus hipposideridae. in contrast with other studies, the hipposideridae family in our study was the most sampled family with five times more samples than those collected from rhinolophidae. only two sampling sites among 28 (site 17 for hl bcov-t and site 4 for ha acov-r) explored with various sampling intensity, gave positive results. for some site, the low level of sampling might be insufficient to detect any coronavirinae (table 1) . we cannot exclude that betacoronaviruses are hosted by others hipposiderid bat colonies and could circulate around thailand or south-east asia. moreover, it is likely that other yet unknown betacoronaviruses circulate in hipposideridae and even in other bat families around south-east asia. an appropriate sampling would be able to test these hypotheses.long-lasting infection in colony, roost-sharing behaviour and host phylogenetic affinities are suspected to be species-jumping promoting factors chu and collaborators have repeatedly detected alphacoronaviruses in miniopterus (miniopteridae) colonies from hong kong. positive detections in bat colonies were obtained over a period ranging from 3 months in a miniopterus pusillus colony to 6 months in a miniopterus magnater colony (chu et al., 2006) . these results, suggested that alphacoronaviruses were able to persist through time in bat colonies. another study on alphacoronavirus (and betacoronavirus -sarsr-rh-batcov -) infected rhinolophus sinicus bats modulated this conclusion. no significant persistence was observed in rhinolophus sinicus bat colonies and the viral clearance was estimated between 2 weeks and 4 months (lau et al., 2010) . moreover, the authors reported a significant loss of body weight in bats infected by betacoronavirus (sarsr-covs) that was not observed in alphacoronavirus infected bats. this loss of weight could be the sign of a loss of fitness associated with betacoronavirus infection in rhinolophus sinicus, without presuming that it would be a promoting factor or a consequence of betacoronavirus infection. even though: (i) betacoronavirus persistence was not observed in rhinolophus sinicus colonies and, (ii) the loss of body mass correlated with betacoronavirus infection might reduce the fitness of rhinolophus, we report here that a betacoronavirus was persisting for 18 months in a hipposideridae bat colony. this suggests that a hipposideridae colony might be more tolerant to betacoronavirus than rhinolophidae over a long period of time or that betacoronavirus of rhinolophidae might have acquired virulence factor limiting long-lasting infection in this host. further investigations are needed to confirm and describe this suspected difference. thisbetacoronavirus detected so far in hipposideros larvatus in thaïland is restricted to a single cave. thus, betacoronavirus long-lasting infection in a bat colony might be a rare event. although rare, long-lasting infection can promote cross-species transmission by the emergence of new properties in viral populations (baric et al., 1999) . despite the coincidence of several promoting factors in study site 17 (the long-lasting infection - table 1 -, the sharing of the same small-sized cave by three bat species and the phylogenetic proximity of the two hipposideros species) none of the other species were detected positive for betacoronavirus (hipposideros armiger and taphozous longimanus were negative - table 1) . interestingly, we noted that the taphozous longimanus (negative) colony was roosting separately from the hipposideros larvatus (positive) cluster whereas the hipposideros armiger (negative) colony occupied also another specific area of the cave. similarly, in site 4 (table 1) the hipposideros armiger colony, infected by acov-ha, was roosting separately from the other (negative) species. again, this typical spatial segregation within a roosting site (e.g. cave) limits direct contacts between species and is suspected to account for a behavioral barrier to cross-species transmission in the wild, as previously described for lentivirus and felidae (troyer et al., 2008; vandewoude et al., 2010) . nevertheless, we mentioned these observations here but these mechanisms still remain to be precisely described in the complex relationship between rhinolophoidea and betacoronaviruses.by contrast, previous studies of asian coronaviruses that focused on the species level, suggested that there was no strict association between bat species and alphacoronavirus species (chu et al., 2006; tang et al., 2006) , and other studies on betacoronavirus in africa reached similar conclusions (quan et al., 2010) . speciesbarrier crossing has been reported occasionally for betacoronavirus in asian, european and african rhinolophidae or hipposideridae but more frequently in miniopteridae (chu et al., 2006; tang et al., 2006; tong et al., 2009; drexler et al., 2010) . moreover, miniopterus species exhibit an aggregative behaviour, and mixed species colonies are commonly observed as described in literature (benda et al., 2003) . mixed species roosting, inducing direct contact between species and therefore promoting transmission, in synergy with viral persistence in a colony and the phylogenetic proximity of the hosts, is likely to promote cross species transmission of alphacoronaviruses. as a result, a non-specific host-virus association for alphacoronavirus in miniopterus follows the same model as what has been described for these bats and their ectoparasites (bruyndonckx et al., 2009) . the apparent higher frequency of cross-species transmission (or the absence of strict virus-host association) in miniopteridae compared to hipposideridae and rhinolphidae might partially be explained by their different roosting behaviour.the two methods of phylogenetic reconstructions employed here supported comparable relationships within coronavirinae ( fig. 1 and s1 ). the uncertainty associated with some relationships was often similarly reported by each method. these phylogenetic issues might be reduced by increasing the size of the analysed fragment, that would increase the number of informative characters and therefore provide more information to support nodes. adding new taxa would also improve the phylogeny by providing probable currently lacking information, within or around groups that are not yet well supported: (i) betacoronavirus sub-groups relationships might be improved by looking for new taxa related to the group hku9/bat cov philippine dilim (weak posterior probability: 0.59 and bootstrap value: 0.24 are reported for this node); (ii) other sequences from new betacoronavirus (or taxa from a new group) might help to clarify the relationship between betacoronavirus, alphacoronavirus and putative new groups as discordance is observed between phylogenies and none of the method provide significant support to the nodes that link betacoronavirus and alphacoronavirus (posterior probability: 0.69 and bootstrap values: 0.21; 0.06; 0.24).interestingly, our study revealed that the betacoronavirus detected in hipposideridae in south-east asia was related to those that currently circulate in africa, according to the analysis of a rdrp fragment. our analyses strengthen the diversity of betacoronavirus-b clade and extend their broad distribution. indeed, sars-cov emerged from this betacoronavirus-b clade (fig. 1a) which is present in africa, europe, asia and even australia.quan and collaborators pushed forward the possible occurrence of migration events from africa to asia to explain the basal phylogenetic position of an african betacoronavirus (compared to asian rhinolophidae sarsr-cov) together with the apparent absence of sarsr-cov in asian hipposideridae (quan, 2010) . with the detection of betacoronavirus in hipposiderids in asia, this hypothesis, while still possible, becomes less necessary to explain phylogenetic and geographic patterns of hipposideridae and rhinolophidae betacoronaviruses. the clustering of betacoronavirus-b that correlates with the host phylogeny rather than with virus geolocalization suggests that the phylogenetic relationships between betacoronaviruses-b is mainly driven by the host phylogeny ( fig. 1 and s1 ). accordingly, the phylogenetic relationships of the hl bcov detected here (from south-east asia) with the sarsr-cov (from africa) and other betacoronaviruses support the following hypothesis.betacoronaviruses-b ancestors, meaning sarsr-covs ancestors, could have been historically hosted by the common ancestor of the rhinolophidae and hipposideridae and could have later evolved independently in the lineages leading towards rhinolophidae and hipposideridae betacoronaviruses. this point of view is supported by the topology of betacoronavirus clade that exhibits the monophyly of rhinolophidae betacoronaviruses despite their broad geographic distribution (from africa and central europe to south-east asia and northern australia - fig. 1 ) and shows the close relationship of hipposideridae betacoronaviruses. nevertheless, it is unlikely that putative host switching between rhinolophidae and hipposideridae betacoronaviruses (ancestors), eventually associated with ancient migration events, would still be detectable. more investigations are necessary to address these points and test corresponding hypotheses. as well, new investigations would be necessary to confirm this suggested predominant influence of the host phylogeny on betacoronavirus-b clustering and whether other lineage would exist in hipposideridae, as suggested by the report of a betacoronavirus from australia (c. smith pers. com. -fig. 1) .the position of the hipposideridae betacoronavirus from australia (basal to the rhinolophidae betacoronaviruses), suggests the existence of an intermediary subgroup ( fig. 1 and s1 ) between hipposideridae and rhinolophidae betacoronaviruses that survived within a rare endemic australian bat species. the phylogenetic status of this host, rhinonicteris aurantia, is not well defined but this species is described as intermediary between hipposideridae and rhinolophidae, while considered an hipposideridae (hand and kirsch, 1998; simmons, 2007; armstrong, 2006; armstrong com. pers.) . albeit this putative intermediary betacoronavirus group count a unique member to date and its associated posterior probability is weak, its phylogenetic position correlates with that of its host. therefore, we are looking forward new investigations that would address these elements and screen betacoronaviruses in other hipposideridae and rhinolophidae.the ecological niche of these bats and their behaviour provide them with frequent opportunities to spread viral variants among other nocturnal mammals such as other chiroptera or carnivora viverridae (civet family) (song et al., 2005; guan et al., 2003; gonzalez et al., 2008) . many factors have been suggested to explain the occurrence of emerging viruses in bats such as diversity (in term of species and ecology), ability to fly, immunology, physiology, seasonal migration and roosting behaviour (dobson, 2005; kunz and fenton, 2005; calisher et al., 2006) . another stated that population genetic structure correlates with viral richness (turmelle and olival, 2009 ). in the case of betacoronavirus, the role of: (i) the fragmented biotope observed today (the thai forest biotope has drastically reduced over the past decades, leading to the formation of species refuge areas promoting species interactions (harvey et al., 2006; trisurat et al., 2010) ) and, (ii) the segregation behaviour and the mobility patterns of bats (metapopulations, migrations), should be investigated for their impact on the mosaic pattern of betacoronavirus.this study suggests that hipposideridae have been underestimated in the study of coronaviruses in the wild. both an alphacoronavirus and a betacoronavirus (more precisely the sub-group b that includes sars-cov) were detected in hipposideridae in south-east asia (thailand). in contrast to what is reported for rhinolophidae, hipposideridae are able to host betacoronavirus close to sars-cov over long periods of time, suggesting that they could be a source of virus for other species under specific circumstances. moreover, the phylogeny of the rdrp, when compared to the biogeography, suggests that these two bat families may share an ancient relationship with independent lineage of betacoronavirus. consequently, and by contrast to what have been generally reported for coronaviruses, we suggest that the host phylogeny globally drive the pathogen clustering in the particular relationship between betacoronavirus and rhinolophoidea. as for other emerging viruses, interactions between wildlife refuges (whether considered in spatial or organic dimensions) and human populations, likely enhanced by fragmentation, changes, cultural behaviour and secular traditions, contribute to drive the species barrier crossing of coronaviruses to humans.the funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. this work benefited from the financial support of carrefour international fondation, episars 511063 e.u. funded project, ird intramural research funds and science foundation ireland's, research frontiers programme, gen 0056.since the isolation of hendra virus from pteropid bats in 2000 (halpin et al., 2000) , bats have been implicated in the emergence of a number of other human infectious diseases, most notably nipah, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) and ebola (calisher et al., 2006; moratelli and calisher, 2015) . in turn, the notion that these viral diseases likely have their ultimate ancestry in bats triggered a major increase in the sampling of bat viruses, leading to the progressive uncovering of a diverse bat virome and further fueling the idea that these animals are major reservoirs of emerging pathogens (moratelli and calisher, 2015; young and olival, 2016) .successful cross-species transmission and emergence depends on a variety of biological, ecological and epidemiological factors. although rna viruses commonly jump species boundaries, in part reflecting their ability to rapidly generate important adaptive variation (geoghegan et al., 2017; holmes, 2009; woolhouse and gowtage-sequeria, 2005) , coronaviruses (covs) seem to exhibit a strong zoonotic potential and demonstrated by the emergence sars-cov and mers-cov in humans in 2002 and 2012, respectively (graham et al., 2013) . coronaviruses are single-strand rna viruses of the order nidovirales that are classified in four genera: alpha-, beta-, gamma and deltacoronavirus. among these, gamma and delta covs are largely associated with avian hosts, while alpha and beta covs include several pathogens of humans and domestic animals, and whose emergence is likely associated with crossspecies transmission events (drexler et al., 2014) .both sars-cov and mers-cov belong to the genus betacoronavirus and are associated with severe lower respiratory tract infection characterized by mortality rates of 10% and 35%, respectively (hu et al., 2015) . the sars pandemic was promptly controlled through an unprecedented global containment effort and the virus has not been reported in humans since may 2004 (graham et al., 2013) . despite this rapid eradication, sars-cov caused almost 800 deaths in 27 countries, with sustained outbreaks in 18 countries on three continents (who). there is increasing evidence that rhinolophid bats act as natural reservoirs for sars-related covs, with direct spill-over to non-flying mammals. for example, like the sars coronavirus, some bat covs are able to utilize the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as a cell receptor (ge et al., 2014; menachery et al., 2016; yang et al., 2016; zeng et al., 2016) . conversely, the role of bats in the epidemiology of mers-cov is less well understood as the human viruses are clearly mostly related to those viruses found in dromedary camels (sabir et al., 2016) . indeed, although related viruses have been found in bats, these are divergent in their spike sequences and seem to be inefficient in the use of human dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4) as cell a receptor (anthony et al., 2017a; reusken et al., 2016; yang et al., 2014) . the mers epidemic is ongoing in the middle east and travel-associated cases have been reported in 27 countries worldwide (who, 2017) . finally, alphacoronavirus 229e and nl63, which cause a mild influenza-like syndrome in humans, share a common ancestor with viruses sampled from the bat genus hipposideros and triaenops, respectively (corman et al., 2015 (corman et al., , 2016 tao et al., 2017) .bats are known to harbor high levels of cov diversity with impressive geographical range and prevalence in almost every species investigated, again supporting the idea that they have played a major role in cov evolution (anthony et al., 2017b; drexler et al., 2014) . in addition, bat covs are phylogenetically interspersed with those associated with other mammals, including humans and domestic species, compatible with the idea that bats are an important genetic reservoir (tao et al., 2017; woo et al., 2012) . the long-term evolutionary interactions between bats and coronaviruses is also supported by phylogenetic evidence that covs exhibit some species-and genus-specific tropism (cui et al., 2007; vijaykrishna et al., 2007) , and that phylogenetically related viruses are found in related bat species independent of sampling location. in contrast, that covs are not always shared among bat species that co-roost suggests that there are some barriers to cross-species transmission (anthony et al., 2013; corman et al., 2013; cui et al., 2007; drexler et al., 2010; smith et al., 2016; tang et al., 2006) .because of the topological similarity between the phylogenetic trees of covs and their mammalian hosts, it has been suggested that the diversity of covs largely reflects the long-term co-divergence between bats and covs (cui et al., 2007) . however, recent studies on specific bat taxa from particular locations suggests that the role of virus-host codivergence in the evolutionary history of covs may have been overestimated relative to other events including host-jumping (anthony et al., 2017b; lin et al., 2017; tao et al., 2017) . indeed, as well as strict virus-host co-divergence, topological congruence could also arise from preferential host switching, in which viruses most often successfully jump from closely related hosts (de vienne et al., 2013) . the analysis of the long-term evolutionary history of bat covs is also complicated by frequent multiple substitution at deep evolutionary distances that prevents the accurate estimation of divergence times (wertheim et al., 2013) .to obtain a more complete picture of the evolutionary history of alpha and beta coronaviruses in their natural hosts, which is essential for understanding the fundamental mechanisms of virus emergence, we performed a statistical analysis of co-phylogenetic relationships on a large data set of mammalian covs. not only did this suggest that crossspecies transmission has played a major role in the evolution of alpha and beta covs in bats, but also that differences in bat host ecology, biology and geographical range have a strong impact on coronavirus evolution.we retrieved all bat cov sequences representing the partial orf1b that encodes the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) available on genbank (as of march 2017). these were combined with 109 cov sequences from other mammals. two gamma covs were used to root the phylogeny. only sequences > 350 bp in length and associated with a bat genus for which at least two sequences were available were retained. unique sequences associated with a particular species were included, but solely used for analyses based on the host genus. similarly, we retrieved cov sequences encoding the spike (s) protein, including those from bats and 46 cov sequences sampled from other mammals. for each cov sequence we recorded the collection date, location and host (genus and species) based on information available in genbank and/or in the associated literature. cov sequences for which the sampling location and/or host genus were unavailable were discarded. sampling locations were retrieved at the country level, and were categorized according to their large-scale geographic area of sampling: europe, africa, north america, latin america (central and south america), asia, south east asia, and australia.the most comprehensive cov data set encoding the rdrp (denoted "rdrp_cov_1") comprised 541 cov sequences from bats plus 111 sequences from other mammalian genera, including three randomly chosen representatives of known monophyletic groups of covs as well as all unclassified mammalian sequences. this data set was used for the phylogenetic and host clustering analyses (see below). cov sequences encoding the spike protein comprised a data set, denoted "spike_cov", which included 199 sequences from bats plus 46 cov sequences from other mammals.we also constructed sub-sampled data sets from the comprehensive rdrp_cov_1 data set based on results from the genus-specific clustering (see below) to minimize errors associated with the non-independence of data. specifically, reduced data sets cov (n = 58), covα (n = 34) and covβ (n = 24) included the longest sequence for each genus-specific cluster. these reduced data sets were used in the co-phylogenetic analysis (see below).to help assess the validity of our results we constructed a second group of data sets ("data sets_2") which only included sequences from bat hosts whose species was confirmed genetically (and hence more confidently), thereby removing any error due to host misclassification. these data sets were termed rdrp_cov_2 (n = 42 sequences), which was used for phylogenetic and host clustering analyses, and cov_2 (n = 11), cov_2α (n = 8), cov_2β (n = 3) and host_2, used in the cophylogenetic analysis (see below).host sequences targeting the full mitochondrial cytochrome b (cytb) gene were also retrieved from genbank and visually inspected to ensure that they agreed with previously published bat phylogenies. the host data set (denoted "host") included one cytb gene sequence for each genus associated with the cov data set.all sequences were aligned with mafft utilizing the l-ins-i routine (katoh et al., 2002) , manually adjusted. longer sequences were then trimmed to 935 bp (rdrp) and 1440 bp (spike protein) using mega6 (tamura et al., 2013) . sequence alignments utilized nucleotide sequences for the host, cov, covα and covβ data sets and all the data sets_2, amino acid sequences for the spike_cov data set, and both nucleotide and amino acid sequences for the comprehensive data set rdrp_cov_1. best-fit models of nucleotide and amino acid substitution for each data set were determined using mega6 (tamura et al., 2013) . pairwise genetic distances among nucleotide and amino acid sequences were computed using the maximum composite likelihood method in mega6.maximum likelihood nucleotide phylogenetic trees were inferred using phyml (version 3.0), employing the gtr + г 4 substitution model, a heuristic spr branch-swapping algorithm and 1000 bootstrap replicates (dereeper et al., 2008) . similarly, amino acid ml trees were estimated for data sets rdrp_cov_1 and spike_cov using raxml (version 8.1.17) assuming the lg + γ 4 and the lg + γ 4 + i models of amino acid substitution, respectively, and 1000 bootstrap replicates.topological congruence between the rdrp and spike-based amino acid trees was determined based on the phylogenies of rdrp and spike sequences derived from the same host taxa. to implement the phylogeny trait methods which require a posterior distribution of phylogenetic trees (see below), we inferred non-clock bayesian trees for data set rdrp_cov_1 using mrbayes v3.2.4 (ronquist and huelsenbeck, 2003) and assuming the gtr + г 4 nucleotide substitution model. this analysis was run for 70 million generations (25% discarded as burn-in) and sampled every 500 generations. the resultant tree was then edited using itol (letunic and bork, 2016) .finally, the degree of temporal signal (i.e. clock-like structure) in these cov data was explored by plotting root-to-tip genetic distances on the ml trees against year of sampling using the method implemented in tempest (rambaut et al., 2016) .we first investigated whether coronaviruses showed significant clustering by bat host genus/species or sampling location using the association index (ai), parsimony score (ps) and maximum monophyletic clade (mc) phylogeny-trait statistics available in the bats package (parker et al., 2008) . this analysis compared the posterior distribution of trees for data set rdrp_cov_1 described above to a null distribution of 100 trait-randomized trees, with bat large-scale geographic area and country of sampling, bat genus, and bat species assigned as the character states of interest. the extent of clustering associated with the characters "host genus" and "host species" was investigated also in the reduced data set rdrp_cov_2. in addition, we used the phylogenetic tree to identify bat rdrp genus-specific clusters of covs, defined as a minimum of two monophyletic rdrp sequences associated with the same bat genus, supported by bayesian posterior probabilities > 0.90 and differing no > 4.8% and 5.1% at the amino acid level for the genera alphacoronavirus and betacoronavirus, respectively (see below).the taxonomy of cov clusters was determined based on pairwise amino acid distances calculated using 816 bp of the rdrp, when available, and reflecting the rdrp group units (rgu) defined previously for covs (drexler et al., 2014) . following these criteria, we assigned distinctive rgus to sequences differing by at least 4.8% and 5.1% at the amino acid level for the genera alphacoronavirus and betacoronavirus, respectively (drexler et al., 2014) .to assess the extent of virus-host co-divergence in the data we reconciled the cov and host phylogenies using jane 4.0 (conow et al., 2010) , which infers the nature and frequency of different evolutionary scenarios by finding the reconciliation with the lowest total cost. accordingly, we assigned event costs = 1 for virus lineage duplication, host shift, and virus loss, or failure to diverge following host speciation, and costs of both 0 and 1 for co-divergence. jane was run for 45 generations (g) with a set size of 23 (s). this analysis used the tree topologies based on rdrp and cytb for coronaviruses and their hosts, respectively. in addition, the congruence between the phylogeny of bat genera and their cov clusters was depicted graphically using the tanglegram function of the decipher package (wright, 2016) from the r environment. to exclude the impact of possible host misclassification, this analysis was also run for datasets_2 in which hosts are assigned genetically.sequences included within bat rdrp genus-specific clusters of covs but associated with different host genera were considered as likely cross-species transmission events. for each such event we determined whether cross-species transmission was associated with the following variables: host taxonomy (genus, family and superfamily) of the donor and recipient hosts, cov lineage, sampling location, sampling year, sampling location, and sampling year and location of the most closely related sequence.to tentatively determine whether there may have been a sustained chain of cov transmission in the new host species (as opposed to transient spill-overs), we assessed whether sequences associated with cross-species transmission events were significantly divergent from the donor cluster. accordingly, for each putative cross-species transmission event, we compared the median nucleotide distance among sequences from the donor host with the median nucleotide distances between the donor sequences and those from the novel (i.e. recipient) host using a one-tailed wilcoxon rank sum test. genetic distances were again calculated using mega6 (tamura et al., 2013) as described above. although this analysis was based on the rdrp, spike protein sequences were also used when available.the spearman coefficient (rs) was used to determine the strength of the correlation between cov diversity, expressed as number of detected cov clusters, and the species richness or geographical range of cov samples for each host genus. to test the influence of sampling effort on cov diversity, the same correlation coefficient was determined between cov diversity and the number of genbank submissions and the total number of sequences per genus. absolute values were (arbitrarily) interpreted as follows: 0.00-0.39 "weak" correlation, 0.40-0.59 "moderate" correlation, 0.60-0.79 "strong" correlation, and 0.80-1.0 "very strong" correlation. coefficients were considered significant for pvalue < 0.05.a total of 650 cov rdrp sequences were analyzed in this study. among these, 541 were from bats (307 alphacoronavirus and 234 betacoronavirus), representing most of the cov diversity currently described in bats, and 111 from other mammalian species (57 alphacoronavirus, 50 betacoronavirus and two gammacoronavirus, with the latter used as outgroups) (data set "rdrp_cov_1"). sequence lengths generally ranged from 350 bp to 816 bp (n = 352), although a number (n = 298) were longer and trimmed to 935 bp prior to analysis (table 1) . similarly, we analyzed 245 spike protein sequences, including 199 sequences from bats and 46 from other mammals. sequence lengths ranged from 678 bp (including the receptor-binding domain rbd) and~4000 bp corresponding to the full length sequence. for 94 bat covs both the rdrp and the spike protein sequences were available (table 1) . although bat sequences obtained were identified worldwide, most came from asia (n = 252 in five countries), africa (n = 170 in six countries) and europe (n = 116 in nine countries) (fig. 1) .bat-derived cov sequences (either rdrp or spike) were sampled from 82 different species belonging to 25 genera (table 1) . importantly, information on the criteria used for the classification of bat species in the data set was often lacking (69.5%); in some cases, classification was based on morphology (55.4%), and to a lesser extent on genetic identification (17.1%). of note, 36 of the bats under study (representing 12 genera) are considered cryptic species as they are morphologically indistinguishable from other sympatric species (table s1 ). in 18 cases, the host classification provided with the cov sequence identified the host genus only, while in one case (h. caffer_ruber) the exact species was not defined (pfefferle et al., 2009) . therefore, to help assess the robustness of our results, we performed a second analysis on 42 sequences for which the bat host species was confirmed genetically (data set rdrp_cov_2), among which 26 were alphacoronavirus and 16 were betacoronavirus.phylogenetic analyses revealed a structuring of bat coronavirus diversity dependent on both their host taxa and the large-scale geographic area of sampling (fig. 2) . with the exception of cov sequences associated with alphacoronavirus 1, mink coronavirus 1, human coronavirus hku1 and betacoronavirus 1, all other covs from non-flying mammals formed clades that either exhibited sister relationships with bat-associated viruses or were nested within them (fig. 2) . regression analyses revealed no correlation between sampling times and root-totip genetic distances for both the rdrp and spike proteins (r 2 = 0.0078 and 0.0075 for the rdrp_cov_1 and spike_cov data sets, respectively) thereby precluding any molecular clock dating (fig. s1a, b) .phylogeny-trait analyses based on rdrp sequences using the bats program provided statistical support (p < 0.01) for the clustering of covs in all the traits investigated. the percentage of individual traits significantly (i.e. < 0.05) supporting cov clustering was 100% for "large-scale geographic area of sampling", 88.46% for "bat genus", 77.4% for "country of sampling", and 75.4% for "bat species" (table  s2 ). individual traits represented by unique sequences (e.g. single countries) always gave non-significant results and were excluded from the overall percentages given above. a similar trend was confirmed for sequences associated with genetically defined host species (data set rdrp_cov_2), for which clustering was significant in 80% of host genera and 50% of host species (table s3) .our phylogenetic analyses identified 44 rdrp bat genus-specific clusters, 28 in the alpha covs (denoted c1α-c28α) and 16 in the beta covs (denoted c29β-c44β) (fig. 2) . as expected, sequences from nl63, cov 229e and sars cov from other mammalian hosts fell within batassociated clusters (between c26α and c27α, within c26α and within c36β, and associated with bats belonging to the genera trianops, hipposideros and rhinolophus, respectively) (fig. 2) . conversely, it was not possible to identify species-specific or geographically structured clusters across all bat genera. this was particularly evident for clusters of covs found in the bat genera miniopterus, rhinolophus and hipposideros associated with different host species sampled from different geographical macro-areas (fig. 2) . that these results were not due to errors in host classification was confirmed by phylogenetic analyses of data set rdrp_cov_2, which also revealed a clustering by host genus rather than host species (fig. s2) .a single cov phylogenetic cluster was associated with most bat genera. however, two or three clusters were observed in artibeus, rousettus, hipposideros, triaenops, rhinolophus, eptesicus and miniopterus, and more than three clusters were present in myotis and pipistrellus. the bat genera pipistrellus, eptesicus, rhinolophus and hipposideros were associated with both alpha and beta covs, while all genera of fruit bats (the pteropodidae) were found to only harbor beta-covs assigned to lineage d (table 1, fig. 2 ). the number of host species included within genus-specific clusters varied between one and 10, with the most observed in rhinolphus (n = 10), miniopterus (n = 7) and hipposideros (n = 4) ( table 2) .a strong correlation was observed between the number of rdrp specific clusters described for each bat genus and either its species richness (rs = 0.69, p = 0.0001) or geographic distribution (rs = 0.67, fig. 2 . phylogenetic overview of cov sequences analyzed here. the tree reflects a bayesian analysis of 935 bp of the rdrp gene (data set rdrp_cov_1), rooted using two sequences from gamma coronaviruses (genbank accession numbers ef584911-2). genus specific clusters identified in our study are colored based on the host genus, as indicated. posterior probabilities > 0.90 supporting each cluster are shown. branch lengths are scaled according to the number of substitutions per site. the three bars around the tree show the frequency within each cluster of (i) host genera, (ii) host species and (iii) sampling locations, from the innermost to the most exterior. sequences showing characters with frequency < 10%, between 10 and 50%, and > 50% are colored black, grey and light grey, respectively. for the "host species" bar, only sequences belonging to the host genus characterizing the cluster (frequency > 50%) have been colored; sequences associated with hosts only characterized at the genus level are indicated in yellow. the ictv classification of virus clusters is indicated when available. the figure was generated using itol. p = 0.0002). however, the correlations between cov diversity and the number of genbank submissions and the total number of cov sequences within each bat genus were also very strong (rs = 0.64, p = 0.0006; rs = 0.73, p < 0.0001). hence, it is possible that these sampling biases have had a strong impact on the results.the majority of genus-specific clusters (32/44) originated from a single large-scale geographic area. of the remaining 12/44 clusters showing a broader geographical spread, 11 were identified in two or three geographic areas and one in more than three geographic areas (table 2, fig. 2 ). of note is the frequent clustering of coronaviruses from asia and south-east asia (china and thailand) associated with miniopterus (c10-11α), hipposideros (c9α, c27β) and schotophilus (c16α) ( table 2) .the availability of rdrp sequences > 816 bp enabled the classification of 27/44 genus-specific clusters using the rdrp group units (rgu) previously defined for covs (drexler et al., 2010 ) (c2α-c5α, c7α-c11α, c15α-c16α, c18α, c20α, c25α-c28α, c30β, c33β, c35β-c40β, c43β-c44β) ( table 3) . the taxonomy of all other clusters was not resolved due to short fragment lengths. in all but two cases, the pairwise amino acid distance between sequences > 816 bp was consistent with the association between rdrp genus-specific clusters identified in this study and distinct rgus. the exceptions, c18α and c20α, both associated with myotis bats, and c43β and c44β, associated with pipistrellus and eptesicus, respectively, shared 96% similarity at the amino acid level in 816 bp of rdrp and hence should be classified as a single rgu (table 3) . mean nucleotide divergence between sequences from eptesicus and pipistrellus was 39.3% (se = 0.11), compared to only 1.6% (se = 0.005) mean divergence within sequences from pipistrellus bats only. interestingly, our analyses identified these rdrp genus-specific clusters as belonging to the same putative species of mers-cov, with amino acid identities of 98.2% and 96.3%, respectively (table 3) .spike protein sequences were available for 17/44 rdrp genus-specific clusters (c2α, c7α, c9α-c11α, c16α, c18α, c25α, c28α, c30β, c33β, c35β-c40β), all of which were taxonomically resolved based on rgu classification (table 3) . mean amino acid divergence in spike sequences from covs included within the same rgu ranged from 0.46% (c39β) to 48.29% (c37β) ( table 3) . tree topologies based on the spike protein sequences were largely consistent with rdrp clustering detected in this study (fig. s3) . however, there were discordant tree topologies between the rdrp and spike proteins for the two clusters associated with miniopterus bats which did not cluster together in the latter, with mean amino acid divergence of 42.4% (se = 0.01) in the spike protein compared to only 6.8% (0.013) for the rdrp (figs. s3, 2, table 3 ). furthermore, three sequences from miniopterus fuliginosus (accession numbers kj473800, kj473799, kj473797) belonging to rdrp genus-specific cluster c10α fell into spike protein cluster c11α (fig. s3) . a similar pattern was observed for c30β associated with rousettus bats; these fell within cluster 33β on the rdrp tree but were distinct from it in the spike protein tree (figs. s3, 2) . finally, our analyses confirmed a different evolutionary history for the spike protein of human coronavirus nl63; this grouped with covs from hipposideros bats (c28α) and human coronavirus 229e rather than being nested within sequences from bats of the genus trienops (rdrp genus-specific cluster c26α and c27α) as seen in the rdrp phylogenies (figs. s3, 2) .despite the likely antiquity of covs in bats, genus-specific clusters showed a low level of phylogenetic congruence in respect to their hosts (fig. s4) . indeed, a full reconciliation analysis (using jane) suggested that the evolutionary history of covs was best explained by more frequent cross-species transmission than co-divergence, with the latter accounting for 0-18.3% of all the events observed (table 4 ). for example, across the covs as a whole, there were 0-11 co-divergence events compared to 38-47 host-shift events. importantly, this result was independent of the cost associated with co-divergence (assigned as either equal or lower than that associated with cross-species transmission) and was the same when the alpha and beta covs were analyzed independently, such that there was no difference in the frequency of cross-species transmission between these viral groups. equivalent results were obtained using the genetically confirmed hosts in data sets_2 (table s4) .a total of 27 cov sequences were identified as likely cross-species table 3 amino acid diversity within and between clusters based on the rdrp and the spike protein, expressed as percentages (with se). spike protein data are only shown sequences for whose clusters correspond with those obtained from the rdrp. pipistrelluseptesicusnyctalusmurina 0.14 (0.001) 7.4 (0.018) -pedv c16α pipistrellus 0 (0) c22αpipistrellusmyotis 0.69 (0.004) c24αmyotismyotistriaenopstriaenops 0 (0) 9.6 (0.02) -c26α c28αhipposideros 1 pipistrellus 0 (0) c42βeptesicus 0.72 (0.007) c43βpipistrelluseptesicus 0 (0) 3.7 (0.01) -mersv/c43β c a distances calculated between rdrp sequences longer than 816 bp are indicated in bold. b distances are only calculated between clusters containing sequences equal or longer than 816 bp, including those from non-flying mammals. c clusters compatible with the inclusion within a single rgu.transmission events based on rdrp topology, as they were nested within clusters associated with a different host genus with strong bootstrap support (fig. 2) . these cross-species transmission events involved 20 different combinations of recipient and donor hosts (13 recipient and eight donor genera, respectively), among which the association between cynopterus and hipposideros was bi-directional. in five cases, cross-species transmission events involved more than one highly similar cov from the same recipient bat species. up to six cross-species transmissions were recorded for a single donor host, with the highest frequency in clusters associated with the genera miniopterus, hipposideros and rhinolophus (table 5 ). in 17/27 cases recipient and donor hosts belonged to different bat superfamilies. notably, the bats involved in cross-species transmission were largely sampled from the same geographic location, with a sharing of roosts between host species documented in only 6/27 cases and possible in 13/27 (table 5 ). in only two cases did cross-species transmission involve related hosts from different geographical areas, namely phyllostomidae bats of the genera carollia and artibeus sampled in costa rica and panama, respectively, and bats of the genera miniopterus and eptesicus from china and usa, both belonging to the superfamily vespertilionoidea. unfortunately, the host classification was not confirmed genetically for any of these events so that more accurate analyses could not be performed. sequences identified as likely cross-species transmissions were generally located at tree tips and were not significantly divergent from those of their putative donor cluster suggesting that they most likely represent recent host jumps (p > 0.05 in 21/27 cases) (table 5) . among sequences exhibiting divergence from the donor cluster, 4/6 were sampled from related hosts, belonging at least to the same superfamily.spike sequences were available for 3/27 covs identified as crossspecies transmission events, involving jumps from the bat genera hipposideros to rousettus and from rhinolophus to chaerepon. interestingly, spike protein sequences from rousettus bats were significantly divergent from hipposideros covs and constituted a sister group to those from this genus (table 5) . although this is compatible with host adaptation, this clearly needs to be investigated in greater detail.alpha and beta coronaviruses exhibit both substantial genetic diversity and a wide geographical range in bats, such that these mammals are important virus hosts (anthony et al., 2017b; drexler et al., 2014) . our data indicate that bats are indeed associated with several distinct clusters of alpha and beta covs, and that most covs from non-flying mammals also fell within these clusters on phylogenetic trees. however, we also noted the existence of monophyletic groups of covs associated with mammalian species other than bats, such as alphacoronavirus 1 and betacoronavirus 1. interestingly, we revealed a positive association between cov diversity and the species richness and geographical table 4 frequency of different evolutionary scenarios following co-phylogenetic reconciliation analysis (jane) of the full set of sequences. results are shown assuming equal or lower costs for codivergence compared to the other possible evolutionary events. (fenton and simmons, 2015; woo et al., 2012) , and supports the central role for these animals in cov evolution. furthermore, we detected a strong impact of sampling effort on cov diversity, suggesting that this still likely underestimated in bats as a whole (anthony et al., 2017b) . our data also provide evidence for the close phylogenetic relationship of coronaviruses from hosts of the same genus, with distinct putative cov species tending to be associated with different bat genera. indeed, single rgus (which are considered indicative of distinctive cov species) were associated with more than one bat species, particularly in those bats that live sympatrically or that belong to the same genus. similarly, despite the evidence for geographical structuring, covs belonging to the same rgus were also described in different locations, as previously described (leopardi et al., 2016) . hence, as a general rule, covs exhibit genus-specificity rather than species-specificity. conversely, cov clusters associated with bat genera pipistrellus and eptesicus showed low divergence at the amino acid level based on the 816 bp fragment, suggesting their classification within the same cov putative species. interestingly, these clusters were also highly similar to mers-cov, such that they may be included within a single cov species, although more data are needed to confirm this hypothesis.it was notable that co-specific miniopterus, rousettus, pipistrellus, rhinolophus and hipposideros bats sampled from the same location harbor more than one cov cluster, which will increase the likelihood of virus recombination (parrish et al., 2008) . this hypothesis is supported by our finding of discordant topologies between trees estimated using the rdrp and the spike protein for covs detected in rousettus and miniopterus bats and thereby supporting previous results (huang et al., 2016; wu et al., 2015) . in this context, it is noteworthy that bats from the genera pipistrellus, rhinolophus and hipposideros are also those that show the highest identity with three human coronaviruses, namely mers cov, sars cov and hcov 229e, respectively.a key observation of our study was the frequency with which crossspecies transmission has occurred in the evolution history of coronaviruses, reflected in the general incongruence between the virus and host phylogenies, the lack of species-specificity, and the presence of phylogenetically divergent viruses in some bat genera suggesting multiple introductions of covs (cui et al., 2007) . this hypothesis is consistent with the finding of highly related covs in different species nonflying mammals; for example, feline coronavirus (fcov) and canine coronavirus (ccov) define two sister clades within the alphacoronavirus 1 species, and are likely a result of recent interspecies jumping (woo et al., 2009) .despite the frequency of cross-species transmission, it was striking that only one recent host-jump between different bat genera was confirmed in our data set. this involved two distinct clusters of covs from closely related vespertilionid bats from the genera pipistrellus and eptesicus, likely associated with the same cov species. the availability of spike sequences also allowed us to identify a clear diversification of covs in bats of the genus rousettus following their jump from a donor cluster associated with the co-roosting bat genus hipposideros. conversely, however, our data suggest that cross-species transmissions between distantly related hosts often result in transient spill-over infections, reflected as an absence of daughter lineages in phylogenetic trees (although this may also reflect a lack of appropriate sampling).the multiple introductions of covs in rhinopomatidae bats suggests that cross-species transmission events may be favored by their ecology of sharing roosts with different species, including myotis, miniopterus and rousettus bats. however, it is important to note that we also detected cross-species transmission events between species for which no interaction is suspected based on their ecologies, such as the fruit bats eidolon helvum that mainly roost in big colonies in trees, and the cave dwelling insectivorous bat miniopterus natalensis (fenton and simmons, 2015) . although this suggests that we have not sampled the key intermediate species, we necessarily cannot exclude cross-contamination or incorrect classification of hosts as confounding factor in these cases.overall, our results confirm the long-term evolution of mammalian coronaviruses within bats, seemingly representing a complex interplay between co-divergence and cross-species transmission, a pattern that is seeming common among rna viruses (geoghegan et al., 2017) . in addition, we found evidence that likelihood cross-species transmission increased with sympatry.despite its large-scale, this study has several limitations, mostly related to the quality of the available data. of particular note is the short length of most fragments of coronaviruses used for analyses, with less than half compressing the 816 bp necessary for rgu classification (drexler et al., 2010) , and which obviously limit phylogenetic resolution. similarly, the uncertain classification of certain host species should not be underestimated, due to variable species assignments as well as the cryptic nature of several bat species that cannot be readily identified based on obvious morphological features but whose correct assignation often require the use of genetic or echolocation studies (kingston et al., 2001) (table s1 ). indeed, the hosts included in our database represent only about 20% of the bat species (6% of the bat genera) described worldwide. studies of cov diversity have mainly been performed in china and europe, while important hot spots for bat biodiversity (richardson, 2002) , such as south east asia and latin america, are under-represented. furthermore, sequences collected from different areas are generally weakly representative for their specific continent with, for example, most african samples being collected from ghana and kenya (fig. 1) . while the reliability of our conclusions was confirmed by analyses performed on a much smaller data set with more accurate host assignments, we encourage a more comprehensive sampling, the collection of longer cov sequences, and the accurate genetic attribution of the host species, all of which provide the information needed to better reveal the evolution and ecology of coronaviruses in bats.supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.meegid.2018.01.012.the novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), is associated with the current pandemic outbreak of covid-19. the virus emerged in wuhan (china) and it can be transmitted from person to person. 1 the patients visited a local seafood market selling various live animals, from where this zoonotic disease was suspected to have spread. 2 were also suggested such as snake, 4 pangolin, 5 or some mammals and birds. 6 the genome of sars-cov-2 contains two open reading frames (orfs), orf1 and orf2 encoding two polyproteins, which are responsible for viral genome maintenance after cleavage. there is also a set of so-called structural proteins such as spike glycoproteins, an envelope protein, membrane proteins, and the nucleocapsid. one of the structural proteins, the spike surface glycoprotein ("spike glycoprotein"), is one of the primary therapeutic targets. this protein plays an important role in binding to receptors on the host cell, fusion of the host and viral membranes, and as a target for antibodies (reviewed in fung and liu 7 ).in this study, we examined 137 genomes to establish the relationship between spike glycoproteins from different coronaviruses. this was done with a combination of the phylogenetic tree analysis (reconstructed from the translated sequences) and a comparison of the structural models. the phylogenetic study has confirmed close relatedness of sars-cov-2 to bats' coronaviruses.in contrast, a comparison of the structural models has found yak (bos grunniens) betacoronavirus as the closest match.recently released complete genome sequences were downloaded for the analysis from ncbi (listed in table s1 ). furthermore, spike glycoprotein orfs (nucleotide and protein sequences) were retrieved from ncbi orffinder (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/orffinder/) and conserved domains were checked with cd-search (ncbi), respectively. complete translated orfs were used for multiple sequence alignments performed using muscle. the tests of substitution models and phylogenetic analysis were carried out using the mega x software. 8 the neighbor-joining method and jtt substitution models were selected assuming an estimated proportion of invariant sites and 4-gamma-distributed rate categories to account for rate heterogeneity across sites. the gamma shape parameter was estimated directly from the data. reliability for the internal branch was assessed using the bootstrapping method (1000 bootstrap replicates). two spike glycoproteins from the gammacoronaviruses were used as an outgroup.structural models of the spike glycoproteins (table s1 , marked with *) were built using swiss-model. 9 predicted structures were refined with an online tool 3drefine (http://sysbio.rnet.missouri.edu/3drefine/) and verified using qmean (https://swissmodel.expasy.org/qmean/). ipba web server was used for pdb structure alignment (https://www.dsimb.inserm.fr/dsimb_tools/ipba/index.php). the quality of the structure alignments was evaluated using root mean square deviation and normalized score. chimera software 10 was used for structure visualization. (table s1 ).four conserved domains were identified: spike glycoprotein n-terminal domain (pfam16451), spike receptor-binding domain (pfam09408), coronavirus s1 glycoprotein (pfam01600), and coronavirus s2 glycoprotein (pfam01601) (listed from n-terminal to c-terminal direction) ( figure s1) . surprisingly, none of the analyzed genomes exhibited such domain architecture, as is known, for example, for the viruses studied earlier (top line in figures s1 and s2) . as a common feature, we noticed that alphacoronaviruses and gammacoronaviruses share domain architecture represented by two domains: coronavirus s1 glycoprotein along with coronavirus s2 glycoprotein. in contrast, all analyzed betacoronaviruses have a full or partial spike receptor-binding domain. interestingly, only betacoronaviruses with humans and yaks as hosts have spike glycoprotein n-terminal domain, which is absent in all other analyzed hosts.to gain insight into the phylogenetic relationships between spike glycoproteins from alphacoronaviruses, betacoronaviruses, and gammacoronaviruses of different hosts, a robust phylogenetic tree after multiple alignments of the 137 extracted sequences ( figure s3 furthermore, to better understand the relationships between spike glycoproteins on the structural level, we built protein models with homology-based server swiss-model 9 (table s1, marked with *).obtained models were evaluated and verified (table s2 ). in the next step, ipba web server, with a local backbone conformation comparison similarity algorithm, was used to match human hostdelivered sars-cov-2 and mers spike glycoproteins to models delivered from other coronaviruses and hosts (table 1) . mers betacoronavirus was used as a control data set as it is well-studied in both hosts (human and camel), and as their close genetic relationship is well-characterized. 11 as expected, human hostdelivered-mers showed the highest similarity to that from camels. sars-cov-2's spike glycoprotein, on the contrary, has shown the highest similarity to the yak-delivered betacoronavirus (table 1 and figure 1b ).proper domain classification and identification remain to be a matter of discussion. earlier papers refer to the spike glycoprotein as cleaved in the middle and forming s1 and s2 domains, further subdividing them into n-terminal and c-terminal domains in each. 12 based on the current conserved domain database (cdd) output, we concluded that n-terminal s1 corresponds to the spike glycoprotein we also wish to emphasize the importance of further investigations into the evolution of the spike glycoprotein. such work could render a positive impact on the current sars-cov-2 transmission and prevent zoonotic disease outbreaks of this type in the future.tracing the history of molecular changes in coronaviruses using phylogenetic methods can provide powerful insights into the patterns of modification to sequences that underlie alteration to selective pressure and molecular function in the sars-cov (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus) genome. the topology and branch lengths of the phylogenetic relationships among the family coronaviridae, including sars-cov, have been estimated using the replicase polyprotein. the spike protein fragments s1 (involved in receptor-binding) and s2 (involved in membrane fusion) have been found to have different mutation rates. fragment s1 can be further divided into two regions (s1a, which comprises approximately the first 400 nucleotides, and s1b, comprising the next 280) that also show different rates of mutation. the phylogeny presented on the basis of s1b shows that sars-cov is closely related to mhv (murine hepatitis virus), which is known to bind the murine receptor ceacam1. the predicted structure, accessibility and mutation rate of the s1b region is also presented. because anti-sars drugs based on s2 heptads have short half-lives and are difficult to manufacture, our findings suggest that the s1b region might be of interest for anti-sars drug discovery.can phylogeneticists and bioinformaticians help virologists to tackle sars-cov (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus)? phylogenetic methodology has progressed almost beyond recognition in the past decade and the study of phylogenetic relationships among species is now a valuable source of information in a variety of biological fields. the widespread use of a reliable statistical formalisation in phylogenetic and bioinformatic studies is necessary to extract the maximum information from sequence data [1] .recent work, although reporting impressive insights into the mechanisms of pathogenesis of sars-cov, has assessed the phylogeny of proteins of this virus using overly simple algorithms [2, 3] . the distance methods used to assess sars-cov phylogeny present several disadvantages. first, by converting a sequence alignment to pairwise distances we necessarily lose some of the evolutionary information contained within the analysed sequences [1] . second, distance methods are known to compromise the accuracy of estimates of evolutionary divergence, which are fundamental to understanding the rate and mode of viral evolution. third, there are no known methods to test evolutionary models and estimated trees produced using the pairwise distance methodology [1] .here we use state-of-the-art phylogenetic methods to analyse all the available coronaviridae and sars-cov sequence datasets to gain an insight into the origin and evolution of sars-cov and to narrow down the list of potential regions of its genome that might be interesting targets for drug design.the statistically most robust method that can be used to achieve these aims is to consider the phylogenetic inference problem in a likelihood framework, using a valid model of evolution for viral genomes [1] . the choice of such a model for single-stranded rna virus genomes is difficult. a parametric model, based on chemical or biological properties of rna, might underestimate or completely miss important unknown constraints; for example, packaging of single-stranded rna genomes that requires interaction with coat proteins [4] . an alternative approach is to use empirical models that are generated through comparisons of observed sequences; for example, simply counting apparent replacements between closely related sequences. given that sequence databases are biased towards mammalian and bacterial dna sequences, there are relatively few coding single-stranded rna sequences to be aligned, and non-coding rna sequences, such as rrna or trna, might be subjected to different selective (e.g. structural) constraints. because the proteins encoded by rna genes might be subjected to functional constraints in a similar manner to non-viral proteins, it might be better to use empirical amino acid substitution models that describe the probability of fixation of amino acid changes rather than rna models. furthermore, relative to primary structure, the secondary structure of homologous proteins persists long after any statistically significant sequence similarity has vanished; sequences with 25% amino acid identity probably have the same secondary structure [5] . amino acid models of evolution that incorporate protein structural information perform better than simple amino acid models [6] . moreover, selection pressures act on protein function, which in turn is closely related to structure. therefore, incorporating structure information into evolutionary analysis can assist in incorporating selective constraints. here, the programme passml-tm, which implements protein secondary structure-based models of evolution, has been used for analyses [7, 8] . the first undertaking is the determination and rooting of the coronavirus phylogeny, that is, the putative origin of the sequences of interest.rooting the coronaviridae and sars-cov phylogenies a large fraction (, 70%) of the sars-cov genome encodes a replicase polyprotein, which has significant sequence homology to all of the replicase polyproteins that have been sequenced to date from the order nidovirales (comprising the coronavirus, torovirus, okavirus and arterivirus genera). therefore, this protein is a good choice for investigating the phylogenetic relationships among the family coronaviridae. viral sequences have high mutation rates and, consequently, alignments are usually difficult to prepare. here, clustalw is applied using standard parameters [9] , followed by careful refinement of the alignments both by eye and by using the protein secondary structural information for each nidovirus sequence as predicted by phd (http://cubic.bioc.columbia.edu/predictprotein/) [10] and psi-pred (http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/ psipred) [11] . figure 1 shows the maximum likelihood tree produced using a set of homologous replicases from five sars-cov strains, 12 other coronaviruses representing both groups 1 and 2 of the genus [2, 3] , one torovirus (breda virus) and one okavirus [yellow head (yh) virus], which were determined to most closely represent the consensus coronavirus sequence by a psi-blast search [12] . the coronavirus sequences allow the determination of the root of the sars-cov strains, whereas the torovirus and okavirus sequences provide insights into the rooting of the family coronaviridae phylogeny, which is closer to group 1 than group 2 of the coronavirus genus.as found previously by marra et al. [2] and rota et al. [3] , the root of sars-cov is closer to coronavirus group 2. all sars-cov strains are almost completely identical in sequence (,99% dna sequence homology) and therefore it is not possible to get any meaningful phylogeny within the sars-cov group. the avian infectious bronchitis virus (ibv), which causes respiratory disease in chickens, and the turkey virus (tcv), which causes enteric disease, are clustered together; their ancestor divides groups 1 and 2 of the mammal-infecting coronaviruses. the close clustering of the chicken and turkey viruses suggests that the difference between enteric and respiratory tropisms might require only a few amino acid changes. experiments have shown that just two point mutations in the spike (s) glycoprotein can change porcine transmissible gastroenteritis coronavirus (tgev), a mostly enteric virus that can kill piglets, into a non-deadly virus that excels at the respiratory route but replicates poorly in the gut [13 -15] . to infect enteric tract cells with tgev, two different domains of the s protein of tgev, mapping to between amino acids 522 and 744 and close to amino acid 219, are involved [13] . the first domain binds to aminopeptidase n (papn); many viruses use co-receptors, and it is probable that the second domain maps a co-receptor essential for the enteric tropism of tgev [14, 15] .the clustering of murine hepatitis virus (mhv) and rat coronavirus (rtcov) might reflect the relatively close proximity in which the hosts reside and perhaps the similarity of murine and rat target receptors. note that mhv receptors, including ceacam1, have recently been identified [16, 17] . the clustering of the human oc43 (hcov-oc43), bovine (bcov) and porcine haemagglutinating encephalomyelitis (hev) coronaviruses might reflect conditions contributing to cross-infection in farming. the breda torovirus is enteric, whereas the yh okavirus infects gill tissue in prawns. this indicates that the switch between enteric and respiratory tropism is a general characteristic of the order nidovirales.coronaviruses attach to host cells through the s glycoprotein [15, 18] . this protein is translated as a large polypeptide that is subsequently cleaved into a receptorbinding peripheral subunit (s1) that remains non-covalently associated with a fusion-inducing membrane-spanning (s2) fragment [18] .studies have shown that the entry of the porcine coronavirus tgev into cells is mediated by the interactions of s1 with papn, an ectoenzyme abundantly expressed at the apical membrane of enterocytes covering the villi of the small intestine [19] . the fact that the s protein mediates the first interaction of the virus with human cells suggests that it might represent an excellent target for effective anti-sars-cov drugs; unfortunately, structural information is only available for the 3clpro proteinase, which is part of the coronavirus replication complex (pdb accessions 1q2w, 1p9u, 1p9s and 1lvo) [20] . the s protein shows relatively high sequence homology within two of the major coronavirus groups (. 60% within group 1; . 38% within group 2), whereas the homology between groups is lower (15-21% between groups 1 and 2; 15-21% between sars-cov and group 1 or 2). comparative sequence analysis between the sars-cov sequences and sequences from groups 1 and 2 of the coronavirus genus reveals three regions of varying sequence conservation: from amino acid positions 1 to , 400, 401-680 and 681-1255. interestingly, the first two regions correspond to the s1 fragment (we subsequently refer to these regions as s1a and s2a) and the third to the s2 fragment. figure 2a shows a cartoon of the gene for the s protein. the region s1a is poorly conserved between groups 1 and 2 and sars-cov, whereas s1b is flanked by two very well conserved motifs making it easier to align the internal sequences. notably, this region is homologous to a tgev spike region that is reported to contain determinants for tissue tropism [13 -15] . the region s2 is more conserved than s1a and s1b and consequently the alignment is easily determined; passml-tm, which uses the evolutionary relationships of the sequences analysed to improve its predictions of secondary structure and accessibility, predicts a transmembrane helix at location 1196-1218 of the s protein. the maximum likelihood trees of s1b and s2 are shown in figures 2b and 2c , respectively. the length of the trees and the distances between sequences reflect the sequence homologies according to the model of evolution, explaining why the s2 tree is much shorter than s1b tree.the phylogenetic tree produced from the analysis of the spike s2 fragment from several coronaviruses indicates that sars-cov is closer to group 2 of the coronavirus genus than to group 1. phylogenetic analysis of the s1 fragment from several coronaviruses indicates that sars-cov has an even closer relationship to group 2 viruses than the previous analysis suggests. phylogenetic analysis of a 300 amino acid region at the terminus of s1, which we denote s1b, indicates that sars-cov belongs to group 2 and is closely related to mhv and rtcov. the differences between these results might be a result of recombination events involving sars-cov or convergent evolution, or they might also be caused simply by chance; however, it is apparent that sars-cov is most closely related to group 2 of the coronavirus genus. because the s1 fragment of mhv binds to ceacam1, we suggest that the s1b region of the sars-cov spike might bind to a human ceacam1 receptor instead of papn. holmes and collaborators, who have identified receptors for mhv (murine cea-cam1a), hcov-229e (human papn) and feline coronaviruses (feline papn) [16, 17] , are currently investigating this hypothesis (k. holmes, pers. commun.). in support of the proposal that s1b is involved in receptor-binding is the fact that this region is homologous to a domain of the tgev s protein, which is located between amino acids 522 and 744 and is also involved in receptor-binding [13, 16] .notably, tgev mutants that lack sialic acid-binding activity contain single point mutations in the s protein (cys155phe, met195val, arg196ser, asp208asn or leu209-pro) [21, 22] . sialic acid-binding activity might help tgev to resist detergent-like substances encountered during gastrointestinal passage and therefore facilitate infection of the intestinal epithelium [23] . we found that only cys155 is conserved in sars-cov; this is in agreement with clinical findings that show that 20 -50% of sars patients present gastrointestinal symptoms [24] . the low conservation of the s1a region among coronavirus sequences suggests that once more strains of sars-cov or other closely related species are available it will become possible to use innovative comparative sequence analyses to examine positive selection that acts in this region [1] .several important functional determinants have been discovered in fragment s2. it contains a cytoplasmic tail enriched in cysteine residues (1217 -1236; figure 2a ); this is a common feature among coronaviruses and appears to be related to membrane fusion [25] . several authors have discovered that sars-cov s2 contains two conserved regions of heptad repeats (913 -1000 and 1151-1185; figure 2a ) [26, 27] (see also a press release by w.r. gallaher and r.f. garry http://www.virology.net/sars/ s2model.html). these heptads suggest that sars-cov uses mechanisms to gain entry to a cell that are similar to those used by human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), the virus that causes aids (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome), orthomyxoviruses and paramyxoviruses, and also ebola. it is known that peptides derived from these repeat regions in hiv and the paramyxoviruses can specifically inhibit virus entry and subsequently viral replication [26] . currently, sars treatment is modeled after the drug known as t20 (http://www.hivmedicine. com/textbook/drugs/t20.htm). this drug is a complex peptide that is difficult to manufacture, has a short halflife in the human body and must be injected. this suggests that other regions of the genome, such as s1b, which might be of some interest for drug design, should be described. we report in figure 2d the consensus protein structure estimate of s1b obtained using passml-tm, phd [10] and psi-pred [11] . passml-tm also estimates the distribution of mutation rates along the protein and the sitewise mutation rate (figure 2d ).the sars-cov genome is at rich (59%). asymmetries in strand composition can reveal mutation bias (for example, cytosine deamination) or selection [28] . we found that the gc [(g 2 c)/(g þ c) ¼ 0.02] and at skew [(a 2 t)/ (a þ t) ¼ 0.037] in the sars-cov genome are smaller than those of the hiv genome (gc skew is 0.15 and at skew is 0.23), which has a double-stranded rna genome with a similar at content. this suggests the existence of some selection on g and c distribution along the sequence to control the types of rna secondary structure that form [29] . cg is the only dinucleotide statistically underrepresented {f(cg)/(f(c)f(g) ¼ 0.46, where f(cg) is the frequency of cg dinucleotides and significance is assessed according to refs. [30, 31] }. because this depletion is also found in the hiv genome but not in that of tobacco mosaic virus, it might occur as a result of mutational bias in vertebrate cells.comparison of the mutation patterns in the sars-cov genome sequences from 16 sites occur within or near to single base and dinucleotide repeat stretches. despite the absence of a pairing rule, the ratio of rates of transition and transversion mutations is , 2, as is often found in double-stranded dna. the low gc and at skews and the low number of mutations suggest that evolvability of sars-cov might be restricted by selective constraints acting on the rna structure and packaging of the genome, and therefore it might also be restricted by the low fitness of its mutational neighbours. sequence features that form stems and loops that are potentially involved in coronavirus genome packaging have been described [32, 33] . mutational neighbours with ; and sars-covs from strains tor2, bj01, bj02, bj03 and cuhkw1], one torovirus (breda) and one okavirus (yellow head virus, yh). coloured areas indicate coronavirus groups 1 (blue) and 2 (yellow). (d) predicted structure and mutation rate for the sars-cov s1b region. secondary structure has been predicted (row pred) in three classes: helix (h), sheet (e) and coil (c). accessibility has been predicted (row acc) in three classes: buried (b), exposed (e) and intermediate (i). mutation rates (row mut) are partitioned into eight classes (classes 1-8 have relative rates of evolution 0.10, 0.27, 0.44, 0.64, 0.88, 1.19, 1.65 and 2.83, respectively), inferred using the empirical bayes method [37] . the sequence homologous to the region 522-744 of the tgev spike protein is shown in red. maximum likelihood trees and mutation rate analyses were computed using passml-tm [7] . different fitness might explain why, although some rna viruses evolve at high rates, some rna viruses are highly stable [34, 35] . interestingly, the ease of tropism switching as exemplified by the closeness between turkey and chicken coronaviruses (figure 1) is favoured by the large number of viral particles in each host, by their mutation rates, by the large populations of hosts (birds and other species) and by the aerial mode of viral spread (for instance, through sneezing and faeces). these factors suggest that birds might act as powerful engines for virus evolution.in this review we have highlighted that the s1 and s2 fragments of the sars-cov s protein have different mutational patterns. on the basis of phylogenetic evidence ( figure 2b ) and the homology with the tgev 522-744 region, it is suggested that a short region of the s1 fragment, which we denote s1b, located at positions 400-680, might be of particular interest to virologists, structural biologists and biotechnologists. the sitewise secondary structure, solvent accessibility and mutation rate of this region have been estimated; our work in progress includes further structural characterization and fold family determination. at the moment, sars appears to be under control despite doctors having neither drugs nor a vaccine to protect against it. because it could reappear in the future, research should proceed and hopefully our findings might assist in maintaining a feed-forward loop on sars-cov research between bioinformatics analysis and experimental work from microbiologists and virologists. as a final comment, it is notable that, in all the phylogenies, human coronaviruses hcov-229 and hcov-oc43 always cluster with porcine coronaviruses. because ericsson and collaborators [36] reported the identification of two homologous human proteins that act as receptors for porcine endogenous retrovirus, the benefits and risks of porcine -human xenotransplantation should be carefully balanced.those of us who make our living studying microorganisms often take their metabolic versatility for granted. however, we are reminded of this versatility yet again with the recent publication by larimer et al. [1] on the complete genome sequence of rhodopseudomonas palustris, a purple photosynthetic bacterium that is a member of the alpha group of proteobacteria. r. palustris was used in some of the earliest studies that characterized aromatic degradation in microbial species and is found in very diverse environments, an observation that reflects its spectacular metabolic capabilities and ability to grow using any one of four different modes of metabolism: photosynthetic, photoheterotrophic, chemoheterotrophic or chemoautotrophic. the ability of this organism to adjust its metabolism so dramatically in response to changes in energy and nutrient availability sets r. palustris apart from many of its close relatives.the r. palustris genome is composed of a single circular chromosome (5.46 mb) and one 8.4 kb plasmid and encodes 4,836 genes. the relatively large size of the r. palustris genome is reminiscent of other ubiquitous environmental bacteria for which we have complete genome sequences, including streptomyces coelicolor (8.7 mb), streptomyces avermitilis (9.0 mb) and pseudomonas putida (6.6 mb). the streptomycete genomes contain an unprecedented number of gene clusters that encode known or predicted proteins involved in secondary metabolism. these gene clusters might represent dna that was acquired through lateral gene transfer at some point in the evolution of the streptomycetes. by contrast, r. palustris has a minimal number of insertion sequence elements, and few regions of atypical nucleotide composition which, taken together, suggest that lateral gene transfer has not played a major role in shaping this genome. the genes that encode components of major metabolic pathways are also randomly distributed throughout the r. palustris genome.in r. palustris, key genes that code for bacteriochlorophyll and carotenoid biosynthesis, as well as those for membrane-bound reaction centre complexes of photosynthesis were found to be clustered in a 55 kb region of the genome. forms i and ii of rubisco, the key enzyme of the calvin -benson -bassham pathway of carbon dioxide fixation are encoded by the genome, as well as two rubisco-like proteins (so far only identified in the photosynthetic chlorobium tepidum) [2] . based on the biochemical characterization of the rubisco-like protein in c. tepidum [3] , in r. palustris these proteins probably play a role in sulfur metabolism.approximately 31% of the predicted coding sequences in the genome are devoted to energy metabolism. for example, many predicted protein sequences for the oxidation of inorganic compounds including thiosulfate and hydrogen, which provide reducing energy for carbon dioxide and nitrogen fixation are encoded, and also carbon monoxide and formate dehydrogenases. analysis of the genome also highlights the ability of r. palustris to degrade heterocyclic aromatics and chlorinated benzoates, and reveals the presence of four-ring cleavage pathways.as with the soil bacteria for which we have complete genome sequences, just over 9% of the r. palustris genome is devoted to regulation. this is probably a reflection of the need of these species to sense variations in environmental conditions and respond accordingly. this diversity is also reflected in the high percentage of the genome that is devoted to transport capabilities and chemotaxis. as , 30% of the r. palustris genome consists of genes that are either hypothetical or conserved hypothetical proteins, or of unknown function, the biochemical characterization of these predicted protein sequences will undoubtedly reveal additional new physiological capabilities for this species.r. palustris has been studied for its metabolic potential for close to forty years [4] , however, the genome sequence revealed a greater set of predicted coding sequences for the biodegradation and metabolism of aromatic compounds than had been expected, as well as an ability to combine these pathways under anaerobic and aerobic conditions. it is anticipated that, as with the genomes of other metabolically diverse environmental species such as deinococcus radiodurans, the genome of r. palustris can serve as a model to increase our understanding of how organisms can use diverse metabolic capabilities to respond to changes in substrate, light and other environmental cues.corresponding author: claire m. fraser (cmfraser@tigr.org).the covid-19 pandemic continues to inflict devastating human life losses (1), and has enforced significant social changes and global economic shut downs (2) . with the accumulating financial burdens and unemployment rates, several governments are sketching out plans for slowly re-opening the economy and reviving social life and economic activity.however, robust population-based surveillance systems are essential to track viral transmission during the re-opening process.while rt-qpcr targeting sars-cov-2 can be effective in identifying infected individuals for isolation and contact tracing, it is not useful in determining which viral strains are circulating in the community: autochthonous versus imported ones, and -if imported -it is important to know the origin of the strains, which in turn influences public health policy decisions. in addition, it is vital to identify super-spreader events as they can be influenced by the virus strain (3) . sars-cov-2 whole genome sequencing (cwgs), on the other hand, can detect the virus and can delineate its origins through phylogenetic analysis (4, 5) in combination with other local and international viral strains, especially given the accumulation of thousands of viral sequences from countries all over the world (www.nextstrain.org) (figure 1) . however, practical considerations, such as cost, scalability, and data storage, should first be investigated to assess the feasibility of implementing cwgs as a population-based surveillance tool. here we show that cwgs is cost-effective and is highly scalable when using a target enrichment sequencing method, and we also demonstrate its utility in tracking the origin of sars-cov-2 transmission.all patients had laboratory-confirmed covid-19 based on positive rt-pcr assay for sars-cov-2 in the centralized dubai health authority (dha) virology laboratory. this study was approved by the dubai scientific research ethics committee -dubai health authority (approval number #dsrec-04/2020_02).viral rna was extracted from nasopharyngeal swabs of patients with covid-19 using the ez1 dsp virus kit (qiagen, hilden, germany), optimized for viral and bacterial nucleic acids extractions from human specimens using magnetic bead technology. sars-cov-2 positive results were confirmed using a rt-pcr assay, originally designed by the us centres for disease control and prevention (cdc), and is currently provided by integrated dna technologies (idt, ia, usa). this assay consists of oligonucleotide primers and dual-labelled hydrolysis (taqman®) probes (5'fam/3'black hole quencher) specific for two regions (n1 and n2) of the virus nucleocapsid (n) gene. an additional primer/probe set is also included to detect the human rnase p gene (rp) as an extraction control. the reverse transcription and amplification steps are performed using the taqpath tm 1-step rt-qpcr master mix (thermofisher, ma, usa) following manufacturer's instructions. a sample was considered positive if the cycle threshold (ct) values were less than 40 for each of the sars-cov-2 targets (n1 and n2) and the extraction control (rp). to estimate the viral load relative to human rna, we calculated the δct value for each target as follows: δct = ctnn -ctrp, where nn is either n1 or n2. the average of the n1 and n2 target δct values was then negated to reach a relative estimate of viral load which is inversely correlated with ct value.rna libraries from all samples were prepared for shotgun transcriptomic sequencing using the truseq stranded total rna library kit from illumina (san diego, ca, usa), following manufacturer's instructions. rna specific fluorescent dye is used to quantify extracted rna using the qubit rna xr assay kit and the qubit flourometer system (thermofisher, ma, usa). then, 1µg of input rna from each patient sample was depleted for human ribosomal rna, and the remaining rna underwent fragmentation, reverse transcription (using the superscript ii reverse transcriptase kit from invitrogen, carisbad, usa), adaptor ligation, and amplification. libraries were then sequenced using the novaseq sp reagent kit (2 x 150 cycles) from illumina (san diego, ca, usa).rna extracted (~1µg) from patient nasopharyngeal swabs was used for double stranded cdna synthesis using the quantitect reverse transcription kit (qiagen, hilden, germany) according to manufacturer's protocol. this cdna was then evenly distributed into 26 pcr reactions for sars-cov-2 whole genome amplification using 26 overlapping primer sets covering most of its genome (figure 2a and supplemental table 1 ). the sars-cov-2 primer sets used in this study were modified from wu et al (6) by adding m13 tails to enable sequencing by sanger, if needed (supplemental table 1 ). pcr amplification was performed using the platinum tm superfi tm pcr master mix (thermofisher, ma, usa) and a thermal protocol consisting of an initial denaturation at 98°c for 60 seconds, followed by 27 cycles of denaturation (98°c for 17 seconds), annealing (57°c for 20 seconds), and extension (72°c for 1 minute and 53 seconds). a final extension at 72°c for 10 minutes was applied before retrieving the final pcr products. amplification was confirmed by running 2µl from each reaction on a 2% agarose gel.all pcr products were then purified using agencourt ampure xp beads (beckman coulter, ca, usa), quantified by nanodrop (thermofisher, ma, usa), diluted to the same concentration, and then pooled into one tube for next steps.a minimum of 200-800ng of the pooled pcr products in 55µl were then sheared by ultrasonication (covaris le220-plus series, ma, usa) to generate a target fragment size of 250-750bp using the following parameters: 20% duty factor, peak power of 150 watts, 900 cycles per burst, 320 seconds treatment time, an average power of 30 watts, and 20°c bath temperature. target fragmentation were confirmed by the tapestation automated electrophoresis system tapestation (agilent, ca, usa) (figure 2a) . subsequently, the fragmented product is purified and then processed to generate sequencing-ready libraries using the sureselectxt library preparation kit (agilent, ca, usa) following manufacturer instructions. indexed libraries from multiple patients were pooled and sequenced (2 x 150 cycles) using the miseq or the novaseq systems (illumina, san diego, ca, usa). a step-bystep sars-cov-2 target enrichment and sequencing protocol is provided in appendix i.demultiplexed fastq reads, obtained through shotgun or target enrichment sequencing, were generated from raw sequencing base call files using bcl2fastq v2.20.0, and then mapped to the reference wuhan genome (genbank accession number: nc_045512.2) by burrow-wheeler aligner, bwa v0.7.17. alignment statistics, such as coverage and mapped reads, were generated using picard 2.18.17. variant calling was performed by gatk v3.8-1-0, and was followed by sars-cov-2 genome assembly using bcftools v.1.3.1 ( figure 2b ).all tools used in this study are freely accessible. for laboratories without bioinformatics support, several publicly accessible, end-to-end bioinformatics pipelines (insaflu: https://insaflu.insa.pt/; genome detective:https://www.genomedetective.com/app/typingtool/virus/) (7, 8) , composed of the above tools, can be used to generate viral sequences from raw fastq data.for downstream analysis, a general quality control metric was implemented to ensure assembled sars-cov-2 genomes have at least 20x average coverage (sequencing reads >q30) across most nucleotide positions (56-29,797).for target enrichment and shotgun sequencing comparisons in table 1 , we used data from 7 samples (uae/p1/2020, l0287, l1189, l4711, l5857, l6841, l9119) generated using both methods. data from patient l5630 were not included in this analysis since, unlike the above 7 samples, significantly more sequencing data was allocated for the target enriched sample in this patient (supplemental table 2 ) which can overestimate the efficiency of the target enrichment protocol.all new sars-cov-2 sequences (n=7) generated in this study were submitted to gisaid (global initiative on sharing all influenza data) under accession ids: epi_isl_463740 and epi_isl_469276 to epi_isl_469281.we used nexstrain (9), which consists of augur v6.4.3 pipeline for multiple sequence alignment (mafft v7.455) (10) and phylogenetic tree construction (iqtree v1.6.12) (11) .tree topology was assessed using the fast bootstrapping function with 1,000 replicates. tree visualization and annotations were performed in figtree v1.4.4 (12).shotgun transcriptome sequencing was used to fully sequence sars-cov-2 rna extracted from patients (n=17) who tested positive for the virus (4). analysis of the sequencing data showed that this approach required, on average, 4.71gb of data per sample yielding 31.7 million total reads, of which approximately 0.63% of the reads (~199,000 reads) mapped to the sars-cov-2 genome with an average coverage of ~173x (table 1) . this is attributed to the fact that most of the shotgun data (~99%) is allocated to the human transcriptome while a minority of the reads align to the sars-cov-2 genome (table 1 ). in addition to cost and storage considerations discussed below, this approach is not highly sensitive for detecting sars-cov-2 genomes in general and specifically in samples with low viral abundance. in fact, despite high viral abundance relative to human rna, most samples had less than 100x sequencing coverage across the sars-cov-2 genome. samples with seemingly very low viral loads failed to yield full sars-cov-2 genome sequence using this approach (table 1 and figure 3a ).to enrich viral sequences and minimize sequencing cost and data storage issues addressed below, we describe an alternative approach where the entire sars-cov-2 genome is first amplified using 26 overlapping primer sets each yielding around 1.5kb long inserts (figuresand supplemental table 1 ). all inserts were then pooled and fragmented to 250-750bp inserts which were then prepared for short read next generation sequencing (figures   2a and 3c) .rna extracted from eight covid-19 patients, which were first sequenced by shotgun transcriptome (table 1 and supplemental table 2 ), were sequenced using the enrichment protocol. as expected, we observed significant enhancement in virus detection using this protocol where, on average, 99.3% of the reads now mapped to the sars-cov-2 genome leading to tenfold increase in coverage relative to shotgun transcriptome (avg. 440x versus 45.5x, respectively) despite generating a two hundred fold less sequencing data (avg. 0.02gb versus 4.28gb, respectively, table 2 and figure 3d ).on average, 37x coverage per 1gb of sequencing data was generated using shotgun sequencing ( table 1 ) compared to ~23,000x per 1gb using target enrichment ( table 2) suggesting the latter method is more cost effective and is highly scalable. we calculate the table 3) . therefore, target enrichment sequencing is still more cost-effective and scalable than shotgun transcriptome sequencing even at higher sequencing throughputs.another factor impeding scalability of the shotgun approach is data storage. even with higher throughput sequencing (novaseq sp flowcell), shotgun sequencing requires an allocation of 1tb of data for ~250 sequenced samples. on the other hand, with 1tb of data, a total of around 80,000 samples can be sequenced using the enrichment method and the miseq micro flowcell ( table 3) . therefore, long term data storage allocations, and cost, are significantly higher, and perhaps formidable, when using the shotgun sequencing approach.to illustrate the utility of sars-cov-2 whole genome sequencing, we tracked the origin(s) of the virus in seven patients (uae/p1/2020, l0287, l1189, l4711, l5857, l6841, l9119) by comparing their assembled sequences to virus strains (n=25) identified during the early phase of the pandemic, between january 29 and march 18 2020, in the uae (4). all seven patient samples were collected between march 28 and april 5 2020, and are therefore good candidates to determine whether transmissions were community-based due to the previously documented 25 strains or were independent external introductions.multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis (figures 2b and 4) showed that the new isolates from patients l0287, l4711, l1189, and l5857 clustered with earlier strains of iranian origin (or clade a3), while that from patient l9119 belonged to the early european (or clade a2a) cluster (figure 4) . this information suggests that transmissions for all those five patients were most likely community-based, which we then confirmed from patient medical records where no recent travel history was reported by any of those individuals.sars-cov-2 isolates from patients p1/uae/2020 and l6841 were, on the other hand, closer to the earliest asian strains, which are more diverse due to fewer but distinct mutations ( figure 4) . hence, with the available sequencing data it is challenging to ascertain whether the p1/uae/2020 and l6841 transmissions were community-based or due to early independent introductions. however, patient l6841 did not have any recent travel history before symptoms onset, suggesting the case for community-based transmission related to an asian strain. on the other hand, travel history in patient p1/uae/2020 was not known and the corresponding isolate appeared to match closely to five other strains from the united states and taiwan (figure 4) . therefore, transmission in patient p1/uae/2020 was unlikely to be community-based from the early 25 strains (4), but rather due to an independent travelrelated introduction of the virus.genomics-based sars-cov-2 population-based surveillance is a powerful tool for controlling viral transmission during the next phase of the pandemic. therefore, it is important to devise efficient methods for sars-cov-2 genome sequencing for downstream phylogenetic analysis and virus origin tracking. towards this goal, we describe a cost-effective, robust, and highly scalable target enrichment sequencing approach, and provide an example to demonstrate its utility in characterizing transmission origin.our target enrichment protocol is amplicon-based for which oligonucleotide primers can be easily ordered by any molecular laboratory. next generation sequencing (ngs) has also become largely accessible to most labs, and in our protocol we show that highly affordable, low throughput sequencers, such as the illumina miseq system, can be used efficiently to sequence up to 96 samples at 400x coverage each at a cost of $87 per sample ( table 3) . this cost is likely comparable to rt-pcr testing for the virus.one possible limitation is the use of ultra-sonication for fragmentation of pcr products after sars-cov-2 whole genome amplification. several labs might lack sonication systems due to accessibility and affordability issues. in such situations, our protocol can be easily modified to use enzymatic fragmentation instead provided by commercial kits, such as the agilent https://www.genomedetective.com/app/typingtool/virus/) (7, 8) which can take raw sequencing (fastq) files to assemble viral genomes, and to perform multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis for virus origin tracking. in addition, the described approach does not require significant data storage or computational investment as shown by our cost, data, and scalability calculations ( table 3) .our phylogenetic analysis demonstrates how sars-cov-2 genomic sequencing can be used to track origins of virus transmission. however, data should be carefully interpreted, and should be combined with other epidemiological information (such as travel history) to avoid inaccurate conclusions. the major limitation facing genomic-based sars-cov-2 surveillance includes the lack of virus sequencing data representing most strains in any country.nonetheless, sars-cov-2 strains are continuously being sequenced by government, private, and academic entities all over the world, and the sequencing data is being shared publicly. this proliferation of sequencing datasets will empower genomic-based surveillance of the virus, and the availability of cost effective sequencing options, like the one described in this study, will contribute to democratizing sars-cov-2 sequencing and data sharing.in summary, we show that sars-cov-2 whole genome sequencing is a highly feasible and effective tool for tracking virus transmission. genomic data can be used to determine community-based versus imported transmissions, which can then inform the most appropriate public health decisions to control the pandemic.disclosures. authors do not have any conflicts of interests to disclose. the sudden appearance and potential lethality of severe acute respiratory syndrome associated coronavirus (sars-cov) in humans has focused attention on understanding its origins. the host reservoir from which humans were infected remains to be determined. however, molecular phylogenetics can be used to assess sars-cov's evolutionary origin and history of change by analyzing genes from sars-cov with homologous genes from other coronaviruses. though surveys and sampling of coronaviruses from both wild and domestic host-species are limiting, comparative phylogenetic analyses for viruses and hosts is important in elucidating the history of host associations as well.coronaviruses have been divided into three groups based on serological and genetic criteria (siddell, 1995) . to date, group 3 coronaviruses have been found only in birds, group 1 coronaviruses have been found in carnivores, cetartiodactyls and primates, and group 2 coronaviruses have been found in cetartiodactyls, perissodactyls, rodents, and birds. previous phylogenetic analyses, all of which were unrooted, suggested that sars-cov represents a relatively early diverging coronavirus lineage equally distantly related to the three groups of coronaviruses noted above. on this basis, sars-cov was proposed as representing a fourth, distinct group within the genus coronavirus (marra et al., 2003; rota et al., 2003) . these previous studies, which focused on characterizing and sequencing sars-cov, did not yield evidence for recombination within the sars-cov genome, although marra et al. (2003) commented that the s2m motif within the sars-cov utr may be the product of horizontal transfer, given the disjunct presence of s2m in many if not all astroviruses, a picornavirus (erbv) and only one group 3 coronavirus (avian infectious bronchitis viruses (ibv)).here, we use phylogenetic analyses of sars-cov and other coronaviruses, rooted with diverse viruses from the family artiviridae, to show that the rna dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) of sars-cov is a recombinant. we also compare phylogenetic trees for known coronaviruses and their hosts to assess the history of host associations for sars-cov and other coronaviruses.to identify and align three sars-cov proteins with homologs in the non-redundant genbank cds translations (also includes pdb, swissprot and pir; 20 april 2003), we used pfam hidden markov models (hmm) (bateman et al., 2002) with the software hmmer (eddy, 1998) . the hmms we used are: pf05183 for rna dependent rna polymerase, pf00937 for nucleocapsid (n) and pf01601 for spike (s). for identical rdrp sequences, we only retained a single representative. for n and s we used blastclust to retain a single representative from 95% identity groups to reduce the abundance of these sequences for computational efficiency. envelope and membrane proteins were not analyzed because of their short size and lack of conservation across coronaviruses.to detect recombination within rdrp, s and n genes, we used sliding window phylogenetic analyses where windows of 100 amino acids in 25 amino acid intervals were analyzed using bayesian inference (bi) (mau et al., 1999; yang and rannala, 1997) . this approach is analogous to bootscanning (e.g. salminen et al., 1995) , however, we use bayesian inference rather than neighbor joining (nj) and amino acid sequences rather than nucleotides. for bi, four chains were run for 200 k generations with a 100 k generation burn-in using a ␥ distribution of rates and the transition matrices wag for s and n, and rtrev for rdrp (dimmic et al., 2002) in mrbayes v.3b4 (huelsenbeck and ronquist, 2001 ) and summarized as a 50% majority rule consensus tree. we used the differential phylogenetic position of different sars-cov gene fragments ('windows') with respect to other coronavirus groups to identify potential recombination breakpoints and to divide the alignment into segments for additional phylogenetic analyses ( fig. 2a for rdrp) with bi and nj bootstrap. for the analysis of these segments, bi parameters were as above, except each chain was run for 1 million generations. for nj bootstrap, we used 1000 bootstrap replicates and nj searches under default parameters in paup*, summarized as a 50% majority rule consensus tree.we used the approximately unbiased (au) test (shimodaira, 2002) to assess the validity of these breakpoints by determining whether alternative phylogenetic placements for different sars-cov gene regions can be statistically rejected using the program consel (shimodaira and hasegawa, 2001) with branch lengths and model parameters estimated in paml (yang, 1997) .in order to evaluate the types of evolutionary events (codivergence, duplication, sorting, host switching) that explain the fit between coronavirus evolution and host evolution, we considered the nucleocapsid coronavirus phylogeny and its host phylogeny, where mammalian relationships in the host tree follow murphy et al. (2001) . we used treefitter v.1 (ronquist, 2000) which incorporates differential costs to the four types of potential events of a host-parasite association: codivergence (c), duplication (d), sorting (s) and host switching (h). we used various event costs to test a variety of situations (see desdevises et al., 2002; ronquist and liljeblad, 2001) . significance of fit was determined by comparing the cost of the observed tree with 10,000 random permutations of the coronavirus tree terminals.the rdrp hmm detected 27 unique sequences in gen-bank related to sars-cov from arteriviridae and coronaviridae. the relationship between sars-cov and these other coronaviruses for each 100 amino acid window in rdrp, as indicated by bi phylogeny, is shown in fig. 1a . three contiguous, overlapping windows spanning 150 amino acids in the 5 region of the sars-cov rdrp are sister to a clade including groups 1-3 (all other known coronaviruses). alternatively, seven contiguous windows, spanning 259 amino acids in the 3 region, are sister to group 3 coronaviruses. using this diagram (fig. 1a) , we split rdrp into two fragments, 5 and 3 .to assess the significance of this inference, we performed extensive phylogenetic analyses on each fragment. the optimal tree for the 5 region ( fig. 1b ) and the 3 region ( fig. 1c ) mirrored the results of the sliding window analysis (fig. 1a) . to assess the potential impact of the outgroups on these results we also analyzed both regions for the 12 coronavirus taxa alone. these unrooted topologies (not shown) are compatible with the rooted topologies, indicating that the results for sars-cov in fig. 1 are not due to long branch attraction involving the outgroup. we then used the approximately unbiased (au) tree selection test (shimodaira, 2002) to see if the alternative, competing trees for each gene fragment can be statistically rejected in favor of the optimal tree, or if the conflicting results between the 5 and 3 regions showing bayesian inference (bi) sliding window (100 amino acids long in 25 amino acid intervals) analyses used to assess recombination breakpoints within rdrp. the sister relationship of sars-cov rdrp with other coronavirus groups (1, 2 and/or 3) for each fragment is indicated by color code and numbers. bi phylogenies are shown for the entire 5 (b) and 3 (c) regions of rdrp. numbers by each node are posterior probabilities, and when applicable, are followed by neighbor joining bootstrap percentages in italics. multiple terminal nodes from a single virus species are represented by a black triangle, with the number of terminals indicated in white numerals. geninfo identifiers for the proteins used in this analysis: 482297, 564004, 7769353, 93916, 233625, 14917044, 6625761, 13752450, 10242469, 94017, 12744851, 10179430, 25121660, 20271248, 11878197, 7650194, 17529672, 11878201, 25361011, 26008080, 12082740, 133455, 29293454, 14250963, 12240326, 10181074, 9635157, 29837504. fig. 2 . results of the au topological test (shimodaira, 2002) for alternative trees based on the 5 and 3 rdrp putative recombinant fragments. compatible topologies for the 5 and 3 fragments are located in each row. putative recombinant fragments were inferred from the results of the sliding window analysis shown in fig. 2b . the topologies shown are summaries, with each group represented by a single terminal taxa; see are not statistically significant. as shown in fig. 2 , the optimal sister relationship for the 5 region, with sars-cov as sister to a clade including groups 1-3 combined, is rejectable for the 3 region, and the optimal sister relationship for the 3 region, with sars-cov sister to group 3, is rejectable for the 5 region. additionally, sars-cov rdrp as sister to group 1 rdrp is rejectable in both regions, and sars-cov as sister to group 2 is rejectable in the 3 region. to assess the impact of the outgroups on these results, we repeated the au tests with only the 12 coronavirus taxa. all alternative topologies for both regions were rejectable in favor of the optimal topology according to the au test.for s, the hmm detected 120 unique relatives of sars-cov, which we reduced to 24 by 95% identity clustering. for n, the hmm detected 93 unique relatives of sars-cov, which we reduced to 32 by identity clustering. for s and n, we were not able to reject alternative topologies for segments when following the above procedure (results not shown) and thus considered each gene as a historical unit for further analysis. according to their hmms, both s and n are too variable to allow inclusion of an outgroup in alignment and phylogenetic analyses, therefore their phylogenies are unrooted. for n (fig. 3) and s (not shown) coronavirus groups 1-3 are each monophyletic with respect to sars-cov, however, we cannot say with statis-tical confidence (according to the au test) which group (1, 2 or 3) is most closely related to sars-cov.examination of the fit of the n virus tree to the host tree was performed in treefitter v.1 (ronquist, 2000) . under default settings (h = 2, s = 1, d = 0, c = 0), nine host switches (p 0.001) describe a significant fit (p 0.001) of the virus and host trees, while codivergences, duplications and sorting events are rare (p 0.05). as further evidence of this, when the program settings are changed to maximize codivergence events (h = 0; or h = 0 and c = −1) the global fit between the two trees is no longer significant (p 0.05). together, these results indicate that, given current sampling, host switches have been extremely important in the evolution of coronaviruses and their hosts.the difference in the phylogenies inferred from the 5 (fig. 1b) and 3 (fig. 1c) rdrp regions, and the significant differences in support and rejectability of alternative trees for each gene region, all strongly support the hypothesis of an ancient recombination event between two co-infecting viruses. we say 'ancient' to denote that both regions are sister to clades of other sequences, rather than to any single recently diverged sequence. these results indicate that the two sars-cov rdrp regions do indeed represent two unique histories. thus, it is preferable not to analyze them together, as has been done in previous analyses (marra et al., 2003; rota et al., 2003) because their history cannot be represented by a single tree. these previous analyses used distance methods (nj) less able to accommodate heterogeneity in rates of sequence character change, and found rdrp as a whole to be closest to group 2 coronaviruses. this may result from conflicts within the data stemming from recombination and/or from effects of rate heterogeneity. the authors do not report whether alternative trees could be rejected based on their analyses of multiple genes, though it seems unlikely, as when we performed similar analyses for the s and n proteins we were not able to differentiate between alternative sars-cov sister relationships using the au test. we note that the approach for detecting recombination implemented here is rigorous in comparison to traditional bootscanning, in that it analyzes more conserved amino acids using bayesian inference rather than nj, and explicitly tests the significance of alternative topologies using the au test. it is possible and likely that more recombination events have happened within rdrp, n, s or other sars-cov genes, than we have detected here, although the evidence for recombination generally becomes more difficult to discern over time. murphy et al., 2001 for mammals) . lines drawn between the two phylogenies indicate the host status of each coronavirus. for the nucleocapsid phylogeny, all nodes are supported by >50% bayesian posterior probability. nodes overlaid with circles are also supported by >75% of neighbor joining bootstraps. geninfo identifiers for the proteins used in this analysis: 1220375, 395178, 127872, 11096193, 543643, 3132999, 1515361, 21624372, 222585, 29840828, 13448682, 28916465, 281107, 74863, 28460530, 11640712, 29836503, 14253137, 1515365, 1515367, 6689852, 6689856, 320020, 1515375, 1515373, 1515371, 331869, 547999, 21624295, 21624366, 21624369, 28932648, 28932650. inclusion of an outgroup, as we have done with rdrp from 15 arteriviridae taxa (fig. 1) , allows inference of the sister relationships and the relative age and timing of coronaviridae (coronavirus and torovirus) divergence events, missing from the previous unrooted analyses which only could assess distance between clades. our rooted analyses indicate that the 5 rdrp fragment diverged from other coronavirus taxa prior to divergences between and within groups 1-3. fig. 1c indicates that the 3 rdrp fragment diverged from other coronavirus homologs more recently, after divergences between and within groups 1-3. interestingly, fig. 1c also shows non-monophyly for group 1 coronaviruses. this is not surprising, given that groups 1-3 were initially distinguished based on serological tests rather than phylogenetic analyses and given the capacity for recombination.the sister relationship between the more recently diverged sars-cov 3 rdrp fragment and group 3 avian infectious bronchitis viruses (fig. 1c) , suggests that potential horizontal transmissions of s2m to sars-cov (marra et al., 2003) and the 3 region of rdrp are correlated. they may have even been incorporated concomitantly, perhaps on transmission from an ancestor of ibv, the only coronavirus with s2m (jonassen et al., 1998) . as the 5 region of rdrp and the s2m motif are disjunct in the sars-cov genome, putative replication-dependent recombination would have involved several consecutive template switches, as was inferred for the transfer of s2m to ibv (jonassen et al., 1998) . alternatively, horizontal transfer from astroviruses or a picornavirus cannot be ruled out, as horizontal transfer of s2m accounts for its presence in three different virus families (jonassen et al., 1998) .phylogenetic indication of recombination for sars-cov makes sense, as coronaviruses are unique among singlestranded, non-segmented rna viruses in their propensity for recombination, a mechanism purportedly useful in eliminating frequent deleterious mutations in large rna viruses (lai, 1996) . coronavirus genomes generally appear resilient and able to tolerate deletions, insertions and rearrangements (de haan et al., 2002) . similar to our findings, decimo et al. (1993) suggested that n genes from murine hepatitis viruses were the result of double recombination, and several authors have reported evidence for recombination among natural isolates of ibv (e.g. jia et al., 1995; wang et al., 1993) . recombination can be important in gain of novel functions. for example, in hiv recombination is considered to be a powerful adaptive mechanism for antiviral agent resistance and cytotoxic t-cell escape (e.g. morris et al., 1999) . the combination of horizontal transfer and recombination results in complex phylogenies that may blur the evolutionary history of genes (e.g. keeling and palmer, 2001; rest and mindell, 2003) , especially since horizontal transfer and recombination are often associated processes.despite the limitations imposed on inference of historical host association by the restricted sampling of hosts and coronaviruses to date, some preliminary observations can be made. coronaviruses have been shown to be particularly host specific (lai, 1990; sturman and holmes, 1983) and it had been assumed by some that they coevolved (diversified in tandem) with their hosts (decimo et al., 1993) . however, based on current sampling and analyses summarized in fig. 3 , some host switching events are implicated in accounting for incongruence between the host and coronavirus phylogenies. for example, chicken and turkey are sister taxa within the host phylogeny, yet isolates from each do not form host-specific monophyletic groups. rather, some isolates from chicken are most closely related to turkey isolates, suggesting host-shifts for coronaviruses between these two bird species (fig. 3) . a third avian species, the manx shearwater (puffinus puffinus) is the host to a group 2 coronavirus (kirkwood et al., 1995) , which are otherwise known only from mammals. the phylogenetically nested position of this avian coronavirus within mammalian-host isolates suggests a possible bird-mammal host-shift. coronavirus host-shifts between mouse and rat are implicated in the same manner as for chicken and turkey; isolates from the two rodent species are not reciprocally monophyletic. similarly, isolates from pig are not monophyletic, including two group 1 and one group 2 coronavirus in fig. 3 . with the outbreak of sars, coronavirus isolates from humans are also non-monophyletic.using an earlier and more limited sampling of host species (n = 6) and coronaviruses (n = 9), decimo et al. (1993) suggested a host-shift between cats and pigs. inclusion of additional host and virus sampling in fig. 3 , including two iso-lates from dogs, implicates potential host-shift between dogs and pigs, rather than cats and pigs. this demonstrates sensitivity to sampling, although the implication of host-shifting as a phenomenon remains. the emerging picture of coronavirus host associations is increasingly indicative of host-shifts. this is supported in fig. 3 by the observations mentioned above as well as (1) the sister relationship between human coronavirus 229e and porcine (pig) epidemic diarrhea virus and (2) non-monophyly for human coronavirus 229e and sars-cov. further, according to statistical tests in treefitter, allowing host-shifts to occur results in significant fit while duplication, codivergence and sorting play no detectable role. depending on the assigned costs, treefitter estimates between 9 and 15 host-shifts in reconciling the host and coronavirus phylogenies shown in fig. 3 , though the actual number is unknown. in light of the genomic disparity among diverse coronaviruses from some individual host-species (e.g. humans, pigs), it seems unlikely that increased sampling of coronaviruses will yield monophyly for all isolates from each of the individual host-species in fig. 3 .the finding of recombination for sars-cov rdrp, the relatively early phylogenetic divergence for rdrp fragments (prior to the most recent divergences within coronavirus groups 1-3), as well as the inference of multiple coronavirus hosts switches, suggests that sars-cov belongs to an old, potentially diverse, and changeable coronavirus lineage that remains to be discovered in its natural hosts. demonstration of recombination in the sars associated coronavirus lineage indicates its potential for rapid unpredictable change, a potentially important challenge for public health management and for drug and vaccine development. the known non-human coronaviruses come from only nine, mostly domestic, mammal or bird species, and searches for the zoonotic reservoir might reasonably focus on other species, including non-domesticated animals, that are used as food for humans in the geographic region of the sars outbreak.in 2002, a new infectious disease was found in the southern part of china which had high mortality and morbidity and was termed ''severe acute respiratory syndrome'' (sars). it affected 8096 people and led 774 patients to death around the world, within a very short span of time [1] . several studies have shown that sars is caused by a new member of the coronavirus family. the sars coronavirus (sars-cov) was supposed to be transmitted from wild animals [2] [3] [4] . this hypothesis was then supported by the identification of a sars-cov-like virus in civet cats, sold in markets in south china. this isolate had more than 99% sequence identity with sars-cov, indicating that the virus was recently transferred from animals to human beings [5] . however, according to a recent report there is no direct evidence that the civet cat virus is the origin of the sars-cov [6] . although unlikely, the possibility that sars-cov positive animals were infected from humans cannot be formally excluded, and it was indeed reported that sars-cov was transmitted from man to pig [7] . the mechanism how the pathogen broke the barrier between its natural reservoir and man is still unclear [8] .after the first sars epidemic, there were three incidences of laboratory infections in singapore, taiwan and beijing [9] [10] [11] . furthermore, in guangdong, china, sars patients were observed to suffer from ''mild clinical symptoms'' [12] . it is therefore important to further explore the characteristics of the sars-cov genome and trace the source of the epidemic.there were several studies on sars-cov phylogeny and genotyping published immediately after sars was identified. according to 4 polymorphism sites, ruan et al. [13] first genotyped 14 previously published sars-cov genomes at the beginning of may, 2003. subsequently, li et al. [14] proposed genotypes of c and t in 17 sars-cov genomes based on 5 polymorphism sites. regional and international transmission types were also proposed [15, 16] . sars-cov su-10 and cuhk-w1 were genotyped into two different groups even though they were all isolated in hongkong [17] . based on the 7 loci of 44 sars-cov genomes, c and t genotypes were further modified and named as the yexin and xiaohong genotypes [18] . according to 5 polymorphism sites, 63 sars-cov genomes were divided into early, middle and late phase genotype groups [19] . the polymorphism sites analyzed in these papers were almost the same.three successful examples have been reported where infection chains have been traced by comparing variations in sars-cov genomes. the first sars-cov laboratory infection incidence was confirmed by identifying 13 variant loci in the sars-cov genomes [9] . secondly, it was found that the sars-cov isolated from the patient with ''mild clinical symptoms'' and the sars-cov (or sars-cov-like virus) isolated from animals resembled each other in the sequence encoding the spike protein [19] . this study indicates that virus-carrying animals may be a risk for the investigator. thirdly, sequence analysis confirmed the laboratory infection of a technician who was working with sars-cov [20] .up to date, there are already 295 complete or partial sars-cov genome sequences available in genbank. a new method of genotyping is proposed in this study. the results show that all sars-cov genomes are clustered into three groups and that sars-cov genomes in the second group belong to genotypes c and t. these two genotypes can be further divided into 8 sub-genotypes. in this study we also analyzed the sars death rate, sars-cov origin, and population genetics.sars-cov zj01 (accession no. ay297028) was isolated in zhejiang province, china [14] . other sars-cov genome sequences were downloaded from ncbi genbank database. two hundred and ninety-five complete or partial sars-cov genomes were searched. after removing shorter and repeated records, 101 complete genomes and 44 partial genome sequences were collected for final analysis (by september 20, 2004) . the detailed information of sequences of the earliest 20 records in genbank is shown in table 1 and the other sequences are listed in table s1 (supplementary materials). the newest information about domestic and international sars fatality rates were downloaded from health ministry of china (http:// 168.160.224.167/) and who websites (http://www.who.int/csr/sars/ country/table2004_04_21/en/).the analysis platform was pc server based on p4 ultra thread technological cpu and the operating system was windows xp. clu-stalw version 1.83 was used for multiple sequence alignments. tree-view (win32) version 1.6.6 and mega 2.0 were used to draw phylogenetic tree. dnasp 4.0 was used to analyze single nucleoside polymorphism. the sars-cov sequences were arrayed with clu-stalw program, and alignment was further manually examined and adjusted. only those variant sequence loci that were present in at least two independent sequences were selected for further analyses [13, 18, 19] . deletion and insertion in sars-cov genomes and the neutral mutation in the spike protein gene, etc., were also estimated. the latest version (nc_004718) of the first submitted sars-cov genome sequence (sars-cov tor2, ay274119) was used as the control reference.3.1. the distribution of single nucleotide polymorphism loci of sars-cov genome eight hundred and seventy-six mutation loci were identified among the 145 complete or partial sars-cov genomes (the over all mutation rate was 2.94%, 876/29 751), of which 174 loci were identified in more than two genome sequences. to avoid errors that might be introduced by sequencing and cell culture passages, only the latter group of 174 loci was analyzed. different characteristics of the polymorphism sites were found. the loci related to t mutation accounted for 60.9% (106/174), and c, a and g mutation loci accounted for 39.6% (69/174), 39.0% (68/174) and 27.0% (47/174), respectively. it was obvious that t mutation had the priority. most of the loci, except for 7 sites, were limited to one pair of nucleotide variations. one hundred and twenty loci were transition mutations (78 ct, 42 ag), and 48 loci were transversion mutations. the ratio of transition mutations to transversion mutations was 2.5 (120/48), and 6 loci were of deletion mutation.the sequence deletion in sars-cov genome mainly occurred in the regions between sars7a to n protein by losing key mutation loci are shown in table 3 (identified by using nucleotide-nucleotide blast program at nebi and clustalw 1.83), and the phylogenetic tree of 174 loci ( fig. 1) showed that, according to the polymorphism sites of c9404t, c9479t, g17564t, g19838a, a21721g, c22222t, g22517a, g23823t, t27243c and c27827t, the sars-cov genomes of the first epidemic can be divided into two genotypes, genotype c and t. the characteristic of the genotype c was that the genomes had at least one position with the same nucleotide as 10 loci listed above (c:c:g:g:a:c:g:g:t:c). these genomes included gd01, zs-c, cuhk-w1, bj01, bj302-1 and gz-c, etc. the characteristic of the genotype t was that the genomes must have all the 10 nucleotides of t:t:t:a:g:t:a:t:c:t. this genotype included gz-b, zj01, sin2679, urbani, tc1, cuhk-ag01, sino1-11, tor2 and as, etc. these polymorphism sites were located in 5 different regions of the replicase 1a, 1b, spike protein gene, sars6 and sars8a. except the 4th and the 7th loci that were synonymous mutations, the others were non-synonymous mutations with amino acid changes of a/v, a/v, e/d, g/d, t/i, d/y, p/l and r/c, respectively. it revealed the strongly biased characteristic of changes in genotypes associated with changes in phenotypes. genotype c can be further divided into 4 sub-genotypes. sub-genotype c1 had, besides the 10 sites mentioned above (table 3) , c3626t, c8559t, t22207c and g22522a loci that would distinguish them from the others. in the same way, sub-genotype c2 had g3962a, g9448t and t19882c and sub-genotype c4 had t9854c site. as shown in fig. 1 , the sub-genotype c3 is a transitional one. genotype t could also be divided into 4 subgenotypes, sub-genotype t1, t2, t3 and t4. besides the 10 common polymorphism sites shown above, they had 3, 4, 4 and 3 variant loci, respectively (table 3) . zj01, hsr1 and sin2679, belonging to genotype t and with more polymorphism sites identified in their genomes, located in the midst of the phylogenetic tree ( fig. 1 ) and were not sub-genotyped in this paper (table 3) . only some genomes in both sub-types c1 and c2 had the 29 nt fragments. sars-cov genomes in sub-type t3 lacked a region of 415 nt (fig. 1 , table 2 ).to verify the genotyping results of the 174 loci shown above, we reconstructed the phylogenetic trees of 122 spike protein genes and 101 complete genomes ( fig. 2a and b) . as can be seen in fig. 2a , most sars-cov were clustered in accordance with their genotypes. some partial genome sequences were situated in this tree, such as cuhk-l2, sz1, gz43, hsz-a, gd03t0013, bj302-1, hku-65806 and ly, could not be properly located in the phylogenetic tree based on 174 loci. the genomes of gz-c and qxc1 showed intercrossing features between genotype c and t. some sub-genotypes, such as c1, c2, t2 and t3, were easily recognized in the spike protein gene tree, but some subgenotypes were intercrossed. in the phylogenetic tree of complete genomes, the clusters of genotype c and t and 8 table 2 the sub-types are obvious (fig. 2b) . one of the reasons for this might be that the spike protein genes were less informative than the complete genomes.3.5. the evolutionary relationship among gd03t0013, the animal source viruses and the first epidemic sars-covs fig. 3 shows that the genetic distance of recent sars-cov genome of gd03t0013 was closer to the first epidemic sars-cov gz02 than to the animal-origin sars-cov sz3.among the genotypes and the groups the genetic characteristics of the genotypes were further analyzed based on the sequence polymorphism of the spike protein genes ( table 4 ). the p a /p s value was 1.047 for the polymorphism sites among the genomes of genotype c that showed neutrality or fine selection. in genotype t, nonsynonymous mutation loci decreased, and the p a /p s value was 0.230 (p < 0.05, with significant differences between the genomes), which showed negative selection in this genotype. the p s % value of synonymous mutation, which was less influenced by the general environment selection, had no significance between the two genotypes. the p s % value was one of the characteristic indices identifying the genetic relationship of the populations, and the p s % value of group 2 (c + t) was approximately half of that of the group 1 (animal source viruses, table 4 ). the animal source viruses (sars-cov sz1, sz3, sz13 and sz16) also showed negative selection among themselves.according to the phylogenetic trees based on the different data sets described above, the genetic diversities between any pair of 3 groups (the animal source viruses, the first epidemic viruses including c and t genotypes, and gd03t0013) were evaluated. the k a /k s values of each two groups were all greater than 1, showing positive darwinian selections between these groups. on the other hand, the k a /k s values between genotype c and zs-b (one of the first epidemic viruses and the closest to the animal origin viruses) or between genotype t and zs-b were all less than 1 (figs. 1 and 2a, table 4 ).all analyses described above indicated that the animal source virus and gd03t0013 virus could be classified as two relatively independent populations. 145 sars-cov genome sequences could be classified into three groups, and the group 2 could further be divided into two genotypes and eight subgenotypes (fig. 4) .based on the new concept of dividing all the 145 sars-cov genome sequences into three groups, the origin of group 2 and group 3 (assuming group 1 as outer source group) was estimated. eight candidates including four animal origin genomes of group 1 identified in april to may, 2003, three early genomes of hgz8l1-a, zs-b and gz02 in sub-genotype c1 of group 2 in january to february, 2003, and the genome of gd03t0013 of group 3 in december, 2003, were selected to analyze the date when their most recent common ancestor was existed. based on analysis of the diversities of spike protein genes, the synonymous mutation rate k s between group 1 and 2 was 0.00321 ± 0.00135, and the synonymous mutation rate k s between group 1 and 3 was 0.00509 ± 0.00199. assuming that the synonymous mutation rate was constant, a linear regression analysis was evaluated. the linear equation of k s and occurrence time t is k s = 0.000171t + 0.00321 (from january, 2003, with one month intervals), and the date for the most recent common ancestor was esti- tc2  tc3  tc1  tw10  tw11  twk  tws  twy  tw9  cuhk-ag03  twc3  cuhk-ag01  tw8  gd69  cuhk-ag02  tw6  twc2  twh  tw7  twj  sino3-11  pumc02  cuhk-su10  tw5  lc1  pumc01  sino1-11  pumc03  urbani  hsr1  tw3  tw4  tw1  tw2 lc3hku information about sars fatality rate and genotypes from all regions are shown in table 5 . comparing sars fatality rates of different regions, it was found that sars-cov genomes of genotype t had the highest case fatality rate.several studies on sars-cov genome genotyping and grouping have been published [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] . some presented the regional and international transmission types according to the epidemic regions and some divided the viruses into early, middle, and late phase groups according to the time of the sars epidemic in a certain region (guangdong of china). based on genome characteristics of 145 sars-covs, a new concept of three groups, two genotypes and eight subtypes was established. the genotype c of group 2 in this work was almost compatible with the regional transmission type and the early, middle phase groups, while genotype t of group 2 was compatible with the international transmission type and the late phase group as well [16, 19] . one of the advantages of the new classification is that it fits global and regional epidemic feature analysis, such as for sars-covs in taiwan and singapore. up to date, all the genomes from clinical samples in the early, middle, and late phase of the sars epidemic in these regions belonged to genotype t. the concept of dividing all sars-covs into three groups was mainly based on the phylogenetic analysis and the positive darwinian selection. because of the limited virus number in group 1 and 3, this grouping has to be further confirmed.the source of sars-covs was traced. it was clear that genotype t was derived from genotype c [14, 18, 19] . the origins of each sub-genotype were also elucidated [22] [23] [24] and are consistent with our results. but the origin of the sars-cov remains a question and needs further investigation. zhao et al. [25] analyzed 16 sars-cov genomes and proposed that the closest common ancestor might have existed during the spring of 2002 which is consistent with the date, may 2002, estimated by the spike gene synonymous mutation rate of the three groups in this work. it is very probable that the three groups originated from an unknown common ancestor.the genotype classification of sars-cov plays an important role in tracing and controlling sars prevalence. according to genome sequence variation analysis, genotype shifts of sars-covs in the main epidemic regions during the first epidemic were obvious. the sub-genotypes c1 and c2, that have a closer relationship to the virus of animal origin, first appeared in guangdong, and then appeared the sub-genotype c3. the dominant viruses in hongkong were of genotype t, but genotype c also appeared there. similarly, although sub-genotype c4 dominated in beijing, genotype t also existed there. in singapore, they had all the genomes of genotypes t, mostly of sub-genotypes t1 and t2. the viruses in taiwan were all of genotype t, mostly of sub-genotype t4. with more sars-cov genome sequences and more complete epidemiological data released, the characteristics of the sars-covõs variations in the genotypes, as well as the features about the epidemic phases, the epidemic regions, the clinical symptoms, and the virusesõ adaptation to the human host, will become clearer and clearer.the genotype was apparently correlated with virulence of the sars-cov. sars-cov gd03t0013 was from the patient with ''mild clinical symptoms'', and its genome sequence was similar to that of the sub-genotype c1. experiments have also demonstrated that sars-covs of the genotype t had a stronger ability to cause cyto-pathogenic effects (cpe) than those of the genotype c. the cpe of the genotype t remained stable during passages in cell cultures [26] . in the first epidemic, sars patients in guangzhou seldom suffered from diarrhea, and the sars-cov genomes were mainly of the genotype c [27] . the majority of sars patients in hongkong, however, suffered from diarrhea and it turned out that sars-covs of the genotype t dominated [28] . sars-covs of different genotypes might have different virulence. moreover, the serum from mice immunized with inactivated sars-cov bj01 of genotype c is able to neutralize the invasiveness of sars-cov bj01 itself into vero cells [29] . further investigations are required to demonstrate whether this serum could prevent the cells from the invasiveness of the sars-cov pumc01 or others of the genotype t.if, in the future, a sars-cov epidemic appears again, after rounds of random mutations, it might cause slight clinical symptoms at the initial stage of the infection. through positive darwinian selection, a virus with greater virulence might cause more severe clinical symptoms. a period of neu- table 4 polymorphism and diversity analysis of the spike gene among the genotypes and the groups 5327  349  7  42  11  beijing  2521  193  8  14  5  guangdong  1512  58  4  26  3  shanghai  8  2  25  2  1  zhejiang  4  1  25  0  1  hubei  7  1  14  0  1  hong kong  1755  299  17  3  12  singapore  238  33  14  0  24  taiwan  346  37  11  0  22  canada  251  43  17  0  1  germany  9  0  0  0  2  italy  4  0  0  0  2  russian  1  0  0  0  1  thailand  9  2  22  0  1  other  156  11  7  0  0  total  8096  774  10  45  76 ily coronavirinae) infect a wide range of vertebrates and cause respiratory, enteric, or less frequently, neurological diseases (1, 2) . coronaviruses were originally divided into three groups based on their antigenic cross-reactivities and nucleotide sequences (3) . they have been recently reclassified by the international committee on taxonomy of viruses into 3 genera, designated alphacoronavirus (former group 1), betacoronavirus (former group 2), and gammacoronavirus (former group 3) (4). whereas the alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses are associated with diseases of mammals, including humans, the gammacoronaviruses are implicated chiefly in diseases of birds. interest in coronaviruses was largely focused on their impact on domestic porcine and avian husbandry and their utility in animal models of virus-induced demyelination (5) until the emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in 2003 (6) . thereafter, with recognition of the causative agent sars coronavirus (sars-cov) (7) (8) (9) (10) and of the presence of sars-cov-like viruses in chinese horseshoe bats (rhinolophus spp.) (11) , efforts to explore the genetic diversity of coronaviruses and their host range intensified (12) .bats are suggested to be important reservoir hosts of many zoonotic viruses with significant impact on human and animal health, including lyssaviruses, henipaviruses, filoviruses, and coronaviruses (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) . viruses of bats may be transmitted to humans directly through bites or via exposure to saliva, fecal aerosols, or infected tissues as well as indirectly through contact with infected intermediate hosts, such as swine (18) . in the course of a project focused on pathogen discovery in situations where human-bat contact might facilitate more efficient interspecies transmission of emerging viruses, we surveyed bats in nigeria. through consensus pcr (cpcr) and unbiased high-throughput pyrosequencing (uhts) of bat tissue samples, we identified a coronavirus that is most closely related to the genus betacoronavirus (subgroup 2b), which includes sars-cov and sars-covlike viruses. however, the genomic organization of this coronavirus, obtained from a commerson's leaf-nosed bat (hipposideros commersoni), is unique in that it is comprised of three overlapping open reading frames (orfs) between the m and n genes and two conserved stem-loop ii motifs (s2m). based on these observations and phylogenetic analyses, we propose that this new member of the family coronaviridae, tentatively named zaria bat coronavirus (zbcov) after the city near to where the bat was captured, represents a new subgroup of group 2 covs.total rna extracts from gastrointestinal tract (git) specimens obtained from 33 bats of 6 different species (eidolon helvum, hipposideros com-mersoni, pipistrellus sp., rousettus aegyptiacus, scotophilus nigrita, and scotophilus leucogaster) captured at 2 different sites from a roost inside a cave in nigeria (fig. 1a) were screened for the presence of coronaviruses by consensus pcrs of a 400-nucleotide (nt) fragment of the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) gene. one specimen obtained from a commerson's leaf-nosed bat (fig. 1b) yielded products that shared no more than 70% nt identity to any known coronavirus. rna from zbcov was submitted for uhts, resulting in a library comprising 74,133 sequence reads. alignment of unique singleton and assembled contiguous sequences to the genbank database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih .gov/) using the basic local alignment search tool (blastn and blastx) (19) indicated coverage of approximately 6,500 nt of sequence distributed along coronavirus genome scaffolds and homology to regions of replicase, spike (s), and nucleocapsid (n) sequences.genome organization and coding potential of zbcov. the additional genomic sequence of zbcov was determined by filling in gaps between uths reads, applying consensus pcrs, and 3= and 5= rapid amplification of cdna ends (race). overlapping primer sets based on the draft genome were synthesized to facilitate sequence validation by conventional dideoxy sequencing. due to exhaustion of the sample, we were unable to completely sequence the open reading frame 1ab (orf 1ab) region ( fig. 2a ).zbcov has a genome organization similar to that of other coronaviruses, with the following characteristic gene order: the orf 1ab, spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m), and nucleocapsid (n) genes are shown in gray arrows, whereas putative accessory genes orf 3, orf 6, orf 7, and orf 8 are indicated as 3, 6, 7, and 8 and illustrated by green arrows. the following conserved functional domains in orf 1ab are represented in boxes: papain-like protease (pl), 3c-like protease (3cl), rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), metal ion-binding domain (mb), and helicase (hel). the two regions in orf 1ab where sequences are incomplete are indicated by black lines. (b) expanded diagram of the 3= region of the zbcov genome in comparison to representative covs from subgroup 2b. trs motifs and s2m are represented by black arrowheads and vertical lines, respectively. 5=-replicase orf 1ab-spike (s)-envelope (e)-membrane (m)nucleocapsid (n)-3=. both the 5= and 3= ends contain short untranslated regions of 297 nt and 363 nt, respectively. the conserved putative transcription regulatory sequence (trs) motif 5=-acgaac-3= identified in subgroup 2b, 2c, and 2d viruses (2) is present in zbcov at the 3= end of the leader sequence and upstream of potential initiating methionine residues of each orf except orf 6 ( table 1) .all domains within replicase polyproteins of coronaviruses that are implicated in viral replication are found in zbcov, including the papain-like protease (pl pro ), 3c-like protease (3cl pro ), rnadependent rna polymerase (rdrp), and helicase (hel) domains ( fig. 2a ). orfs consistent with the s, e, m, and n proteins present in all other coronaviruses are also present in zbcov (table 1 ; fig. 2 ). pairwise identity (i) and similarity (s) comparisons of a deduced amino acid sequence of zbcov to that of representative coronaviruses in other groups showed that the predicted proteins of zbcov are more similar to those of subgroup 2b covs than to those of other subgroups, with hel and rdrp having the highest homologies (hel: i, 80%; s, 90%; rdrp: i, 74%; s, 85%) and the s protein having the lowest (i, 36 to 38%; s, 50 to 53%) (http://cait .cumc.columbia.edu:88/dept/greeneidlab/identificationofasars -coronavirus-likevirusinaleaf-nosedbatinnigeria.html).the putative spike (s) protein of zbcov, comprising 1,299 amino acids (aa) in length, is slightly larger than those of other subgroup 2b covs (see table s8 in the supplemental material). zbcov showed the highest amino acid conservation to human and civet sars-cov (i, 38%; s, 53%) (http://cait.cumc.columbia .edu:88/dept/greeneidlab/identificationofasars-coronavirus -likevirusinaleaf-nosedbatinnigeria.html). pfam (20) analysis identified a spike receptor binding domain (pf09408) that corresponds to the immunogenic receptor binding domain that binds to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) and the coronavirus s1 (pf01600) and s2 (pf01601) spike glycoprotein domains. transmembrane region prediction (tmhmm 2.0) (21) revealed a long ectodomain (aa 1 to 1240), a transmembrane domain near the c-terminal end (aa 1241 to 1263), and a short cytoplasmic tail (aa 1264 to 1298). a predicted signal peptide (signalp 3.0) (p ϭ 1) (22) was identified with a cleavage site (p ϭ 0.768) between residues a 16 and a 17 . netnglyc 1.0 identified 25 putative n-linked glycosylation sites. the s protein of zbcov displays major sequence differences compared to that of subgroup 2b covs, especially in the s1 domain involved in receptor binding. the critical residues suggested to be important for the cleavage of the sars-cov s protein are present in the s protein of zbcov (23-25) (see fig. s1a in the supplemental material). motifs at the carboxyl terminus of the s protein that are conserved among coronaviruses are also found in the zbcov s protein, including the conserved motif y(x)kwpw(y/w)(v/i)wl present as y 1237 ekwpwyiwl and the cysteine-rich cytoplasmic tail (10) (see fig. s1b in the supplemental material).in addition to the five genes present in all genomes, coronaviruses also have several group-specific genes between the s gene and the 3= end of the genome that encode accessory proteins ( fig. 2) (26, 27) .an orf (orf 3) encoding a putative 250-aa protein was observed between the s and e proteins of zbcov (table 1) . orf 3 corresponds to the genomic position of orf 3a in subgroup 2b covs. similar to subgroup 2b covs, orf 3 is the largest accessory gene of zbcov and is 75 nt shorter than orf 3a of subgroup 2b covs (see table s8 in the supplemental material). orf 3 shows 21 to 23% aa identity and 31 to 35% aa similarity to the orf 3a protein of subgroup 2b covs (see table s9 in the supplemental material). pfam analysis showed a relationship with pf11289, a viral family protein of an unknown function; tmhmm analysis predicts the presence of 4 transmembrane regions, spanning residues p 43 to l 65 , a 72 to e 94 , v 99 to l 121 , and y 196 to v 218 . netoglyc 3.1 predicted two potential o glycosylation sites in zbcov. orf 3 contains only a portion of the cysteine-rich domain identified in the orf 3a protein of sars-cov; however, the cysteine potentially involved in orf 3a protein polymerization (28) is present in orf 3. no signal peptide, yxx⌽, or diacidic motifs were identified in orf 3 of zbcov (29) .zbcov has a set of orfs located between the m and n genes that are not shared by any of the known coronaviruses. these orfs, orf 6, orf 7, and orf 8, encode predicted proteins of 49, 79, and 218 aa, respectively (table 1) . a trs was identified upstream of orf 7 and orf 8 but not orf 6. orf 6 overlaps with the m gene at the 3= end by 101 nt, orf 7 overlaps with orf 6 by 31 nt, and orf 8 overlaps with orf 7 and the n gene by 83 and 35 nt, respectively. blastx and pfam analyses of orf 6, orf 7, and orf 8 revealed no significant similarities or functional domains. pfam analysis of orf 7 indicated nonsignificant associations to the pra1 (prenylated rab acceptor 1) proteins (pf03208) (e value ϭ 0.02) and the 7 transmembrane g-protein-coupled-receptor protein families (pf10323) (e value ϭ 0.025). tmhmm analysis of orf 7 suggested the presence of a transmembrane region between residues l 10 and i 32 . no signal peptide was predicted.tmhmm and signalp analyses of orf 6 indicated no transmembrane region or signal peptide. tmhmm analysis of orf 8 predicted 2 transmembrane regions, and a third transmembrane region located downstream was predicted by tmpred (30) . sig-nalp revealed a signal peptide (p ϭ 0.988) with a putative cleaved signal sequence (p ϭ 0.804) between residues g 29 and a 30 .at only 788 nt, the region in zbcov between the m and n genes is significantly shorter than those observed for subgroup 2b covs (see table s8 in the supplemental material). alignment of the region between the m and n genes of zbcov with those of subgroup 2b covs indicated large deletions in zbcov (see fig. s2 in the supplemental material).another distinctive genomic feature of zbcov is the presence downstream from the n gene of two conserved motifs corresponding to the conserved stem-loop ii motif (s2m) (31) . a unique s2m is observed in coronaviruses from subgroups 2b, 3a, and 3c and in astroviruses and in the picornavirus equine rhinitis . s3b ). the s2m of zbcov are almost identical in sequence and are separated by 19 nt (see fig. s3b ). mfold prediction (34) of rna secondary structure indicated that both s2m fold into rna stem-loop motifs (see fig. s3c ). phylogenetic analyses. phylogenetic trees constructed from 3cl pro , rdrp, hel, s, m and n amino acid sequences of zbcov and representative coronaviruses show that zbcov is most closely related to but distinct from the subgroup 2b covs, which include sars-cov and sars-cov-like viruses (fig. 3) . this finding is in accord with results obtained from pairwise amino acid comparisons of zbcov and other coronaviruses (http://cait .cumc.columbia.edu:88/dept/greeneidlab/identificationofasars -coronavirus-likevirusinaleaf-nosedbatinnigeria.html). to further define the phylogenetic position of zbcov, an additional phylogeny was constructed using a conserved 659-nt sequence of rdrp, and the time to the most recent common ancestor (tmrca) between zbcov and related coronaviruses was estimated. based on the best-fit model (srd06 with informative rate prior), the results of this analysis indicated that zbcov is most closely related to ghanabt-cov, a recently identified coronavirus found in bats in ghana (35) (fig. 4) . furthermore, zbcov and ghanabt-cov together form a well-supported clade distinct from that of the subgroup 2b covs. the tmrca between zbcov and ghanabt-cov was estimated at 1,417 years before present (ybp) (95% highest population density [hpd] ϭ 267 to 3,061 ybp). the tmrca between the zbcov/ ghanabt-cov clade and subgroup 2b covs was estimated at 3,047 ybp (95% hpd ϭ 714 to 6,205 ybp), whereas the tmrca between sars-covs and sars-cov-like viruses was only 515 ybp (95% hpd ϭ 132 to 1,067 ybp). estimates of the tmrcas between subgroup 2b covs and the rest of the coronavirus groups are not provided due to the potential for nucleotide site saturation at deeper phylogenetic levels to artificially create too recent tmrca estimates.whereas the mean pairwise nucleotide similarity of the partial rdrp gene region was 85% (standard deviation [sd] ϭ 9.75) within coronavirus subgroups (excluding zbcov/ghanabt-cov), the mean pairwise similarity between coronavirus subgroups was 66% (sd ϭ 5.14) (see fig. s4 in the supplemental material). based on the results of the mann-whitney u test, these distributions are statistically different (p ͻ 0.0001). additionally, whereas the mean pairwise similarity within the clade zbcov/ ghanabt-cov was 85% (sd ϭ 9.01), the pairwise similarity between the clade zbcov/ghanabt-cov and subgroup 2b covs was only 73% (sd ϭ 0.84). based on the results of the mann-whitney u test, these distributions are statistically different (p ϭ 0.0092). together, these findings indicate that the clade containing zbcov and ghanabt-cov should be considered a separate subgroup within group 2 covs, distinct from subgroup 2b covs (see fig. s4 in the supplemental material).differences in phylogenetic relationships and genomic organization and the low amino acid similarities of orf 3 and the s protein of zbcov compared to the orf 3a and s proteins of subgroup 2b covs suggest that zbcov represents a new subgroup of coronaviruses within the group 2 covs. although zbcov has features found in subgroup 2b covs, including the trs, a unique pl pro , orfs between the m and n genes, and the presence of the s2m, zbcov forms a unique branch distinct from subgroup 2b covs in all phylogenetic trees analyzed. furthermore, it differs from subgroup 2b covs in that zbcov contains three (versus four to five) orfs between the m and n genes and has two (versus one) s2m.whereas the s proteins of subgroup 2b covs share 78 to 98% aa sequence identity, the s protein of zbcov has only 36 to 38% identity in the deduced amino acid sequence with those of subgroup 2b covs. despite limited primary sequence conservation of the spike protein among zbcov and subgroup 2b covs, particularly in the s1 domain, pfam analyses indicated the presence of a receptor domain that binds to the receptor ace2, the cellular receptor for sars-cov (36) . however, the residues in sars-cov that interact with the human ace2 molecule are not conserved in zbcov, suggesting that human ace2 is not a bona fide receptor for zbcov (37) . orf 3, located between the s and e proteins of zbcov, is slightly shorter than the 3a proteins of subgroup 2b covs and has at most only 22% aa identity to the 3a proteins of subgroup 2b covs. in contrast, the 3a proteins of subgroup 2b covs share 81 to 98% aa identity. orf 3 is predicted to contain four transmembrane domains with extracellular n and c termini. in contrast, orf 3a of sars-cov is predicted to contain three transmembrane domains with extracellular n termini and intracellular c termini (28, 29) . whereas four o glycosylation sites are predicted in the orf 3a protein of sars-cov (38) , only two putative o glycosylation sites were identified in the orf 3 of zbcov. the 3a protein of sars-cov has a cysteine-rich region important for polymerization and ion channel activity (28) , as well as yxx⌽ and diacidic motifs suggested to be involved in the intracellular trafficking (29) . these domains were recently suggested to be important for the proapoptotic function of orf 3a of sars-cov (39). however, orf 3 of zbcov contains only a portion of the cysteine-rich domain and has no yxx⌽ diacidic motifs. in contrast to human and civet sars-cov and bat rf1/2004, there is no orf 3b in zbcov. the 3b protein may function as an interferon antagonist (40) .zbcov contains a unique set of orfs located between the m and n genes. in subgroup 2b covs, orf 6, orf 7, and orf 8 between the m and n genes do not overlap. in contrast, the three orfs between the m and n genes overlap in zbcov. alignment with subgroup 2b covs indicated deletions in zbcov, and as a result, one continuous orf, orf 8, is present in zbcov in place of orfs 7a, 7b, 8, 8a, and 8b of subgroup 2b covs.similar to sars-cov, the putative products of orf 6, orf 7, and orf 8 of zbcov show no sequence homology to other viral proteins. no trs upstream of orf 6 is found, suggesting that if orf 6 encodes a bona fide protein, that protein is likely expressed by the subgenomic rna m. there is precedent in sars-cov for functional bicistronic rnas in the expression of orf 3b, orf 7b, orf 8b, and orf 9b (26, 41) . coronaviruses possess accessory genes, the size and location of which are group specific (2) . by analogy to sars-cov, orf 6, orf 7, and orf 8 of zbcov may encode accessory proteins important for virus-host interactions that may contribute to virulence and pathogenesis (26) . recent studies suggest that the sars-cov accessory proteins 6 and 7b are incorporated into virus particles and that 3a, 7a, and 9b are structural components of the virion (26, 41, 42) . the sars-cov accessory proteins are suggested to have biological functions that include virus release, interferon antagonism, apoptosis induction, and inhibition of cellular protein synthesis (26, 41) .another unique feature of zbcov is the presence of two highly conserved rna sequences (s2m) downstream of the n gene. a single s2m is identified at the 3= end of the genomes of members of several rna virus families, including the coronaviridae and astroviridae, as well as the picornavirus erbv (31) (32) (33) . recent data suggest that the sars-cov s2m rna is a functional molecular mimic of the 530 stem-loop region in small-subunit ribosomal rna, which could facilitate viral hijacking of the host's protein synthesis machinery (43) . the presence of a second s2m in zbcov may further increase the efficiency of this process. interestingly, secondary structures downstream of the n gene, including bulged stem-loop and pseudoknot structures, are also identified in the genomes of subgroup 2a and 2c covs (44, 45) .lagos bat virus (family rhabdoviridae, genus lyssavirus) was initially identified in nigeria in the 1950s. the discovery of zbcov in a bat of the genus hipposideros (family hipposideridae), is the first identification of a coronavirus in wildlife from nigeria. recently, bat coronaviruses closely related to zbcov were isolated from roundleaf bats (hipposideros caffer and hipposideros ruber) in ghana, a country that is close to nigeria (35) . phylogenetic analysis indicates that zbcov and ghanabt-cov form a unique clade that is distinct from those in subgroup 2b covs. however, as the only sequence available for ghanabt-cov is a fragment of the rdrp gene, a comparison of the genome organization between zbcov and ghanabt-cov is not possible. our findings and recent published data, wherein a sars-cov-like virus was found to lack orf 8, suggest that there is considerable diversity in the genome organization of sars-cov-like viruses (46) . sars-cov-like viruses have been isolated from various rhinolophid bats (family rhinolophidae, genus rhinolophus), common insectivorous bats found in africa and eurasia. however, despite extensive studies, no sars-cov-like viruses have been reported in hipposideros sp. bats in china (32) . the rhinolophus species suggested as reservoirs of sars-cov-like viruses are not present in africa. a sequence fragment of a sars-cov-like virus was identified in kenya in bats of the chaerephon genus (family molossidae) (47) , and antibodies reactive with sars-cov antigen have also been detected in the sera of seven different genera of insectivorous and fruit bats sampled in central and southern africa (48) . in concert, these findings suggest that there may be no strict species-specific host restriction of sars-cov-like viruses in african bats.our phylogenetic analysis indicates that the clade containing zbcov and ghanabt-cov occupies an ancestral position to the group 2b covs, which include sars-cov and sars-cov-like viruses. similar to previous estimates, the tmrca of these two clades was estimated at~3,047 ybp (although with large 95% hpds). although sars-cov-like viruses have been identified exclusively in bats in china, a recent sequence fragment (~120 bp) recovered from a kenyan bat was found to occupy a position just outside subgroup 2b and may represent the ancestral african lineage of all subgroup 2b covs (47) . together with the position of the african clade of zbcov/ghanabt-cov relative to subgroup 2b covs, this finding suggests that a migration event from africa to china within the last 100 to 1,000 years may have resulted in the subgroup 2b lineage of covs. indeed, the geographic distribution and the phylogenetic relationships of bat coronaviruses seen both here (fig. 4) and in previous work (35) suggest the presence of multiple independent migration events between africa and asia throughout the history of bat coronaviruses. additional sequence data for the bat coronaviruses identified in kenya along with increased sampling for coronaviruses in africa as well as central and eastern asia will likely be necessary to unveil the timing and origin of this diverse group of coronaviruses.bats are important reservoir hosts of zoonotic viruses with significant impact on human health, including rabies, nipah virus, hendra virus, zaire ebola virus, marburg virus, and sars-cov. the wide genetic diversity that exists among zoonotic viruses in bats may allow an increased emergent potential of interspecies variants that may cause outbreaks of disease in humans and domestic animals. the giant leaf-nosed bat, hipposideros commersoni, is widespread in sub-saharan africa, from gambia to ethiopia, mozambique, and madagascar, but little is known concerning its ecology, population biology, or vector competence. clearly, in order to enhance our knowledge of the diversity and cooccurrence of potential reservoir hosts, it is essential to better understand emerging pathogen dynamics and public health relevance as a means to prevent and control future disease outbreaks.bat sample collection. during june 2008, bats were collected with mist netting in caves and around human dwellings or manually from roost locations near idanre and zaria, nigeria. all bats appeared clinically normal. captured bats were anesthetized by intramuscular inoculation with ketamine hydrochloride (0.05 to 0.1 mg/g of body weight) and euthanized under sedation by intracardiac exsanguination and cervical dislocation. the species of each captured bat was recorded, as well as the sex, forearm and body lengths (in cm), and weight. all samples were initially stored, transported on ice packs, and stored thereafter at ϫ20°c, until shipment on dry ice and final storage at ϫ80°c. no lyssavirus-specific antigens were identified in bat brains by use of direct fluorescent antibody testing.coronavirus consensus pcrs. coronavirus screening was performed by nested pcr, amplifying a 400-nt fragment of the rdrp genes of coronaviruses using consensus primer sequences 5=-cgttggiacw aaybtvccwyticarbtrgg-3= and 5=-ggtcatkatagcrtca vmaswwgcnacnacatg-3= for the first pcr and consensus primer sequences 5=-ggcwccwcchggngarcaatt-3= and 5=-ggwawccccaytgytgwayrtc-3= for the second pcr. primers were designed by multiple alignments of the nucleotide sequences of available rdrp genes of known coronaviruses. reverse transcription was performed using the superscript iii kit (invitrogen, san diego, ca). pcr primers were applied at 0. uhts. total rna obtained from the gastrointestinal tract specimen positive for coronavirus was extracted for uhts. purified rna (0.5 g) was dnase i digested (dna-free; ambion, austin, tx) and reverse transcribed using a superscript ii kit (invitrogen) with random octamer primers linked to an arbitrary, defined 17-mer primer sequence (mwg, huntsville, al). cdna was rnase h treated prior to random amplification by pcr, applying a 9:1 dilution mixture of a primer corresponding to the defined 17-mer sequence and the octamer-linked 17-mer sequence primer, respectively. products of ͼ70 bp were purified (minelute; qiagen) and ligated to linkers for sequencing on a gs flx sequencer (454 life sciences, branford, ct).genome sequencing. pcr primers for amplification across sequence gaps were designed (available upon request) based on the uths data, and the draft genome was sequenced by overlapping pcr products. products were purified (qiaquick pcr purification kit; qiagen) and directly dideoxy sequenced in both directions with abi prism bigdye terminator 1.1 cycle sequencing kits (perkinelmer applied biosystems, foster city, ca). additional methods applied to obtain the genome sequence included additional consensus pcr and 3= and 5= race (invitrogen).phylogenetic and sequence analyses. alignments were constructed using muscle 3.7 (49) and adjusted manually using se-al (50) . maximum likelihood (ml) phylogenetic trees containing representative taxa from each coronavirus genus (n ϭ 31) (fig. 3, legend) were constructed using the subtree pruning and regrafting (spr) method of branch swapping in phyml (51) . phylogenies were constructed using amino acid alignments for the complete proteins of 3cl, hel, m, and n and partial protein alignments for the available rdrp protein sequence and for the s protein after regions with low alignment confidence were removed. in all cases, the whelan and goldman model of amino acid replacement was used (52) , with a gamma distribution of rate heterogeneity. the value of the shape parameter for gamma (␣) was estimated from the data and approximated by six rate categories. the reliability of each branch in all phylogenies was estimated using a bootstrap resampling procedure, with 100 ml replications.to estimate the time to the most recent common ancestor (tmrca) for the taxa contained within subgroup 2b covs and including zbcov, an additional 659-nt alignment of the rdrp gene was constructed and chosen for homology to the gene region sequenced for the coronaviruses most closely related to zbcov (ghanabt-cov). all sequences for which timeof-sampling information was available were included (n ϭ 64). tmrcas were estimated using the bayesian markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) method with the beast package, version 1.5.2 (53) , and both the general time-reversible (gtr) model plus ⌫ distribution and the srd06 model of nucleotide substitution. a relaxed uncorrelated lognormal molecular clock was used, calibrated by the time-stamped sequences, both with and without informative rates prior on the molecular clock of 2.0 ϫ 10 ϫ4 ϯ 0.0009 nt substitutions/site/year (35) . this analysis was run until all parameters converged, with 10% of the mcmc chains discarded as burn-in. statistical confidence in the tmrca estimates is given by the 95% highest probability density (hpd) interval around the marginal posterior parameter mean.the classification of zbcov and ghanabt-cov as a putative new subgroup within group 2 covs was determined by first calculating the percent pairwise nucleotide similarity of the same 659-nt region of rdrp genes between and within the existing subgroups of coronaviruses and then extending this comparison to include the clade zbcov/ghanabt-cov. to verify this approach, a nonparametric mann-whitney u test was used to assess if the pairwise nucleotide similarity within the currently accepted subgroups is different from that between subgroups. this test was then used to determine if the percent pairwise similarity within the clade zbcov/ghanabt-cov is statistically different from that of the most closely related subgroup 2b covs.protein family analysis was performed using pfam (http://pfam.sanger .ac.uk/). predictions of signal peptide cleavage sites, glycosylation sites, and transmembrane domains were performed using respective prediction servers available at the center for biological sequence analysis (http: //www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/ and http://www.ch.embnet.org/software /tmpred_form.html). the percent amino acid sequence identity and similarity were calculated using the needleman algorithm with an eblo-sum62 substitution matrix (gap open/extension penalties of 10/0.1 for nucleotide and amino acid alignments; emboss [54] ), using a perl script to iterate the process for all versus all comparisons. prediction of rna secondary structures was performed with the mfold program (http: //mfold.bioinfo.rpi.edu/).nucleotide sequence accession number. the genbank accession number for the zbcov sequence is hq166910.health (abuja, nigeria); the king and chiefs of the idanre community, ondo state, nigeria, for their helpful comments and assistance with logistics; and i. kuzmin for the photograph of the commerson's leaf-nosed bat. we also thank d. palmer (rabies program, centers for disease control and prevention [cdc], atlanta, ga); robert serge (center for infection and immunity, columbia university, new york, ny) for statistical assistance; and charles h. calisher, colorado state university, and eric brouzes for editorial comments.this work was supported by national institutes of health grants ai051292 and ai57158 (northeast biodefense center; to w. i. lipkin), a national institute of allergy and infectious diseases grant (5r01ai079231-02), a u.s. agency for international development grant (predict grant ghna 0009 0001 000), and an award from the u.s. department of defense.supplemental material for this article may be found at http://mbio.asm.org /lookup/suppl/doi:10.1128/mbio.00208-10/-/dcsupplemental. table s8 , pdf file, 0.036 mb. table s9 , pdf file, 0.027 mb. figure s1 , pdf file, 0.034 mb. figure s2 , pdf file, 0.020 mb. figure s3 , pdf file, 0.140 mb. figure s4 , pdf file, 0.297 mb.sars-cov-2 in guangdong, revealing its early transmission out of hubei and shedding light on the effectiveness of controlling local transmission chains.the outbreak of sars-cov-2 (causing the disease known as covid-19), was initially reported in wuhan city (of hubei province) of china in december 2019, and soon swept across the nation and then over the world within two months, leading to its declaration as a pandemic by world health organisation (who) on 11th march 2020. as of 20th may 2020, the death toll of covid-19 reached 318,789 with a total of nearly five million confirmed cases across all continents [2] . the enormous health and economic impacts caused by this virus, at such an unprecedent speed, has raised considerable public interest, fuelling research on its origin, spread and evolution. genomic data and its analysis have been key tools in studying emerging pathogens as such [3] . the recent identification and genomic characterisation of coronaviruses in bats and pangolins, that are evolutionarily related to human sars-cov-2, have suggested the former could act as the zoonotic origins for the latter [4, 5] . other pressing questions for understanding the ongoing pandemic include identifying means by which sars-cov-2 spread across china and the world from its starting place, and whether the disease control measures effectively suppress the introduced infections against further transmission.several studies using mathematical modelling of the covid-19 incidence and other coronavirus infections have suggested the effectiveness of disease control such as social distancing and city lockdown [6, 7] , but these methods seldom assess individual transmission it is evident in literature that genomic information of pathogens provide valuable empirical information about their transmission histories [2] , such as the identification of transmission chains through phylogenetic analysis of the genome sequences as illustrated in the work done by lu et al. [1] . in addition to revealing the evolutionary process of the pathogen and acting as a proxy of disease transmission history, phylogenetic trees also serve as versatile frameworks for comparative analysis of virus genetics and phenotypes, disease epidemiology and clinical manifestations, and population demography and environment, thus facilitating identification of a possible interplay between these various aspects in disease dynamics ( figure 1 ). there has been active research in the methodology for integrating multidimensional data related to pathogen and disease for statistical inference, especially in j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f structure could be easily distorted by including sequences that carry high number of sequencing errors or mutations introduced over longer passage history in virus culture.another issue is the variable intensity of virus genome sampling in different regions. this has been seen in the sars-cov-2 data set used by lu et al, which has relatively few genomes outside guangdong provinces (e.g. 32 genomes from hubei province which has over 60,000 cases at the time). such undersampling in the regions with high disease incidence could result in phylogenetic analyses that underestimate the virus exportation from these regions to other regions [10] such as guangdong, and hence the extent of local transmission in guangdong might be overestimated [1] . notably, the sars-cov-2 genome data set publicly available at the time of this writing remain highly uneven across different countries. for instance, the gisaid database (https://www.gisaid.org) had only 5 full genome sequences from iran where over 120,000 cases have been reported; in contrast it has about 1,300 genomes from around 7,000 cases reported in australia. therefore, any interpretation in the phylogenetic analysis involving those undersampled regions has to be highly cautious. all these sequence limitations undermine the confidence of the interpretations using phylogenetics, and particularly require a conservative approach to explain the results estimated from the complex phylogenetic models and multidimensional data.with many countries investing their efforts into the genomic surveillance of sars-cov-2, the data sharing on the gisaid public database has now reached 25,995 full genomes with an unprecedent speed. although there is no doubt that the challenges of low phylogenetic resolution and biased sampling will remain, it is anticipated that future research of these sars-cov-2 genomes will take on these challenges with more robust statistical methods and cautious data interpretation, and will potentially provide important insights into sars-cov-2 transmission and evolution within the countries and across the world, to aid more effective control of the disease. shortly after its emergence in southern china in 2002/2003, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) was confirmed to be the cause of sars . there has been a total of 8096 laboratory-confirmed cases of sars, leading to 774 mortalities in 11 countries (world health organization, 2004) . subsequently, sars-related cov (sarsr-cov) was found in palm civets from live animal markets in guangdong province . however, the initial hypothesis that civets may act as animal reservoir of sars-cov was soon overturned by several observations. firstly, sarsr-cov was only detected in civets from the market, but not those in the wild (kan et al., 2005; tu et al., 2004) . secondly, the high ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutation rates (ka/ks ratios) of the spike (s), open reading frame (orf) 3a and non-structural protein (nsp) genes in civet sarsr-covs collected in both the 2003 and the minor 2004 outbreaks suggested that the virus was undergoing rapid evolutionary gene adaptation in civets (song et al., 2005) . thirdly, compared with sars-cov collected from human during the 2003 epidemic, functional changes have been observed in the s protein of civet sarsr-cov and the sars-cov isolated from the 2004 minor outbreak. the latter showed less efficient use of the human angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor (li et al., 2005b) and demonstrated resistance to antibody inhibition (yang et al., 2005) . finally, while significant levels of antibody to sars-cov were detected in 80% of the civets from one animal market in guangzhou, low seroprevalence rates in civets from various civet farms in china suggested that civets were largely brought to the animal market infection-free tu et al., 2004) . the sarsr-cov was likely contracted during later mixing and trading.in view of these observations, we carried out a molecular surveillance study in various mammals in hong kong to hunt for the ultimate source of the virus . among the 127 bats (including 8 bat species), 20 monkeys and 60 rodents surveyed, sarsr-cov was only detected in 39% of the fecal samples of 59 chinese horseshoe bats (rhinolophus sinicus, rs) . western blot analysis showed that antibodies against the nucleocapsid (n) protein of bat sarsr-cov was present in 67% of the serum samples of chinese horseshoe bats, while 8% of the serum of chinese horseshoe bats were tested positive for human sars-cov-neutralizing antibody with titer ≥1:20 . shortly afterward, another independent group also reported the detection of sarsr-cov in chinese horseshoe bats, greater horseshoe bats (rhinolophus ferrumequinum, rf), and big-eared horseshoe bats (rhinolophus macrotis, rm) in hubei and guangxi provinces of china (li et al., 2005a) . in the past few years, sarsr-covs have been isolated from a variety of horseshoe bats in yunnan province of china by several groups (ge et al., 2013; he et al., 2014; hu et al., 2017; lau et al., 2015) .three hundred and thirty nine sarsr-cov genomes have been sequenced from 2003 to 2018. these include 274 genomes from human, 18 from civets and 47 from bats. the human sars-cov and civet sarsr-cov were collected in 2003/2004, while bat sarsr-covs were continuously detected even after the cessation of the sars epidemic. in this article, we review our current understanding of the molecular epidemiology, evolution and, phylogeny of sarsr-covs based on analysis of these 339 genomes.the genome size of the sars-cov varies from 29.0 kb to 30.2 kb. its genome structure follows the characteristic gene order of other known covs: the 5′ two thirds of the genome comprises orf1ab encoding replicase polyproteins, while the 3′ one third consists of genes encoding structural proteins including s, envelope (e), membrane (m), and n proteins (fig. 1 ). both the 5′ and 3′ ends of the sars-cov genome contain short untranslated regions. the translational product of orf1ab is cleaved by proteases encoded by sars-cov itself into 16 nsps, which include major enzymes such as papain-like protease(s) (pl pro ), chymotrypsin-like protease (3cl pro ), rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) and helicase (hel) (fig. 1) . in contrast to the genome of viruses belonging to lineage a betacoronavirus (recently renamed as subgenera embecovirus), haemagglutinin-esterase gene is absent from the genome of sars-cov. in addition, sars-cov contains 6-7 accessory proteins, encoded by orf3a, orf3b, orf6, orf7a, orf7b and orf8 [or orf8a and orf8b as a result of a 29-nucleotide (nt) deletion]. this is unique to lineage b betacoronavirus, a subgenus recently renamed sarbecovirus and contains all sarsr-covs (fig. 2) .studies in the past 15 years have partly revealed the biochemical functions of these accessory proteins (liu et al., 2014) . protein 3a triggers apoptosis and induces the production of proinflammatory cytokines such as rantes (regulated on activation, normal t cell expressed and secreted; also known as c-c motif chemokine ligand 5, ccl5) and cxcl8 (c-x-c motif chemokine ligand 8). protein 3b inhibits type i interferon and also induces apoptosis. protein 6 inhibits interferon signaling and stimulates dna synthesis. protein 7a activates nf-κb (nuclear factor kappa b) and mapk8 (mitogen-activated protein kinase 8) for cxcl8 and rantes production. the function of protein 7b is not well characterized yet. orf8 is present in all sarsr-cov genomes in bats and civets, as well as in sars-covs isolated from human during the early phase of the epidemic. protein 8 activates the atf6 (activating transcription factor 6) branch of unfolded protein response. in the genomes of sars-covs isolated from human during the late phase of the epidemic, there was a signature 29-nt deletion in orf8, splitting it into two separate orfs 8a and 8b. protein 8a includes caspase-dependent apoptosis whereas protein 8b modulates cellular dna synthesis.before the sars epidemic, there were just around 10 covs with complete genome sequences available. these covs were classified into three groups: group 1, group 2 and group 3. in 2011, the coronavirus study group of the international committee for taxonomy of viruses renamed these three groups into three genera: alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, and gammacoronavirus (de groot et al., 2011) . when sars-cov was first discovered in 2003, phylogenetic analysis of the sars-cov genome showed that it occupied a unique position in betacoronavirus, which was subsequently placed into the subgenus sarbecovirus. the traditional betacovs (e.g. mouse hepatitis virus, human cov oc43, bovine cov) were classified as embecovirus (fig. 2) . after the sars epidemic, an unprecedented number of novel covs were discovered (lau et al., 2016; lau et al., 2007; lau et al., 2012a; lau et al., 2012b; lau et al., 2014; woo et al., 2005; woo et al., 2014a; woo et al., 2014b) . this led to the description of lineage c betacoronavirus, which comprises important members such as tylonycteris bat coronavirus hku4, pipistrellus bat coronavirus hku5, hypsugo bat coronavirus hku25 and middle east respiratory syndrome cov lau et al., 2018b; woo et al., 2007; woo et al., 2006a) , and lineage d betacoronavirus (lau et al., 2010b) as well as a novel genus deltacoronavirus (lau et al., 2018a; woo et al., 2012; woo et al., 2017) (fig. 2 ). lineage c and lineage d betacoronavirus were now renamed as subgenera merbecovirus and nobecovirus.since its first discovery in chinese horseshoe bats in 2004 , sarsr-covs have been continuously found in various horseshoe bat species in the last 13 years (drexler et al., 2010; ge et al., 2013; he et al., 2014; hu et al., 2017; lau et al., 2005; lau et al., 2010a; li et al., 2005a; tang et al., 2006; wu et al., 2016; yang et al., 2013; yang et al., 2015; zeng et al., 2016) . this is in contrast to the case for civets and human, where sarsr-covs were only found in 2003/2004, and never reported afterward. for the 47 bat sarsr-cov genomes, 30 are from chinese horseshoe bats, 9 from greater horseshoe bats, 2 from big-eared horseshoe bat, 2 from least horseshoe bat (rhinolophus pusillus, rp), and 1 each from intermediate horseshoe bat (rhinolophus affinis, ra), blasius's horseshoe bat (rhinolophus blasii, rb), stoliczka's asian trident bat (aselliscus stoliczkanus, as) in the neighboring family hipposideridae and wrinkled-lipped free-tailed bat (chaerephon plicata, cp) in the genetically more distant family molossidae. sarsr-covs have also been detected in countries other than china, including thailand, italy, luxembourg, bulgaria, slovenia, hungary, japan, kenya, etc. however, only partial sequences were available for these isolates. nevertheless, the immediate progenitor of sars-cov has not been pinpointed. among the 45 sarsr-cov genomes from bats in china, 11 of them were from hong kong, 2 were from guangdong, 2 from guangxi, 5 from hubei, 20 from yunnan and one each from shaanxi, shanxi, jilin, guizhou, hebei, respectively. overall, it is observed that the sarsr-cov genomes from bats in yunnan possess relatively higher, whereas those from guangdong, jilin, shanxi and hebei possess relatively lower nt identity to those from civets (fig. 3a) . this is an interesting phenomenon since the sars epidemic that emerged in late 2002 was first noticed in guangdong province as an outbreak of acute community-acquired atypical pneumonia syndrome. severe cases were later retrospectively traced back to five cities around guangzhou, with the index case reported in foshan, a city 24 km away from guangzhou. the second case was a chef from heyuan who worked in a restaurant in shenzhen who contacted with wild game-food animals regularly. this mismatch between clinical events and apparent gradient of nt identity could either be due to a missing link during evolutionary adaptation among the sarsr-covs in different provinces or simply as a result of sampling error.the high frequency of homologous rna recombination is one of the major factors contributing to a plastic genome underpinning the evolutionary force in covs. this has resulted in different genotypes or even different covs adapted to new hosts (herrewegh et al., 1998; lau et al., 2011; terada et al., 2014; woo et al., 2006b) . as for sarsr-covs, it is evident from both multiple alignments and phylogenetic analyses that some genes of a particular sarsr-cov from bats may possess higher while other genes possess much lower nt identity to the corresponding genes of sarsr-cov genomes from human/civets, resulting in shifting of phylogenetic position in different phylogenetic trees. this phenomenon is frequently observed in sarsr-covs and likely explains the generation of novel sarsr-covs that could jump from bat to civet and subsequently to human.trimers of s protein form spikes on the surface of covs particles. it comprises two functionally distinct subunits -s1 and s2 domains which are involved in receptor binding and fusion respectively. like other class i viral fusion proteins, the s protein undergoes a series of events including receptor recognition, proteolytic cleavage to shed the s1 subunit and conformational changes in s2 that ultimately lead to fusion of the viral and host membranes. it has been well established that human sars-cov utilizes ace2 as a functional receptor. the receptorbinding motifs in the c-terminal domain of s1 are implicated in receptor recognition. substitutions within the s1 receptor-binding domain (rbd) confers adaptability to new or orthologous entry receptors, thus altering the viral tropism (hulswit et al., 2016) . undoubtedly, the ability to bind human ace2 is an indispensable step in establishing cross-species transmission.as we have previously hypothesized, the five amino acid (a.a.) deletion, twelve a.a. deletion as well as a.a. substitutions at 5 critical residues for binding serve as determining factors for the s protein-ace2 interaction (table 1) . a critical pre-requisite for reliable ace2 utilization is the absence of 5 a.a. and 12 a.a. deletions and, preferably, the presence of at least two out of five human-adapted residues. based on these analyses, sarsr-rs-batcov wiv1 is one of the strains most advantageously conformed genotypically for ace2 utilization. it has been shown to be able to directly infect well-differentiated primary human airway epithelial cell cultures (menachery et al., 2016) . in addition, neutralization assays using convalescent sera from sars-cov infected patients showed robust neutralization against tissue culture infectious dose 50 of wiv1 (ge et al., 2013) .sarsr-rs-batcov rsshc014, a strain discovered in chinese horseshoe bats in 2012, contains two of the five a.a. residues in civet strain civet007 but none of the five human-adapted residues. it retains both the 5 a.a. and 12 a.a. deletion sites. this genotype is shared by sarsr-rs-batcov rs4231 and rs4084. recombinant mouse-adapted sars-cov expressing the s protein of rsshc014 was still able to utilize ace2 for viral entry, causing cytopathic changes in vero cells and weight loss in mice model, despite the apparent failure in pseudovirus infectivity assay (menachery et al., 2015) . however, significantly slower viral replication rate was observed, suggesting that deletions in rbds were more critical in receptor recognition while the presence of ace2adapted critical residues modulated entry efficiency. in contrary to the wiv1 strain, neither neutralizing human monoclonal antibody nor existing double-inactivated whole sars-cov vaccine provided protective effect against infection caused by shc014-harboring recombinant virus strain, indicating key difference in a.a. sequences determining antigenicity (menachery et al., 2015) .a phylogenetic tree was constructed from the rbds of sarsr-covs (fig. 4) . surprisingly, sarsr-ra-batcov lyra11, a strain discovered in intermediate horseshoe bat in baoshan, yunnan (he et al., 2014) , around 375 km from kunming, sits closest to the civet/human sarsr-covs despite its lower overall nt identity. this is likely due to the presence of 7 nt in civet/human sars-cov that is found exclusively in sarsr-ra-batcov lyra11. such a unique s gene in relation to civet/ human sars-cov would therefore challenge the previous hypothesis that the origin of rbd was solely from chinese horseshoe bats in (campanella et al., 2003) . (for interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)summary of the critical elements for ace2 utilization present in the s protein of various sarsr-batcovs. y retained l n t y civet sarsr-cov sz3 1 retained y retained l k s y civet sarsr-cov civet007 1 retained y retained p r s y sarsr-rs-batcov wiv1 2 retained s retained f n n y sarsr-rs-batcov wiv16 1 retained s retained f n n y sarsr-rs-batcov rs4874 1 retained s retained f n n y sarsr-ra-batcov lyra11 2 retained s retained f n n y sarsr-rs-batcov rs7327 2 retained s retained f n n y sarsr-rs-batcov rsshc014 2 retained w retained p r a h sarsr-rs-batcov rs4231 1 retained w retained p r a h sarsr-rs-batcov rs4084 2 retained w retained p r a h sarsr-rs-batcov rs4081 3 deleted s deleted deleted s v y sarsr-rs-batcov rs4075 * - deleted s deleted deleted s p y sarsr-rs-batcov rs4085 * - deleted s deleted g s n y sarsr-rf-batcov rf4092 3 deleted s deleted deleted s v y sarsr-rf-batcov ynlf_31c 3 deleted s deleted deleted s v ysarsr-batcovs that were reported to have slower replication kinetics (menachery et al. 2015) sarsr-batcovs that failed to replicate in cell lines # critical a.a. residues on s protein determining interaction with ace2 * only rbd sequences are available in genbank (caption on next page) h.k.h. luk, et al. infection, genetics and evolution 71 (2019) 21-30 kunming. nevertheless, the s proteins of the majority of bat sarsr-covs found in chinese horseshoe bats in various part of china including yunnan resemble the genotype of sarsr-rs-batcov hku3 but not the human ace2-utilizing genotype of sarsr-rs-batcov wiv1. this raises question on how sarsr-batcovs manage to have two distinct genotypes of s infecting the same host (rs). there is a possibility that two cellular receptors for sarsr-covs are present in chinese horseshoe bats. interestingly, two novel sarsr-rp-batcov strains zxc21 and zc45 isolated from least horseshoe bat in zhoushan, zhejiang province in eastern china were shown to be able to infect suckling rats, causing inflammation in the brain tissue and histological changes in the lung and intestine despite failed viral isolation in veroe6 cells. phylogenetically, these two strains represented a separate clade, lying between the susceptible clade of sarsr-ra-batcov lyra11 and the non-susceptible clade of sarsr-rf-batcov rf1. however, the mechanism of such infectivity in suckling rats was not investigated further, especially in light of the two retained deletion sites in the s genes of zxc21 and zc45, which should have imposed inter-species barrier in terms of receptor specificity based on previous discussion (hu et al., 2018) .among all the horseshoe bats, sarsr-covs are most commonly found in chinese horseshoe bats and greater horseshoe bats. detailed analysis of their genomes revealed several intriguing phenomena. firstly, orf1a and orf1b in sarsr-rf-batcov ynlf_31c isolated from greater horseshoe bats in lufeng, yunnan by our group has the highest nt identity to civet sarsr-cov, especially at the regions nsp5, nsp10, nsp12 and nsp13 (fig. 3a) . this raised the possibility that lufeng, yunnan could be a potential gene pool for the progenitor of orf1 of sars-cov. secondly, as previously illustrated, for most regions along the genome of sarsr-cov except orf8, sarsr-rs-batcovs from chinese horseshoe bats are predominantly closer to civet sarsr-cov. however, the orf8 of sarsr-rf-batcov has higher a.a. identity to civet sarsr-cov orf8. in addition, v90 and i113 are the two rf-specific residues present in the orf8 of sarsr-rf-batcov rf4092, which could evolutionarily bridge the orf8 of sarsr-rf-batcov to sarsr-rs-batcov that had very high identity to civet/human sars-cov (fig. 5) . sars-rf-batcov was thus hypothesized to be the origin of human sars-cov orf8 gene through recombination events.in fact, at least three genotypes of orf8 have been found to circulate in nature (wu et al., 2016) . type i is genetically closest to orf8 of civet sarsr-cov (96.2-98.1% nt identity). there are eleven such strains isolated from bats so far, with eight of them originating from chinese horseshoe bats and three from greater horseshoe bats. type ii orf8 has lower (70.8-82.8%) nt identity to orf8 of civet sarsr-cov. it is prevalent only in sarsr-rf-batcov and demonstrates genetic stability regardless of geographical distribution with similar orf8s detected in korea, shanxi, hubei, and hebei. sarsr-rs-batcov has not been found to process type ii orf8. yet another strain, the sarsr-rp-batcov f46 isolated from least horseshoe bats, processes an orf8 with a phylogenetic position right between type i and type ii orf8s with 93.2% nt identity to civet sarsr-cov, further complicating the analysis (fig. 6) . the rest of the orf8 genes from sequenced sarsr-batcov strains belong to type iii. these type iii orf8 genes possess 53.9-57.7% fig. 4 . phylogenetic tree constructed based on the nt sequences of the rbd of the s protein of sars-covs and sarsr-cov. sarsr-rf-batcovs are labeled with dots. brackets in red, orange, yellow and blue represented the descending order of nt identity with respect to civet sarsr-cov sz16. the phylogenetic tree was constructed by maximum likelihood method with t92 + g as the substitution model by mega 6.0. the test of phylogeny was statistically supported by the bootstraps value calculated from 1000 trees. (for interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) (caption on next page) h.k.h. luk, et al. infection, genetics and evolution 71 (2019) 21-30 nt identity to the orf8 of civet sarsr-cov and have the greatest genetic distance observed over the whole genome of sarsr-cov (fig. 3b ). they are detected across a wide range of bat species including r. sinicus, r. macrotis, r. pusillus, r. affinis, a. stoliczkanus and c. plicata, except r. ferrumequinum in which type iii orf8 has not been found. in short, the orf8 of sarsr-rf-batcov from greater horseshoe bats is phylogenetically closer to orf8 of human/civet sars-cov. as mentioned above, orf8 in the late-phase human epidemic was split into 8a and 8b due to a unique 29 nt deletion. a similar 5-nt deletion was observed in the type i orf8 isolated from the strain sarsr-rs-batcov rs4084. however, since the majority of sarsr-rs-batcovs' orf8 genes belong to the type iii orf8 genotype, it raises the speculation that this minority of type i orf8 plays a non-essential role in the chinese horseshoe bats host environment.in a recent study, recombinant sars-cov carrying three forms of orf8 were constructed, including complete orf8 as seen in the early phase of the 2003 human epidemic and civets, orf8 that contained the characteristic 29 nt deletion, and a variant strain with orf8 replaced by a 5 nt spacer sequence. replication assay in verofm cells demonstrated a phenotypic hierarchy that the infectious clone with full type i orf8 exhibited significantly more efficient growth than other variants. the same hierarchy of viral replication was observed in human airway epithelial cell cultures and several "non-host" cell lines transduced to express human ace2, including r. alcyone lung epithelial cell line, cotton rat airway epithelial cell line, and goat and sheep lung cell lines. this study suggests that the 29 nt deletion actually conferred a loss of viral fitness during the initial phase of human-to-human transmission, contradicting the previous belief that the truncated products orf8a and orf8b favored adaptation to human (muth et al., 2018) .complete genome analysis has been carried out for all sequenced sarsr-cov with respect to civet sarsr-cov. the importance of civet sarsr-cov is underlined by its close genetic relationship to human sars-cov along the entire genome and especially at the rbd region where nt identity approaches 98.8-99.8%. moreover, the genetic diversity within the group of civet sarsr-cov strains is minimal, further supporting that civets are only recently infected. adaptation of sarsr-batcov to civet as intermediate amplification host is likely needed, which is further corroborated by the phylogenetic position of civet ace2 in-between bat and human ace2. recently, direct bat-to-human transmission of sarsr-cov was proposed by some groups in view of the fact that some sarsr-batcovs could utilize human ace2 receptors in vitro and that seropositive sera against sarsr-batcovs were detected in yunnan residents (menachery et al., 2015; wang et al., 2018) , despite the fact that human/civet sars-cov has never been reported in yunnan. our findings provide substantial evidence against this hypothesis from a phyloepidemiologic point of view and demonstrated the significance of an intermediate host during the transmission cascade (fig. 3) .referring to fig. 3a , sarsr-rs-batcov rs4084 was one of the two strains that possess the highest genome identity to civet/human sarsr-cov. it is so far the only sarsr-batcov that possessed at least 70% nt identity in all parts of the genome, including the four hypervariable regions. the region sharing lowest similarity to civet/human sarsr-cov was the n-terminal domain (ntd) of the s protein which was likely non-critical. as mentioned above, sarsr-rs-batcov rs4084 was predicted to be able to utilize human ace2 as functional receptor since its rbd region is genetically similar to rsshc014. sarsr-rs-batcov rs4084 has not been studied either as whole virus or in the form of recombinant virus in terms of accessory protein function, tissue infectivity assay and replication kinetics; leaving a potential field for future investigations. animal experiment using civet model would offer great promise in the studying of such virus, along with other sarsr-batcovs that could utilize human ace2.the > 300 genome sequences of sars-cov in human, civets and bats accumulated in the last 15 years allowed us to understand the cause of such a highly fatal epidemic that affected us in a global scale in 2003. after 15 years of work, we are now much closer to fully understand the origin of sars-cov and its evolution, as genomes with fragments that contain gene sequences with higher and higher nt identities to the sars-cov found in human were observed. our current model on the origin of sars is that the human sars-cov that caused the epidemic in 2003 was probably a result of multiple recombination events from a number of sars-cov ancestors. yunnan is the province in china with the largest diversity of horseshoe bat species. it is also the area shown to have a high variety of sars-cov ancestors. further in-depth molecular epidemiology studies in this and other provinces in its proximity, including guangxi and guangdong, will hopefully give us an even clearer picture on the origin and early evolution of sars-cov. fig. 6 . phylogenetic tree constructed based on the nt sequences of orf8 of sars-covs. sarsr-rf-batcovs are labeled with dots. brackets in red, orange, yellow and blue represented descending order of nt identity with respect to civet sarsr-cov sz16. the phylogenetic tree was constructed by maximum likelihood method with t92 + g as the substitution model by mega 6.0. the test of phylogeny was statistically supported by the bootstraps value calculated from 1000 trees. (for interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov, also called severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-cov-2) has caused the current outbreak of coronavirus disease (covid-19), which has emerged as a serious public health concern. the clinical and pathological features caused by 2019-ncov resemble those seen in sars 1-3 , which is caused by sars coronavirus (sars-cov). both 2019-ncov and sars-cov have been determined to be of bat origin, with possible intermediate hosts prior to infecting humans 4,5 . phylogenetic studies have shown that 2019-ncov and sars-cov belong to the subgenus sarbecovirus, but they are distantly related 5-8 , with a sequence identity of 79.6% at the whole-genome level 5 . one recent study showed that 2019-ncov is more similar to a bat coronavirus (ratg13), with a sequence identity of 96.2% at the whole-genome level, than many other coronaviruses from different hosts, suggesting a phylogenetic affinity of 2019-ncov to bat coronavirus compared with sars-cov 5 . despite their relatively distant phylogenetic relationships, 2019-ncov and sars-cov are both known to be capable of infecting humans using the same cell receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) 5,6,9,10 , and their protein structures of receptor-binding protein spike (s) are found to be highly similar to each other 10,11 , suggesting their phenotypic convergence. the spike protein is responsible for receptor binding and membrane fusion, and it is important for host tropism and transmission capacity 6 . the spike protein of coronaviruses comprises two subunits, s1 and s2. the s1 subunit contains a receptorbinding domain (rbd), which harbors a receptor-binding motif (rbm) to make complete contact with the receptor (i.e., ace2) 12,13 .considering that 2019-ncov and sars-cov are distantly related, but show high similarity in the rbd protein structure and can use the same cell receptor, ace2 5-11 , an evolutionary convergence may have occurred between them. in the present study, we employ a recently developed molecular phyloecological approach 14-16 , which uses a comparative phylogenetic analysis of functional gene sequences to determine the genetic basis of phenotypic evolution, and we examine the possible molecular basis underlying the phenotypic convergence between 2019-ncov and sars-cov. our results reveal positive selection signals and evolutionary convergent amino acid sites of the spike protein in both 2019-ncov and sars-cov and their related coronaviruses, providing new insights into understanding the evolutionary origin of their phenotypic convergence.we used likelihood ratio tests based on the branch and branch-site models implemented in the codeml program of paml 17 to examine the possible darwinian selection of all 11 genes annotated in the 2019-ncov genome (nc_045512). positively selected genes (psgs) were found by the branch-site model ( table 1) , independent of the initial value variation of parameters (kappa and ω). specifically, for the branches leading to 2019-ncov and sars-cov, no psgs were found, nor were psgs found along the branches leading to their sister coronaviruses. however, we detected psgs along the ancestral branch (branch c) of 2019-ncov and its sister taxon, ratg13, as well as along the ancestral branch (branch k) of sars-cov and its sister taxa, wiv16 and rs4231 (table 1 , fig. 1 ). for branch c, three psgs (s, orf1ab and n) were found, and for branch k, only one gene (s) was found to be under positive selection (table 1) . orf1ab encodes replicase and n encodes nucleocapsid 18 . intriguingly, the s gene was subject to darwinian selection in both branches, c and k. this gene encodes the spike protein, which mediates receptor binding and membrane fusion 6 . the finding of darwinian selection on the spike protein may suggest its adaptive evolution to the host receptors. to further examine the possible adaptive evolution of 2019-ncov and sars-cov to a human host, we used relax 19 to analyze the relative selection intensity change of the 11 genes along the branches leading to 2019-ncov and sars-cov compared with their most recent ancestors, branches c and k, respectively (tables s1-2). among the 11 genes examined, gene s along the 2019-ncov branch exhibited a significant selection intensification signal (k = 30.54, p = 0.000, table s1, fig. s1 ), and this remained robust in four independent runs. we also found that the orf6 gene showed slight selection intensification (k = 1.81, p = 0.000) along the sars-cov branch (table  s2) , while its statistical significance only received two supports among five independent runs. for the selectively intensified gene s along the 2019-ncov branch, 0.46% of the amino acid sites (about five amino acids) were under positive selection, while most sites (86.63%) were under purification selection (table s1 ). this may suggest that 2019-ncov was subject to an adaptive evolution during its adaption to possible intermediate and/or human hosts.given the positive selection of the s gene in both branches, c and k, we further examined its positive selection signals using branch-site model along all other main branches ( fig. 1) to test whether the positive selection uniquely occurred along the branches related to 2019-ncov and sars-cov. our results showed positive selection signals along 10 out of 45 branches examined (fig. 1, table s3 ). this may suggest that the s gene was widely subject to darwinian selection in different coronavirus strains, indicating that it may be crucial for the successful survival of coronaviruses. further analyses of positive selection sites showed that most positive selection sites among all 12 branches under positive selection were located within subunit 1 of s gene ( table 1, table s3 ), which is used for receptor binding. this may suggest that there are strong selection pressures of different coronavirus strains for their own receptor binding.given the selection intensification of s gene in 2019-ncov since its evolutionary divergence from ratg13, we conducted comparative sequence analyses between the two. we found that there were more than 20 amino acid differences between them, and most of them were located within rbd, especially rbm (fig. s2) , suggesting a high variability of rbm. given the importance of rbm for receptor binding, we further conducted a comparative sequence analysis among all the coronavirus strains studied to examine its variability. the results showed high sequence variability, with insertion and/or deletion and amino acid substitutions among the coronavirus strains studied (fig. 2) . despite the high variability of rbm, strikingly, we found that sars-cov and its phylogenetic relatives-including wiv16 (kt444582), rs4231 (ky417146), rs7327 (ky417151), rs9401 (ky417152), and btrs-betacov/yn2018b (mk211376), called sars-related cov here, shared many identical or nearly identical amino acids with their phylogenetically distant coronavirus strains, including 2019-ncov and ratg13, which we called covid-19-related cov (fig. 2) . these shared amino acids were clearly distinct from bat sars-like cov that were phylogenetic intermediates between them (fig. 2) . further analyses showed that such identical amino acids shared between sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov were not restricted to rbm, but rather, they were scattered throughout the spike protein, with a total of 32 such sites, which were centered on rbd (28 sites in total, fig. s3 ). to further examine whether such similarity occurred in other proteins, we analyzed all 11 genes studied among these coronaviruses, and we found that one additional gene, orf3a, contained eight such sites (fig. 1) . the existence of these shared amino acids between sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov may suggest their high sequence similarity. in support of this, we reconstructed maximum likelihood and neighbor-joining phylogenies using full-length rbd protein sequences, and both showed that sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov were grouped in the same clade, with relatively high support, which is consistent with two previous studies 6,7 , at the same time, their phylogenetic intermediates were clustered in distinct clades (fig. 3,  fig. s4 ). the phylogenetic uniting of sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov provide evidence of their high similarity of rbd protein sequences.given their genome-level phylogenetic disparity, the high similarity of rbd protein sequences between sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov may suggest their evolutionary convergence in the spike protein. to test this possibility, we used an empirical bayes approach in paml 17 to reconstruct ancestral . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.975995 doi: biorxiv preprint amino acid sequences along internal nodes, and our results showed there were up to 35 evolutionary convergent sites, including 3 convergent and 32 parallel amino acid substitutions that were shared by two ancestral branches leading to sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov, respectively (fig. 1) . it should be noted that the 35 evolutionary convergent sites of spike protein were apparently underestimated, since those amino acid sites with alignment gaps were not considered by the approach used. still, these 35 sites represented an unusually high incidence of evolutionary convergence sites, which have rarely been found in previous studies related to molecular convergent evolution 20-26 . this suggests a strong evolutionary convergence between sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov. on completion of our data analyses, one of the most recent studies showed that the rbd of the spike protein of pangolin-cov is nearly identical to that of 2019-ncov, with only one amino acid difference 27 , suggesting that pangolin-cov also belongs to the clade of covid-19-related cov. it should be noted that the rbd sequences of two other coronavirus strains, bm48-31 (gu190215) and btky72 (ky352407), were grouped with sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov (fig. 3, fig. s4 ), suggesting an evolutionary convergence among them. in addition to these evolutionarily convergent coronavirus strains, intriguingly, we found the evidence of evolutionary convergence of the spike protein between the ancestral branch leading to sars-related cov and the ancestral branch of covid-19-related cov and its sister strains (covzc45 and covzxc21), which harbored 9 evolutionary convergent amino acid sites (fig. s5) . these results suggest that the spike protein may have been subjected to a successive evolutionary convergence among ancestral coronavirus strains leading to sars-related cov, covid-19related cov and covzc45 and covzxc21.previous studies show that spike protein interacts tightly with a related protein orf3a and they likely coevolved [28] [29] [30] . if their coevolution does occur, we may expect that the evolutionary convergence of the spike protein found may have led to the occurrence of the evolutionary convergence of orf3a as well.to test this, we reconstructed ancestral amino acid sequences of orf3a along internal nodes, and our results revealed 6 parallel amino acid substitutions shared between the ancestral branch leading to sars-related cov and the ancestral branch of covid-19-related cov and its sister strains (covzc45 and covzxc21) (fig. s5 ). and we also detected a parallel amino acid substitution of orf3a between the two ancestral branches leading to sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov (fig. s6 ). considering that these evolutionary convergent branches of orf3a also showed evolutionary convergence in spike protein as mentioned above (fig. 1, fig. s5 ), it may suggest that spike protein and its partner protein orf3a may have been subjected to a co-evolutionary convergence.evolutionary convergence may occur by chance or by darwinian selection. our results showed that the evolutionary convergent sites found in this study were mainly restricted to two genes (s and orf3a, fig.  1 ), and in particular, they were centered within the rbd of the s gene. this biased distribution of evolutionary convergent sites is difficult to explain according to chance; rather, darwinian selection would be favored as a plausible explanation. in support of this, we used converg2 31 to evaluate the probability of the occurrence of our observed convergent sites of spike protein between the two ancestral branches leading to sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov, and the results showed high statistical significance (p = 0.000000), regardless of whether the jtt model or poisson model was used. this result apparently rejects chance or neutral evolution as a possible explanation; rather, it indicates a . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.975995 doi: biorxiv preprint predominately strong darwinian selection. moreover, we observed an apparently accelerated evolution of rbd of sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov related to their phylogenetic intermediates (fig.  3) , and we detected a significant darwinian selection of the s gene along two branches (branches c and k) of sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov (fig. 1 , table 1 ). these lines of evidence may strongly support the evolutionary convergence found in this study as a result of adaptive evolution. regarding the possible adaptive evolutionary convergence, previously proposed causes, such as gene duplication and horizontal gene transfer 21,32,33 , are less likely because only single-copy s genes were found in all 35 genomes examined and evolutionary convergent sites presented an apparently biased distribution pattern. parallel and/convergent evolution, which occur through point mutation, could contribute to our observed evolutionary convergence, but it could not account for the unusually high incidence of convergent sites observed in this study, representing a rare finding in previous studies 20- 26 . recent studies have shown a relatively high likelihood of occurrence of homologous recombination in spike protein 7,34,35 , and especially, it is considered that the rbd of 2019-ncov may be derived from a recombination event between that of human sars-cov and another (unsampled) sars-like cov 35 . if this is the case, the homologous recombination, if any, may have occurred between the ancestors (branches c and k) of sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov, accounting for their unusually high incidence of convergent sites observed in this study.given the strong evolutionary convergence of rbd of spike protein between the two clades, covid-19related cov and sars-related cov, the coronaviruses of the two clades may have more likely adapted to similar or the same receptor. to date, 2019-ncov and sars-cov have been known to be capable of using the ace2 receptor in human host 5,6,9,10 , but the receptors of their phylogenetic relatives from the two clades, covid-19-related cov and sars-related cov, are less clear 4,5,36,37 . regarding the bat sarslike cov, rs4231 and rs7327 are known to be able to use human ace2 receptor 37 , while wiv16 is capable of using the ace2 receptor from humans, civets and chinese horseshoe bats (rhinolophus sinicus) 4 . the receptors of rs9401, btrs-betacov/yn2018b, and batcov ratg13 remain to be explored. further studies on the receptors of these bat sars-like covs in their natural reservoirs are badly needed to determine whether ace2 or other candidates, if any, represent their shared cell receptor, leading to their strong evolutionary convergence of spike protein.our molecular phyloecological study demonstrates that spike protein shows significant darwinian selection along two ancestral branches related to sars-cov and 2019-ncov, suggesting their adaptive evolution to recognizing their own cell receptors. comparative sequence and phylogenetic analyses indicate a high similarity of rbd sequences of spike protein between sars-related cov and covid-19related cov. subsequent ancestral sequence reconstruction and convergent evolution analyses reveal an unusually high incidence of parallel and convergent amino acid substitutions between them, suggesting an extremely strong adaptive evolutionary convergence in spike protein. in addition to spike protein, we also found evolutionary convergence of its partner protein, orf3a, suggesting their possible co-evolutionary convergence. finally, considering that sars-cov and 2019-ncov have posed serious concerns to public health and safety, it should be noted that many other bat sars-like cov strains that were evolutionarily convergent with sars-cov and 2019-ncov recognized in this study may be potential novel coronaviruses to infect humans in the future. the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.975995 doi: biorxiv preprintwe used 35 coronavirus strain genomes of the subgenus sarbecovirus based on two published studies 5,6 , including 2019-ncov, sars-cov, and their phylogenetic relative, bat sars-like cov (please see fig. 1 for details). for all these coronavirus strains, we downloaded their full-length genome sequences from genbank except for five 2019-ncov and ratg13 strains, which were downloaded from gisaid. we aligned these genome sequences using mafft (https://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/server/). the coding sequences of 11 genes (fig. 1 ) annotated in the genome of 2019-ncov (nc_045512) were used as a reference sequence to obtain the homologous gene sequences of the 35 coronavirus strains. we aligned these homologous gene sequences using the online software webprank (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/goldman-srv/webprank/) 38 , which is considered to create a more reliable alignment to decrease false-positive results in positive selection analyses 39 .we employed the branch and branch-site models implemented in the codeml program of paml 17 to examine the adaptive evolution of our focal genes. for this, a codon-based maximum-likelihood method was used to estimate the ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous substitutions per site (dn/ds or ω), and likelihood ratio tests (lrts) were used to calculate statistical significance. a statistically significant value of ω > 1 suggests positive selection. upon analysis, an unrooted taxon tree (fig. 1) was constructed based on two published studies 5,6 . for branch model analysis, we used a two-rate branch model, and our focal branches were labelled as foreground branches, while others were treated as background branches. the two-rate branch model was compared with the one-rate branch model, which assumes a single ω value across the tree, to determine statistical significance. if a statistically significant value of ω > 1 in a foreground branch was detected, the two-ratio branch model was then compared with the two-ratio branch model with a constraint of ω = 1 to further determine whether the ω > 1 of the foreground branch was statistically significant. in addition to the branch model, we also used a branchsite model (test 2) to detect positively selected sites for a particular branch. test 2 compares a modified model a with its corresponding null model with a constraint of ω = 1 to determine the statistical significance. positively selected sites were found using an empirical bayes method. for result robustness, we evaluated the dependence of the signal of positive selection on parameter variation. for this, we used two different initial values of kappa (kappa = 0.5, 3.0) and of omega (ω = 0.5, 2.0), and eventually, several independent runs were conducted for each of the positively selected genes found.we analyzed relative selection intensity using the relax 19 program, available from the datamonkey webserver (http://test.datamonkey.org/relax). relax is a hypothesis testing framework, and it can be used to test whether selection strength has been relaxed or intensified along a certain branch or lineage. for analyses, relax calculates a selection intensity parameter value (k), and k > 1 shows an intensified selection, while k < 1 indicates a relaxed selection, assuming a priori partitioning of the test branches and reference branches. we would expect that an intensified selection shows ω categories away from neutrality (ω = 1), while a relaxed selection is expected to show ω categories converging to neutrality (ω = 1). statistical significance was evaluated by lrt by comparing an alternative model with . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.975995 doi: biorxiv preprint a null model. the null model assumes k = 1 and the same ω distribution for both test and reference branches, while the alternative model assumes that k is a free parameter, and the test and reference branches may have different ω distributions.we reconstructed an maximum likelihood (ml) tree and neighbor-joining (nj) tree using mega x 40 . for ml analyses, the wag+ g model was selected as the best amino acid substitution model according to the bayesian information criterion. all amino acid sites with an alignment gap were included for analyses. for nj analyses, jtt+g was selected as the best model. for the ml and nj analyses, the bootstrap value was set to 1, 000. other parameters were used as defaults in the program.we used the amino acid-based marginal reconstruction implemented in the empirical bayes approach in paml 17 for ancestral sequence reconstruction. in the analyses, the character was assigned to a single interior node and the character with the highest posterior probability was used as the best reconstruction. we used two different amino acid substitution models, jtt and poisson, to examine the consistency of our results. the jtt model assumes different substitution rates of different amino acids, while the poisson model assumes the same substitution rate of all amino acids. for the analyses, we obtained the full-length spike protein sequences of our focal coronavirus strains and used their phylogeny, as given in fig. 1 . the amino acid substitutions along our focal branches were analyzed. the results based on the jtt and poisson models were generally identical; for convenience, only the results based on the jtt model are shown.we used the converg2 31 program to evaluate the probabilities that the observed convergent and parallel substitutions were due to random chance. a statistical significant p-value may suggest the observed evolutionary convergent sites are less likely attributable to random chance, but instead, favor darwinian selection as a possible explanation. for the analyses, two different amino acid substitution models, jtt and poisson, were used. the rbd amino acid sequences of our focal 35 coronavirus genomes were abstracted and aligned using clustal w 41 program. the phylogenetic relationships among the coronavirus strains studied are given in fig. 1 fig. 1 the phylogeny of subgenus sarbecovirus and 11 genes used in this study. the coronavirus phylogeny follows two published studies 5,6 . 2019-ncov, 2019 novel coronavirus; sars-cov, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus; bat-sl-cov, bat-derived severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-like coronaviruses. genomic organization and the 11 genes annotated in the reference genome of 2019-ncov (nc_045512) are shown. red dots represent the numbers of identical or nearly identical amino acid sites found in genes, s and orf3a, which are shared between sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov, but are completely or nearly completely distinct from those of their phylogenetic intermediates. the spike (s) protein structure follows one previous study 12 , and its receptor-binding domain (rbd) and receptor-binding motif (rbm) are highlighted. * above branches and their corresponding capital letters (a-l) denote the branches with positive selection signals found in the s gene. two branches (bold) indicate two evolutionary convergent branches with three convergent amino acid substitutions (blue) and 32 shared parallel amino acid substitutions of spike protein. the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.975995 doi: biorxiv preprint fig. 2 the identical or nearly identical rbm amino acid sites (rectangle) shared between sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov. these shared amino acids are distinct from that of their phylogenetic intermediates. the phylogeny is the same as in fig. 1 .. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.975995 doi: biorxiv preprint the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.975995 doi: biorxiv preprint table 1 positively selected genes identified based on the branch-site model. only the ω values of the foreground branches are shown. positive selection sites located in subunit 1 of gene s are shown in grey. underlining shows positive selected sites located within rbd. dashes (-) shows alignment gaps in the reference sequence. the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.975995 doi: biorxiv preprint the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.975995 doi: biorxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.975995 doi: biorxiv preprint table s3 branches under the positive selection of the s gene. positive selections are analyzed using branch-site model. for convenience, only the ω values of the foreground branches are shown. positive selection sites located in subunit 1 of the s gene are shown in grey. underlining shows positive selected sites located in the rbd.parameter estimates 2∆l df p-value positive selection sitesthe 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov, also called severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-cov-2) has caused the current outbreak of coronavirus disease (covid- 19) , which has emerged as a serious public health concern. the clinical and pathological features caused by 2019-ncov resemble those seen in sars 1-3 , which is caused by sars coronavirus (sars-cov). both 2019-ncov and sars-cov have been determined to be of bat origin, with possible intermediate hosts prior to infecting humans 4, 5 . phylogenetic studies have shown that 2019-ncov and sars-cov belong to the subgenus sarbecovirus, but they are distantly related [5] [6] [7] [8] , with a sequence identity of 79.6% at the whole-genome level 5 . one recent study showed that 2019-ncov is more similar to a bat coronavirus (ratg13), with a sequence identity of 96.2% at the whole-genome level, than many other coronaviruses from different hosts, suggesting a phylogenetic affinity of 2019-ncov to bat coronavirus compared with sars-cov 5 . despite their relatively distant phylogenetic relationships, 2019-ncov and sars-cov are both known to be capable of infecting humans using the same cell receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) 5, 6, 9, 10 , and their protein structures of receptor-binding protein spike (s) are found to be highly similar to each other 10, 11 , suggesting their phenotypic convergence. the spike protein is responsible for receptor binding and membrane fusion, and it is important for host tropism and transmission capacity 6 . the spike protein of coronaviruses comprises two subunits, s1 and s2. the s1 subunit contains a receptorbinding domain (rbd), which harbors a receptor-binding motif (rbm) to make complete contact with the receptor (i.e., ace2) 12, 13 .considering that 2019-ncov and sars-cov are distantly related, but show high similarity in the rbd protein structure and can use the same cell receptor, ace2 [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] , an evolutionary convergence may have occurred between them. in the present study, we employ a recently developed molecular phyloecological approach [14] [15] [16] , which uses a comparative phylogenetic analysis of functional gene sequences to determine the genetic basis of phenotypic evolution, and we examine the possible molecular basis underlying the phenotypic convergence between 2019-ncov and sars-cov. our results reveal positive selection signals and evolutionary convergent amino acid sites of the spike protein in both 2019-ncov and sars-cov and their related coronaviruses, providing new insights into understanding the evolutionary origin of their phenotypic convergence.we used likelihood ratio tests based on the branch and branch-site models implemented in the codeml program of paml 17 to examine the possible darwinian selection of all 11 genes annotated in the 2019-ncov genome (nc_045512). positively selected genes (psgs) were found by the branch-site model ( table 1) , independent of the initial value variation of parameters (kappa and ω). specifically, for the branches leading to 2019-ncov and sars-cov, no psgs were found, nor were psgs found along the branches leading to their sister coronaviruses. however, we detected psgs along the ancestral branch (branch c) of 2019-ncov and its sister taxon, ratg13, as well as along the ancestral branch (branch k) of sars-cov and its sister taxa, wiv16 and rs4231 (table 1 , fig. 1 ). for branch c, three psgs (s, orf1ab and n) were found, and for branch k, only one gene (s) was found to be under positive selection (table 1) . orf1ab encodes replicase and n encodes nucleocapsid 18 . intriguingly, the s gene was subject to darwinian selection in both branches, c and k. this gene encodes the spike protein, which mediates receptor binding and membrane fusion 6 . the finding of darwinian selection on the spike protein may suggest its adaptive evolution to the host receptors. to further examine the possible adaptive evolution of 2019-ncov and sars-cov to a human host, we used relax 19 to analyze the relative selection intensity change of the 11 genes along the branches leading to 2019-ncov and sars-cov compared with their most recent ancestors, branches c and k, respectively (tables s1-2). among the 11 genes examined, gene s along the 2019-ncov branch exhibited a significant selection intensification signal (k = 30.54, p = 0.000, table s1, fig. s1 ), and this remained robust in four independent runs. we also found that the orf6 gene showed slight selection intensification (k = 1.81, p = 0.000) along the sars-cov branch (table  s2) , while its statistical significance only received two supports among five independent runs. for the selectively intensified gene s along the 2019-ncov branch, 0.46% of the amino acid sites (about five amino acids) were under positive selection, while most sites (86.63%) were under purification selection (table s1 ). this may suggest that 2019-ncov was subject to an adaptive evolution during its adaption to possible intermediate and/or human hosts.given the positive selection of the s gene in both branches, c and k, we further examined its positive selection signals using branch-site model along all other main branches ( fig. 1) to test whether the positive selection uniquely occurred along the branches related to 2019-ncov and sars-cov. our results showed positive selection signals along 10 out of 45 branches examined (fig. 1, table s3 ). this may suggest that the s gene was widely subject to darwinian selection in different coronavirus strains, indicating that it may be crucial for the successful survival of coronaviruses. further analyses of positive selection sites showed that most positive selection sites among all 12 branches under positive selection were located within subunit 1 of s gene ( table 1, table s3 ), which is used for receptor binding. this may suggest that there are strong selection pressures of different coronavirus strains for their own receptor binding.given the selection intensification of s gene in 2019-ncov since its evolutionary divergence from ratg13, we conducted comparative sequence analyses between the two. we found that there were more than 20 amino acid differences between them, and most of them were located within rbd, especially rbm (fig. s2) , suggesting a high variability of rbm. given the importance of rbm for receptor binding, we further conducted a comparative sequence analysis among all the coronavirus strains studied to examine its variability. the results showed high sequence variability, with insertion and/or deletion and amino acid substitutions among the coronavirus strains studied (fig. 2) . despite the high variability of rbm, strikingly, we found that sars-cov and its phylogenetic relatives-including wiv16 (kt444582), rs4231 (ky417146), rs7327 (ky417151), rs9401 (ky417152), and btrs-betacov/yn2018b (mk211376), called sars-related cov here, shared many identical or nearly identical amino acids with their phylogenetically distant coronavirus strains, including 2019-ncov and ratg13, which we called covid-19-related cov (fig. 2) . these shared amino acids were clearly distinct from bat sars-like cov that were phylogenetic intermediates between them (fig. 2) . further analyses showed that such identical amino acids shared between sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov were not restricted to rbm, but rather, they were scattered throughout the spike protein, with a total of 32 such sites, which were centered on rbd (28 sites in total, fig. s3 ). to further examine whether such similarity occurred in other proteins, we analyzed all 11 genes studied among these coronaviruses, and we found that one additional gene, orf3a, contained eight such sites (fig. 1) . the existence of these shared amino acids between sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov may suggest their high sequence similarity. in support of this, we reconstructed maximum likelihood and neighbor-joining phylogenies using full-length rbd protein sequences, and both showed that sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov were grouped in the same clade, with relatively high support, which is consistent with two previous studies 6,7 , at the same time, their phylogenetic intermediates were clustered in distinct clades (fig. 3,  fig. s4 ). the phylogenetic uniting of sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov provide evidence of their high similarity of rbd protein sequences.given their genome-level phylogenetic disparity, the high similarity of rbd protein sequences between sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov may suggest their evolutionary convergence in the spike protein. to test this possibility, we used an empirical bayes approach in paml 17 to reconstruct ancestral amino acid sequences along internal nodes, and our results showed there were up to 35 evolutionary convergent sites, including 3 convergent and 32 parallel amino acid substitutions that were shared by two ancestral branches leading to sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov, respectively ( fig. 1 ). it should be noted that the 35 evolutionary convergent sites of spike protein were apparently underestimated, since those amino acid sites with alignment gaps were not considered by the approach used. still, these 35 sites represented an unusually high incidence of evolutionary convergence sites, which have rarely been found in previous studies related to molecular convergent evolution [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] . this suggests a strong evolutionary convergence between sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov. on completion of our data analyses, one of the most recent studies showed that the rbd of the spike protein of pangolin-cov is nearly identical to that of 2019-ncov, with only one amino acid difference 27 , suggesting that pangolin-cov also belongs to the clade of covid-19-related cov. it should be noted that the rbd sequences of two other coronavirus strains, bm48-31 (gu190215) and btky72 (ky352407), were grouped with sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov (fig. 3, fig. s4 ), suggesting an evolutionary convergence among them. in addition to these evolutionarily convergent coronavirus strains, intriguingly, we found the evidence of evolutionary convergence of the spike protein between the ancestral branch leading to sars-related cov and the ancestral branch of covid-19-related cov and its sister strains (covzc45 and covzxc21), which harbored 9 evolutionary convergent amino acid sites (fig. s5) . these results suggest that the spike protein may have been subjected to a successive evolutionary convergence among ancestral coronavirus strains leading to sars-related cov, covid-19related cov and covzc45 and covzxc21.previous studies show that spike protein interacts tightly with a related protein orf3a and they likely coevolved [28] [29] [30] . if their coevolution does occur, we may expect that the evolutionary convergence of the spike protein found may have led to the occurrence of the evolutionary convergence of orf3a as well.to test this, we reconstructed ancestral amino acid sequences of orf3a along internal nodes, and our results revealed 6 parallel amino acid substitutions shared between the ancestral branch leading to sars-related cov and the ancestral branch of covid-19-related cov and its sister strains (covzc45 and covzxc21) (fig. s5 ). and we also detected a parallel amino acid substitution of orf3a between the two ancestral branches leading to sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov (fig. s6 ). considering that these evolutionary convergent branches of orf3a also showed evolutionary convergence in spike protein as mentioned above (fig. 1, fig. s5 ), it may suggest that spike protein and its partner protein orf3a may have been subjected to a co-evolutionary convergence.evolutionary convergence may occur by chance or by darwinian selection. our results showed that the evolutionary convergent sites found in this study were mainly restricted to two genes (s and orf3a, fig.  1 ), and in particular, they were centered within the rbd of the s gene. this biased distribution of evolutionary convergent sites is difficult to explain according to chance; rather, darwinian selection would be favored as a plausible explanation. in support of this, we used converg2 31 to evaluate the probability of the occurrence of our observed convergent sites of spike protein between the two ancestral branches leading to sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov, and the results showed high statistical significance (p = 0.000000), regardless of whether the jtt model or poisson model was used. this result apparently rejects chance or neutral evolution as a possible explanation; rather, it indicates a predominately strong darwinian selection. moreover, we observed an apparently accelerated evolution of rbd of sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov related to their phylogenetic intermediates (fig.  3) , and we detected a significant darwinian selection of the s gene along two branches (branches c and k) of sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov (fig. 1, table 1 ). these lines of evidence may strongly support the evolutionary convergence found in this study as a result of adaptive evolution. regarding the possible adaptive evolutionary convergence, previously proposed causes, such as gene duplication and horizontal gene transfer 21, 32, 33 , are less likely because only single-copy s genes were found in all 35 genomes examined and evolutionary convergent sites presented an apparently biased distribution pattern. parallel and/convergent evolution, which occur through point mutation, could contribute to our observed evolutionary convergence, but it could not account for the unusually high incidence of convergent sites observed in this study, representing a rare finding in previous studies [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] . recent studies have shown a relatively high likelihood of occurrence of homologous recombination in spike protein 7, 34, 35 , and especially, it is considered that the rbd of 2019-ncov may be derived from a recombination event between that of human sars-cov and another (unsampled) sars-like cov 35 . if this is the case, the homologous recombination, if any, may have occurred between the ancestors (branches c and k) of sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov, accounting for their unusually high incidence of convergent sites observed in this study.given the strong evolutionary convergence of rbd of spike protein between the two clades, covid-19related cov and sars-related cov, the coronaviruses of the two clades may have more likely adapted to similar or the same receptor. to date, 2019-ncov and sars-cov have been known to be capable of using the ace2 receptor in human host 5, 6, 9, 10 , but the receptors of their phylogenetic relatives from the two clades, covid-19-related cov and sars-related cov, are less clear 4, 5, 36, 37 . regarding the bat sarslike cov, rs4231 and rs7327 are known to be able to use human ace2 receptor 37 , while wiv16 is capable of using the ace2 receptor from humans, civets and chinese horseshoe bats (rhinolophus sinicus) 4 . the receptors of rs9401, btrs-betacov/yn2018b, and batcov ratg13 remain to be explored. further studies on the receptors of these bat sars-like covs in their natural reservoirs are badly needed to determine whether ace2 or other candidates, if any, represent their shared cell receptor, leading to their strong evolutionary convergence of spike protein.our molecular phyloecological study demonstrates that spike protein shows significant darwinian selection along two ancestral branches related to sars-cov and 2019-ncov, suggesting their adaptive evolution to recognizing their own cell receptors. comparative sequence and phylogenetic analyses indicate a high similarity of rbd sequences of spike protein between sars-related cov and covid-19related cov. subsequent ancestral sequence reconstruction and convergent evolution analyses reveal an unusually high incidence of parallel and convergent amino acid substitutions between them, suggesting an extremely strong adaptive evolutionary convergence in spike protein. in addition to spike protein, we also found evolutionary convergence of its partner protein, orf3a, suggesting their possible co-evolutionary convergence. finally, considering that sars-cov and 2019-ncov have posed serious concerns to public health and safety, it should be noted that many other bat sars-like cov strains that were evolutionarily convergent with sars-cov and 2019-ncov recognized in this study may be potential novel coronaviruses to infect humans in the future.we used 35 coronavirus strain genomes of the subgenus sarbecovirus based on two published studies 5,6 , including 2019-ncov, sars-cov, and their phylogenetic relative, bat sars-like cov (please see fig. 1 for details). for all these coronavirus strains, we downloaded their full-length genome sequences from genbank except for five 2019-ncov and ratg13 strains, which were downloaded from gisaid. we aligned these genome sequences using mafft (https://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/server/). the coding sequences of 11 genes (fig. 1) annotated in the genome of 2019-ncov (nc_045512) were used as a reference sequence to obtain the homologous gene sequences of the 35 coronavirus strains. we aligned these homologous gene sequences using the online software webprank (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/goldman-srv/webprank/) 38 , which is considered to create a more reliable alignment to decrease false-positive results in positive selection analyses 39 .we employed the branch and branch-site models implemented in the codeml program of paml 17 to examine the adaptive evolution of our focal genes. for this, a codon-based maximum-likelihood method was used to estimate the ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous substitutions per site (dn/ds or ω), and likelihood ratio tests (lrts) were used to calculate statistical significance. a statistically significant value of ω > 1 suggests positive selection. upon analysis, an unrooted taxon tree (fig. 1) was constructed based on two published studies 5,6 . for branch model analysis, we used a two-rate branch model, and our focal branches were labelled as foreground branches, while others were treated as background branches. the two-rate branch model was compared with the one-rate branch model, which assumes a single ω value across the tree, to determine statistical significance. if a statistically significant value of ω > 1 in a foreground branch was detected, the two-ratio branch model was then compared with the two-ratio branch model with a constraint of ω = 1 to further determine whether the ω > 1 of the foreground branch was statistically significant. in addition to the branch model, we also used a branchsite model (test 2) to detect positively selected sites for a particular branch. test 2 compares a modified model a with its corresponding null model with a constraint of ω = 1 to determine the statistical significance. positively selected sites were found using an empirical bayes method. for result robustness, we evaluated the dependence of the signal of positive selection on parameter variation. for this, we used two different initial values of kappa (kappa = 0.5, 3.0) and of omega (ω = 0.5, 2.0), and eventually, several independent runs were conducted for each of the positively selected genes found.we analyzed relative selection intensity using the relax 19 program, available from the datamonkey webserver (http://test.datamonkey.org/relax). relax is a hypothesis testing framework, and it can be used to test whether selection strength has been relaxed or intensified along a certain branch or lineage. for analyses, relax calculates a selection intensity parameter value (k), and k > 1 shows an intensified selection, while k < 1 indicates a relaxed selection, assuming a priori partitioning of the test branches and reference branches. we would expect that an intensified selection shows ω categories away from neutrality (ω = 1), while a relaxed selection is expected to show ω categories converging to neutrality (ω = 1). statistical significance was evaluated by lrt by comparing an alternative model with a null model. the null model assumes k = 1 and the same ω distribution for both test and reference branches, while the alternative model assumes that k is a free parameter, and the test and reference branches may have different ω distributions.we reconstructed an maximum likelihood (ml) tree and neighbor-joining (nj) tree using mega x 40 . for ml analyses, the wag+ g model was selected as the best amino acid substitution model according to the bayesian information criterion. all amino acid sites with an alignment gap were included for analyses. for nj analyses, jtt+g was selected as the best model. for the ml and nj analyses, the bootstrap value was set to 1, 000. other parameters were used as defaults in the program.we used the amino acid-based marginal reconstruction implemented in the empirical bayes approach in paml 17 for ancestral sequence reconstruction. in the analyses, the character was assigned to a single interior node and the character with the highest posterior probability was used as the best reconstruction. we used two different amino acid substitution models, jtt and poisson, to examine the consistency of our results. the jtt model assumes different substitution rates of different amino acids, while the poisson model assumes the same substitution rate of all amino acids. for the analyses, we obtained the full-length spike protein sequences of our focal coronavirus strains and used their phylogeny, as given in fig. 1 . the amino acid substitutions along our focal branches were analyzed. the results based on the jtt and poisson models were generally identical; for convenience, only the results based on the jtt model are shown.we used the converg2 31 program to evaluate the probabilities that the observed convergent and parallel substitutions were due to random chance. a statistical significant p-value may suggest the observed evolutionary convergent sites are less likely attributable to random chance, but instead, favor darwinian selection as a possible explanation. for the analyses, two different amino acid substitution models, jtt and poisson, were used. the rbd amino acid sequences of our focal 35 coronavirus genomes were abstracted and aligned using clustal w 41 program. the phylogenetic relationships among the coronavirus strains studied are given in fig. 1.  fig. 1 the phylogeny of subgenus sarbecovirus and 11 genes used in this study. the coronavirus phylogeny follows two published studies 5, 6 . 2019-ncov, 2019 novel coronavirus; sars-cov, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus; bat-sl-cov, bat-derived severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-like coronaviruses. genomic organization and the 11 genes annotated in the reference genome of 2019-ncov (nc_045512) are shown. red dots represent the numbers of identical or nearly identical amino acid sites found in genes, s and orf3a, which are shared between sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov, but are completely or nearly completely distinct from those of their phylogenetic intermediates. the spike (s) protein structure follows one previous study 12 , and its receptor-binding domain (rbd) and receptor-binding motif (rbm) are highlighted. * above branches and their corresponding capital letters (a-l) denote the branches with positive selection signals found in the s gene. two branches (bold) indicate two evolutionary convergent branches with three convergent amino acid substitutions (blue) and 32 shared parallel amino acid substitutions of spike protein.the identical or nearly identical rbm amino acid sites (rectangle) shared between sars-related cov and covid-19-related cov. these shared amino acids are distinct from that of their phylogenetic intermediates. the phylogeny is the same as in fig. 1.  fig. 3 maximum likelihood tree of the full-length amino acid sequence of rbd. the wag+g amino acid substitution model is used. the tree has the highest log likelihood (-3406.88). the node supports are shown in number. hibecovirus and nobecovirus are used as outgroups. table 1 positively selected genes identified based on the branch-site model. only the ω values of the foreground branches are shown. positive selection sites located in subunit 1 of gene s are shown in grey. underlining shows positive selected sites located within rbd. dashes (-) shows alignment gaps in the reference sequence. branches under the positive selection of the s gene. positive selections are analyzed using branch-site model. for convenience, only the ω values of the foreground branches are shown. positive selection sites located in subunit 1 of the s gene are shown in grey. underlining shows positive selected sites located in the rbd.parameter estimates 2∆l df p-value positive selection sitescoronavirus is commonly found in nature and infects only mammals and birds 1-3 , among 46 species, only seven of them are human-susceptible 4, 5 . aside from sars-cov and mers-cov that cause deadly pneumonia in humans by crossing the species barrier 3,6,7 , sars-cov-2 is now bringing a global pandemic of respiratory disease within six months after the first case has been confirmed in wuhan city of china 8 . it has been identified as a novel coronavirus that is a member of β-coronavirus in the family coronaviridae, which is a positive single-stranded rna virus with a protein envelope 2 . up to date, covid-19 caused by sars-cov-2 results in more than six million people infected and over 380 thousand deaths worldwide. compared with sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 spreads more rapidly and being highly infectious to humans [8] [9] [10] . it is crucial to understand the origin of this coronavirus and its strategy in adapting to human hosts so efficiently, moreover, to apply this knowledge for controlling this pandemic and developing effective therapeutics and vaccines against covid-19.by reconstructing phylogenomic relationships among various coronavirus 11 , it showed around 70% genome sequence similarity with sars-cov 11 , and more closely related to bat coronavirus ratg13 in the spike (s) gene 1 . given closely related to sars-like coronaviruses, the genome structure of sars-cov-2 is similar to other beta-coronaviruses, which composed in order with 5'replicase orf1ab-s-envelope(e)-membrane(m)-n-3' with numbers of open reading frames (orfs) function resembles those of sars-cov 12 . it is noted that ratg13 is highly similar to sars-cov-2 especially between genes, while they differed in some crucial genomic structures, one of the most notable features is that a polybasic (furin) cleavage site insertion (prra residue) at the junction between two subunits (s1, s2) of s protein 1, 2, 12, 13 . although some studies show bats could be the reservoir host for many coronaviruses including sars-cov, the reservoir host of sars-cov-2 remains unclear 4, 10, 14 . given the global spread of this epidemic, it draws a lot of attention to reveal the origins of the pandemic event. the evolutionary of sars-cov-2 may explain its infectiousness and transmissibility among different animal hosts and provide evidence about whether this virus is natural or artificial.spike glycoprotein on the surface of sars-cov-2 is the key to enter the target cells, which forms homotrimers protruding from the surface to recognize host cell receptor and cause membrane fusion 15 . spike protein contains s1 and s2 subunits and the receptor-binding domain (rbd) exists on s1 which can bind to the peptidase domain (pd) of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), while s2 is responsible for membrane fusion during viral infection 14, 16 . in sars-cov, rbd in spike protein is the most diverse part of the whole genome, of which six amino acid (y442, l472, n479, d480, t487, and y4911) have been found to play a key role in binding to ace2 receptor and further in transmissibility across species boundary 16 . similar to sars-cov, rbd mutations acquired during adaption to different host cells along transmission have also been observed in sars-cov-2. thus, dissection of the key mutations in spike protein rbd that affect binding to the ace2 receptor would be important for understanding the molecular mechanism of how sars-cov-2 infect human cells. recent studies show the ace2 receptor in host cells would mediate the entry ability of sars-cov-2 by interacting with spike protein, and its binding capacity to spike protein of sars-cov-2 determines the transmissibility of this coronavirus across species particularly among humans 14, 17 .the present study intends to 1) reveal the phylogenetic relationship of sars-cov-2 identified in the different population at the genomic level, and provide genetic evidence based on the structural protein-coding genes (s, m, n, e) for identifying the nucleotide variations of sars-cov-2 collected from different regions amid covid-19 pandemic; 2) provide a prediction for revealing the adaptive mutations on spike protein of sars-cov-2 based on the specific variation of s gene, and finding the differences of stability of spike protein mutants and their affinities with the human ace2 receptors; 3) explore whether there are variants of ace2 in different populations which may affect the infectivity of covid-19. to this end, we analyzed the variants of ace2 in a large cohort including 1000 chinese local people and other human populations and identified polymorphisms that may influent on the binding between ace2 and spike protein of coronaviruses, furthermore, we predicted the affinities of spike protein to binding ace2 variants to understand whether those changes would render individuals resistant or susceptible to sars-cov-2 at the molecular level.herein our study could explain part of the origin of sars-cov-2 at a phylogenetic level based both on whole genome and multiple key genes, to allow the elucidation of population risk profiles and also help advance therapeutics such as a rationally designed soluble ace2 receptor for the management of covid-19. was carried out by kimura two factor correction method for nucleic acid level calculation. to avoid the prediction error caused by the selection of outgroups with a far evolutionary relationship, the complex outgroup was adopted in this study, and the sequence of mers-cov and sars-cov were selected as outgroups to predict the genetic relationship. the maximum likelihood (ml) phylogenic trees were constructed based on 2,147 genome sequences of sars-cov-2 with sars-cov and mers-cov were selected as the out-groups ( figure 1 ). after alignment, we merged identical sequences into one clade with labels kept as one.the genomic tree showed all sars-cov-2 was closely related to the sars-like virus found in the horseshoe bat from yunnan (ratg13), and a coronavirus from pangolin collected in guangdong province was the sister taxon with ratg13 which is closer to the virus from bat than to other pangolins from guangxi. sars-cov-2 is not related closely with sars-cov at the nucleic level australia, european countries and usa, and the case document showed this patient was confirmed after his seven-day trip to italy and he didn't show any symptoms before his journey. some branches were poorly supported by the bootstrap values and exhibited polytomies, which indicated sars-cov-2 was adapting the human hosts globally and it is hard to determine the origin of sars-cov-2 solely based on nucleic data. furthermore, same to the genomic tree, multiple genes sequences of sars-cov-2 are divergent from outgroups and we detected some mutations according to s gene sequences comparison ( figure 3 ).as shown in figure 3 , we extracted and aligned the s gene sequences from sars coronavirus in different hosts, the one from pangolin that closer to sars-cov-2 and ratg13 was from a horseshoe bat (rhinolophus spp) and we found no big fragment shift in s genes of pangolin and it was less similar to s in sars-cov-2 compared with ratg13, but the insertions exhibited in pangolin indicated potential recombination in spike protein of coronavirus would occur during its cross-species hosts manumission.according to s gene sequences in different strains, we found the similarity between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov-bat (98%) is higher than it compared with coronavirus from pangolins (85%). it showed more solved of the phylogenetic tree based on s gene (fig. 4) compared to the trees based on genomic sequences and multiple genes. nevertheless, the phylogeny reconstructed based on genome, s gene, and multiple genes, all indicate the sars-cov-2 is closely related to ratg13 and the virus isolated from pangolin.s gene has been studied as the key gene for sars-cov-2 binding to host cells' receptor, and this gene shows less conserved compared to the genome sequence of sars-cov-2, and some studies suggest that the high divergence found in spike protein rbd and specifically the direct bonding sites to ace2 receptor play an important role to sars-cov-2 adapting to different animal hosts or the populations in different regions. combined with the phylogeny based on the s gene, we also detected all mutationson the s gene and their binding capacity with ace2 receptor in human beings. 23 point mutations were predicted to significantly influence the affinity and stability of the spike protein (fig. 5) , among which 9 polymorphisms exhibited increased affinity and stability while 14 ones showed decreased affinity and stability (table 1 ). all analysis outcomes of over 3000 polymorphisms in spike protein were shown in supplementary table 1. figure 5 and table 1 showed the missense mutation in spike protein rbd that has significant changes (cutoff =3) of the affinity and stability with ace2 receptors. interestingly, residues l455, q498 and n501 would have two potential mutations that leading to contrary affinities, including increased affinity in leucine changed to methionine on aa455, glutaurine changed to tryptophan on aa498 and asparagine changed to tyrosine on aa501, reduced affinity in leucine changed to alanine, glutamine changed to alanine, asparagine changed to glycine. the polymorphisms on the same residue causing two opposite effects of affinity suggested that mutations on those positions may lead to different adaptation directions on sars-cov-2 to fit in different hosts. furthermore, phe456, gln493, and phe486 showed two mutations that both result in affinity reduction. the stability of spike protein with different mutations was showed in table 1 , we found only 5 mutants increased the stability of spike protein including g446w, g496a, q498w, n501y and g502y, which is not consistent with the affinity.to match the mutations of spike protein that reported by sars-cov-2 database of china national center for bioinformation (https://bigd.big.ac.cn/ncov) with our predictions, a total of 1,150 polymorphisms in spike protein were collected from the database and 643 missense variants were selected and run analysis about their affinity and stability binding to ace2 (supplementary table   2 ). we focused on 76 missense variants in region t333-c525 of spike protein and 9 variants bring significant changes on the affinity of it to ace2 ( figure 6a ), moreover, 13 variants cause structural stability changes in spike protein rbd ( figure 6b ).we calculated the population frequency of 388 missense variants in ace2 collected from gnomad (supplementary table 3 ) and the local population ( table 2 ). analysis of their stability and affinity to spike protein of sars-cov-2 were performed in this study, and the results showed no significant differences in both affinity and stability.revealing the evolutionary origin of sars-cov-2 is of great value to understand its transmission pathway cross-species and provide a guide to long-term infection prevention of zoonotic coronavirus. since it is a novel coronavirus, the extremely limited morphological information of sars-cov-2 could be used in the phylogenic analysis, genomic data of sars-cov-2 nowadays provide a helpful approach to identify its divergence along with the transmission among to most sars-coronavirus 5, 17 , and the s gene is more divergent in coronavirus at a genetic level relative to other genes 14 . along adapting to the human host cellular environment, mutations occur in spike protein in some of which enable to enhance the binding affinity and stability of spike protein-hace2 complex, and the enhancement would increase the transmissibility of sars-cov-2 among human and bring more severe disease 16 table 1 ). 23 variants of spike protein rbd that causing significantly higher or lower affinity to ace2 and stability were focused in this study, the cutoff we set up was three for determining significance (table 1) , among 9 of the mutations that highly enhance the binding between spike protein and ace2, the residue g446 (figure 7 ) was also reported cdc up to date combined 1,150 variants (634 missense mutations in total) in the spike protein of sars-cov-2 reported by cdc, we found their affinity and stability in our analysis outcomes. among 76 missense variants that locate in the region between t333-c525, five variants in spike protein enhance its affinity binding to hace2 (table 3 ) and only three of them increase the stability of spike-hace2 complex (table 4 ). additionally, we collected the genome sequences of sars-cov-2 that harbor those variants in spike protein and found the variants v483a occurs in 26 strains from the usa, v367f occurs in 12 strains from hong kong, australia, and other european countries, and a variant g446v that highly enhance the affinity were identified in a strain from australia (supplementary table 2 ). we mapped those strains onto our genomic phylogenetic tree and found they were dispersed distributed in the position close to the sars-bat and sars-pangolin. as covid-19 widespread globally, several studies tried to find where this novel coronavirus camefrom, but few reports analyze the origin of sars-cov-2 according to the divergent pattern in spike protein. in our study, the multiple variants in spike protein found in different countries and clustered in the ancestral direction on phylogeny which might suggest sars-cov-2 infection start to occur at multiple sites but not only in wuhan city. however, due to the limited detection capability and restricted availability of samples from infected animals, the variants available in the national database are uncompleted, more data needs to be collected for further studies.furthermore, since the sars-cov-2 strains have variants on spike protein relative to a reference sequence of sars-cov-2 (nc_045512.2) were found more divergence on the phylogenetic position that closer to sars-bat and sars-pangolin, it might indicate a consensus evolution occurred in s gene and enable sars-cov-2 to adapt to human hosts well. however, since it is difficult to determine the exact time the zero patient who got infected by sars-cov-2, the date of the sample collection and data extracted could mislead the results. we believe further clinical information from all the countries would be needed for research and this is a global concern that requires more cooperation and collaboration but not political games or constant blames. we shared all the analysis of over 3000 variants on spike protein in this study to help the world tracking the mutations of sars-cov-2 and also can be useful to select the potential druggable targets and neutral inhibitors to prevent the further damages may be brought by the pandemic of covid-19.aside from mutations in spike protein for adapting to new hosts, the hace2 also represents polymorphisms in the binding region, host-virus interaction over time makes a natural selection on both virus and host cells 30 . therefore, the variants in hace2 receptor would also play a role in sars-cov-2 infection. cao and his colleagues (2020) 31 researchers found three unique variants in hace2 in the italian population that might be corresponding to the high fatality including p389h, w69c, and l351v 33 .we compared the unique variants found in local and italian population by mapping them on the hace protein structure ( figure 8 ) and found the italian ones were closer to the binding region than local ones, but in silico simulation indicated that none of them change the affinity and stability of spike protein of sars-cov-2 and hace2 complex (table 2 ). generally, we did not find any variants in ace2 that would significantly increase or decrease the affinity and stability of spike the ml phylogeny tree of different strains sars-cov-2 from various region all around the world (partial, the full tree was found in supplementary figure 1) , the bootstrap values were mapped on the branch as long as the colors annotated for all clades.the ml phylogeny tree of s, n, m, n gene sequences of sars-cov-2 from various strains (partial, the full tree was found in supplementary figure 2) , the bootstrap values were mapped on the branch as long as the colors annotated for all clades.the alignment of s gene from different sars virus.phylogenetic tree based on s gene (partial, the full tree was presented in supplementary figure 3) ,the bootstrap values were mapped on the branch as well as the colors annotated for all clades.identified polymorphism in spike protein rbd mapped to the structure of spike protein in sars-cov-2 in complex with ace2 in humans. cyan = spike protein, orange=ace2 direct bounding to spike protein. 23 point mutations causing affinity significant change on direct bounding of spike protein of sars-cov-2, blue presents decreasing affinity while purple shows increasing.reported polymorphism in spike protein rbd mapped to the structure of spike protein in sars-cov-2 in complex with ace2 in humans. cyan = spike protein, orange=ace2 and blue presents decreasing affinity and stability while red shows increasing ones. a: affinity; b: stability.residue g446 variants in documents from cdc (g446v) and in our prediction (g446w)spike protein polymorphous points from local population and italy (citation), the italian ones are marked as green while local ones marked as red.wuhan, hubei province of china in december 2019. the death toll rose to more than 68,000 among 1,250,000 confirmed cases around the globe (until april 4, 2020) [1] . the virus causing covid-19 is named as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). based on the phylogenetic studies, the sars-cov-2 is categorized as a member of the genus betacoronavirus, the same lineage that includes sars coronavirus (sars-cov) [2] that caused sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) in china during 2002 [3] . recent studies showed that sars-cov-2 has a close relationship with bat sars-like covs [4, 5] [7] ].interestingly, s glycoprotein is characterized as the critical determinant for viral entry into host cells which consists of two functional subunits namely s1 and s2. the s1 subunit recognizes and binds to the host receptor through the receptor-binding domain (rbd) whereas s2 is responsible for fusion with the host cell membrane [ [8] , [9] , [10] ]. mers-cov uses dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (dpp4) as entry receptor [11] whereas sars-cov and sars-cov-2 utilize ace-2 (angiotensin converting enzyme-2) [12] , abundantly available in lung alveolar epithelial cells and enterocytes, suggesting s glycoprotein as a potential drug target to halt the entry of sars-cov-2 [13] .according to recent reports, neutralizing antibodies are generated in response to the entry and fusion of surface-exposed s protein (mainly rbd domain) which is predicted to be an 4 important target for vaccine candidates [ [10] , [14] , [15] ]. however, sars-cov-2 has emerged with remarkable properties like glutamine-rich 42 aa long exclusive molecular signature (dsqqtvgqqdgsednqtttiqtivevqpqlemeltpvvqtie) in position 983-1024 of polyprotein 1ab (pp1ab) [16] , diversified receptor-binding domain (rbd), unique furin cleavage site (prrar↓sv) at s1/s2 boundary in s glycoprotein which could play roles in viral pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment [17] . to date, few genomic variations of sars-cov-2 are reported [ [18] , [19] ]. there is growing evidence that spike protein, a 1273 amino acid long glycoprotein having multiple domains, possibly plays a major role in sars-cov-2 pathogenesis. viral entry to the host cell is initiated by the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of s1 head. upon receptor-binding, proteolytic cleavage occurs at s1/s2 cleavage site and two heptad repeats (hr) of s2 stalk form a six-helix bundle structure triggering the release of the fusion peptide.as it comes into close proximity to the transmembrane anchor (tm), the tm domain facilitates membrane destabilization required for fusion between virus-host membranes [ [20] , [21] ]. insights into the sequence variations of s glycoprotein among available genomes are key to understanding the biology of sars-cov-2 infection, developing antiviral treatments and vaccines. in this study, we have analyzed 320 genomic sequences of sars-cov-2 to identify mutations between the available genomes followed by the amino acid variations in the glycoprotein s to foresee their impact on the viral entry to host cell from structural biology viewpoint.all available sequences (320 whole genome and surface glycoprotein sequences of sars-cov-2) related to the covid-19 pandemic were retrieved from ncbi virus variation resource repository (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/virus/) [22] . in addition, all 40 s glycoprotein sequences from different coronavirus families were retrieved for phylogenetic 5 analysis. the ncbi reference sequence of sars-cov-2 s glycoprotein, accession number yp_009724390 was used as the canonical sequence for the analyses of spike protein variants.variant analyses of sars-cov-2 genomes were performed in the genome detective coronavirus typing tool version 1.13 which is specially designed for this virus (https://www.genomedetective.com/app/typingtool/cov/) [23] . for multiple sequence alignment (msa), genome detective coronavirus typing tool uses a reference dataset of 431 whole genome sequences (wgs) where 386 wgs were from known nine coronavirus species.the dataset was then aligned with muscle [24] . entropy (h(x)) plot of nucleotide variations in sars-cov-2 genome was constructed using bioedit [25] . mega x (version 10.1.7) was used to construct the msas and the phylogenetic tree using pairwise alignment and neighborjoining methods in clustalw [26, 27] . tree structure was validated by running the analysis on 1000 bootstraps [28] replications dataset and the evolutionary distances were calculated using the poisson correction method [29] .variant sequences of sars-cov-2 were modeled in swiss-model [30] using the cryo-em spike protein structure of sars-cov-2 (pdb id 6vsb) as a template. the overall quality of models was assessed in rampage server [31] by generating ramachandran plots (supplementary table 1 ). pymol and biovia discovery studio were used for structure visualization and superpose [32, 33] . 6 multiple sequence alignment of the available 320 genomes of sars-cov-2 were performed and 483 variations were found throughout the 29,903 bp long sars-cov-2 genome with in total 115 variations in utr region, 130 synonymous variations that cause no amino acid alteration, 228 non-synonymous variations causing change in amino acid residue, 16 indels, and 2 variations in non-coding region (supplementary table 2 ). among the 483 variations, 40 variations (14 synonymous, 25 non-synonymous mutations and one deletion) were observed in the region of orf s that encodes s glycoprotein which is responsible for viral fusion and entry into the host cell [34] . notable that, most of the sars-cov-2 genome sequences were deposited from the usa (250) and china (50) (supplementary fig. 1 ). positional variability of the sars-cov-2 genome was calculated from the msa of 320 sars-cov-2 whole genomes as a measure of entropy value (h(x)) [35] . excluding 5′ and 3′ utr, ten hotspot of hypervariable position were identified, of which seven were located at orf1ab (1059c>t, 3037c>t, 8782c>t, 14408c>t, 17747c>t, 17858a>g, 18060c>t) and one at orf s (23403a>g), orf3a (25563g>t), and orf8 (28144t>c) respectively. the variability at position 8782 and 28144 were found to be the highest among the other hotspots ( fig. 1 ).the phylogenetic analysis of a total of 66 sequences (26 unique sars-cov-2 and 40 different coronavirus s glycoprotein sequences) was performed. the evolutionary distances showed that all the sars-cov-2 spike proteins cluster in the same node of the phylogenetic tree confirming the sequences are similar to refseq yp_009724390 (fig. 2) . bat coronaviruses has a close evolutionary relationship as different strains were found in the nearest outgroups and clades (bat coronavirus bm48-31, bat hp-beta coronavirus, bat coronavirus hku9) conferring that 7 coronavirus has vast geographical spread and bat is the most prevalent host (fig. 2) . in other clades, the clusters were speculated through different hosts which may describe the evolutionary changes of surface glycoprotein due to cross species transmission. viral hosts reported from different spots at different times is indicative of possible recombination.the s glycoprotein sequences of sars-cov-2 were retrieved from the ncbi virus fig. 2 ). 8 alterations of amino acid residual charge from positive to neutral (h49y, r408i, h519q), negative to neutral (d111n, d614g, d936y), negative to positive (d1168h, d1259h), and neutral to positive (n74k, s247r) were seen in variants qhw06059, qhs34546, qis61422, qis61338, qik50427, qis30615, qis60978, qis60582, qio04367, and qhr84449 respectively due to substitution of amino acid that differ in charge. the remaining 15 variants were mutated with the amino acids that are similar in charge (fig. 4 a) . the sars-cov-2 spike protein variants were superposed with the cryo-electron microscopic structure of sars-cov-2 spike protein [8] . l5f, n74k, e96d, f157l, g181v, s247r, g476s, v483a, d1168h, and d1259h variants were excluded from superposition due to absence of respective residues in the 3d structure of template (pdb: 6vsb). the superposition showed that most of the residual change were causing incorporation of bulky amino acid residues (t29i, h49y, l54f, s221w, a348t, h519q, a520s, a930v, d936y, and a1078v) in place of smaller size residue except y28n, d111n, r408i, d614g, and f797c (fig. 4 b-p) . fig. 3) . the s2 subunit of spike protein, especially the heptad repeat region 2, fusion peptide domain, transmembrane domain, and cytoplasmic tail were found to be highly conserved in the sars-cov and the sars-cov-2 variants while the s1 subunit was more diverse, specifically the n-terminal domain (ntd) and receptor-binding domain (rbd).covid 19 is one of the most contagious pandemics the world has ever had with 1,250,000 confirmed cases to date (april 4, 2020) and the cases have increased as high as 5 times in less than a month [1] . phylogenetic analysis showed that the sars-cov-2 is a unique coronavirus presumably related to bat coronavirus (bm48-31, hp-betacoronavirus). during this study, we [15] , [38] , [39] , [40] ]. likewise, a number of studies targeting sars-cov-2 spike protein have been undertaken for the therapeutic measures [41] , but the unique structural and functional details of sars-cov-2 spike protein are still under scrutiny. we also found a variant (r408i) at receptor binding domain (rbd) that mutated from positively charged arginine residue to neutral and smaller sized isoleucine residue (fig. 4 i) . this change might alter the interaction of viral rbd with the host receptor because the r408 residue of sars-cov-2 is known to interact with the ace2 receptor for viral entry [42] . similarly, alterations of rbd (g476s, v483a, h519q, and a520s) also could affect the interaction of sars-cov-2 spike protein with other molecules which require further investigations. qia98583 and qis30615 variants were found to have an alteration of alanine to valine (a930v), and aspartic acid to tyrosine (d936y) respectively in the alpha helix of the hr1 domain. previous reports have indicated that hr1 domain plays a significant role in viral fusion and entry by forming helical bundles with hr2, and mutations including alanine substitution by valine (a1168v) in hr1 region are predominantly responsible for conferring resistance to mouse hepatitis coronaviruses against hr2 derived peptide entry inhibitors [43] . this study hypothesizes the mutation (a930v) found in that of sars-cov-2 might also have a role in the emergence of drug-resistance virus strains. also, the mutation (d1168h) found in the heptad repeat 2 (hr) sars-cov-2 could play a vital role in viral pathogenesis.the sars-cov-2 s protein contains additional furin protease cleavage site, prrars, in s1/s2 domain which is conserved among all 320 sequences as revealed during this study ( supplementary fig. 3 ). this unique signature is thought to make the sars-cov-2 more virulent than sars-cov and regarded as novel features of the viral pathogenesis (ref 11).according to previous reports the more the host cell protease can process the coronavirus s can accelerate viral tropism accordingly in influenza virus [[9] , [44] , [45] , [46] ]. apart from that, this could also promote viruses to escape antiviral therapies targeting transmembrane protease tmprss2 (clinicaltrials.gov, nct04321096) which is well reported protease to cleave at s1/s2 of s glycoprotein [47] . comparative analyses between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein showed 77% similarity between them where the most diverse region was .the human population is constantly being barraged by newly emerging and re-emerging viral pathogens, as evidenced by sporadic outbreaks of a variety of different viruses that have occurred in recent years [1] [2] [3] [4] . between late 2002 and 2004, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), a member of the coronaviridae family in the nidovirales order, emerged as a new human pathogen, causing a worldwide epidemic with more than 8000 infections and 700 known deaths [5, 6] . while the primary host reservoir responsible for harboring the immediate ancestor of sars-cov has yet to be identified, evidence of direct transmission of the virus between civets in close proximity to humans has been observed and reported in at least two distinct events [7] [8] [9] .the world health organization (who) became involved in responding to this outbreak by using modern communications technologies to establish a worldwide collaborative multi-centre research project on severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) diagnosis tasked with identifying the etiological agent of the outbreak. multiple labs worked concurrently to determine the sequence of this new pathogen [10] , investigate the structure of virions by electron microscopy [11] , and generate other data that contributed to the correct identification of the causative agent [12] . meanwhile, public health specialists implemented control measures and mitigation procedures to prevent the spread of the disease [13] .in order to support research focused on these newly emerging pathogens, the division of microbiology and infectious diseases (dmid) of the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases (niaid), at the us national institutes of health (nih), is supporting a variety of resources for researchers (http://www.niaid.nih.gov/labsandresources/resources/dmid/pages/default.aspx) including the genomic sequencing centers for infectious diseases, structural genomics centers for infectious diseases, systems biology for infectious diseases research [14] , and bei resources repository programs to increase public availability of genome sequence data, 3d protein structures, systems biology models, isolated organisms and experiment reagents. the bioinformatics resource centers (brc) for infectious diseases [15] [16] [17] were created to serve as database resources for the integration of research and surveillance data being generated by these dmid-sponsored resources and by other primary investigators working on infectious diseases caused by different groups of human pathogens and their insect vectors. the objective of the brc program is to provide a one-stop-shop for data and analytical tools to support data mining and analysis workflows for both basic and applied research. the virus pathogen database and analysis resource (vipr) brc (www.viprbrc.org) supports virology researchers studying select agents and other significant public health pathogens belonging to 14 virus families, including coronaviridae [16] . cross-referencing data and integrating computational tools into the online vipr resource allows complex analyses to be easily performed by researchers regardless of their bioinformatics training or expertise.the layout of the vipr home page, at www.viprbrc.org, highlights the three major functions of the resource ( figure 1 ). first, vipr captures different types of data from both external and internal sources and makes them accessible through custom search pages. vipr stores these data for virus families categorized as containing either human priority pathogens or possible public health threats including 6 families of single-stranded positive-sense rna viruses-caliciviridae, coronaviridae, flaviviridae, hepeviridae, picornaviridae, togaviridae, 5 families of single-stranded negative-sense rna viruses-arenaviridae, bunyaviridae, filoviridae, paramyxoviridae, rhabdoviridae, 1 family of double-stranded rna viruses-reoviridae, and 2 families of double-stranded dna viruses-herpesviridae, poxviridae. although vipr is focused on supporting human infectious disease research, related viruses within these families isolated from other host species are also accessible to allow comparative genomics research. second, vipr has assembled a suite of data analysis and visualization tools so that users can perform custom correlative analyses. third, datasets and analysis results can be saved in private workspaces in the vipr workbench for subsequent retrieval and sharing.vipr strives to integrate data from three types of sources: (i) data transferred to vipr from public archives, (ii) novel data derived by vipr using a variety of computational algorithms and bioinformatics methods, and (iii) data submitted directly to vipr by independent investigators. these data are stored in a relational database to facilitate rapid retrieval through user-specified queries.vipr aims to provide a single resource to access multiple types of data from various public resources for the virus research community. vipr stores sequence records, manually-curated immune epitopes, 3d protein structures, and other types of public records, together with the relevant metadata (i.e. structured information associated with a given record) from genbank [18] , uniprot [19] , protein databank (pdb, http://www.rcsb.org/pdb) [20] , immune epitope database (iedb, www.iedb.org) [21] , pubmed and gene ontology consortium (go, www.geneontology.org) [22] . all of these data are regularly updated and are easily retrievable by selecting search criteria within the intuitive web-based user query interfaces implemented throughout vipr. for coronaviridae, there are currently sequence and related data from 8635 different virus strains in vipr as of september 2012 (table 1) .following import into vipr, these public data are further processed to produce novel derived data through the use of various automated bioinformatics and comparative genomics algorithms implemented by vipr and run behind the scenes, as well as information from manual curation. such pre-calculated data includes: molecular weight, isoelectric point, and pfam and other domains/motifs determined using interproscan [23] for all proteins; predicted cd8+ t-cell epitopes using the netctl algorithm [24] ; nearest blastp hits; predicted ortholog groups using orthomcl [25] ; and all linked pubmed references (table 1) .vipr utilizes the national center for biotechnology and information (ncbi) refseq strains [26] to extend the manually-curated refseq annotations to the rest of the strains belonging to the same taxon. strain records that lack protease cleavage site information for nonstructural proteins are analyzed using custom prediction pipelines that use multiple sequence alignment to map homologous sequence regions and cleavage sites from closely-related refseq sequences. sequence-based methods are also used to construct virus ortholog groups and the associated annotations, which are provided throughout the resource to easily identify proteins having similar function within the virus family even when the gene/protein names or symbols do not match. in an effort to add information that is not included in the genbank records, vipr has also manually-curated the scientific literature to glean information regarding the country, year and host of isolation for many of the clinically-relevant sars-cov strains.recently, we have implemented a sequence feature variant type component within vipr that captures the location of characterized regions found in viral proteins. while this functionality is based on previous work in human hla and influenza virus proteins [27, 28] , it has been extended to the various taxa within vipr. sequence feature (sf) definitions are obtained from the scientific literature, genbank, uniprot and iedb records, and are categorized as structural (e.g. alpha-helices), functional (e.g. active sites), immune epitopes or sequence alteration sf types. sf definitions are currently available in vipr for dengue (serotypes 1-4), hepatitis c (subtype 1a) and pox (vaccinia) viruses; however, functionality exists that allows researchers to add new definitions for any other virus species in vipr through community annotation efforts. such crowd-sourcing efforts are essential to provide the custom sequence feature definitions for each taxon, which can then be useful in performing data mining, comparative genomics and/or evolutionary analyses by the community as a whole. in order to maintain highly accurate definitions within vipr, all community-proposed sfs are inspected and validated by domain experts prior to becoming publicly accessible through vipr.for each sf, all vipr amino acid sequence records for viruses in the same taxon are searched in order to identify all unique sequence variations observed. all strains containing the same sequence variation pattern are then assigned to the same variant type (vt) category. each defined sf has a dedicated sequence feature details page in vipr that displays information about the protein and strain from which the region was characterized and reported, the reference citations, all observed vts, a list of all strains bearing each of the vts, hyperlinks to any homologous 3d protein structures, and a search interface for finding a particular vt based on the user-input sequence. by performing comparative genomics analyses on unique sets of sequence variations in the short, well-characterized regions found in the sfvt component of vipr, researchers can easily identify candidate positions that correlate with a given phenotype at a finer level of granularity and with less noise than is possible using whole-protein sequence analysis approaches.outside institutions and programs, including the niaid-funded genome sequencing centers (gsc) for infectious diseases, submit coronaviridae sequence metadata that may not be available in the corresponding genbank sequence record directly to vipr. sequence metadata can be used in various vipr search interfaces as query criteria to identify all strain records and/or genome sequence data that match the specified constraints, and in selected comparative genomics analysis tools.data from experiments interrogating host genes and proteins that respond to viral infection are currently being generated and submitted by laboratories associated with the niaid-supported systems biology for infectious diseases research program and the brc driving biological projects program, and have recently been included within the new host factor component in vipr. the intent of these studies is to identify host factors that positively-and/or negatively influence virus replication across a range of experimental variables using high-throughput "-omics" methods including gene expression microarrays, proteomics and rna interference technologies. for each set of experimental variables, the lists of host factors, called "biosets", that are identified as being significantly different when compared to controls are submitted to vipr. the aim of this component is to provide easy access to the processed data, establish an automated approach for users to perform a rapid comparison of their own gene(s) of interest against those that have previously been identified through virus-host response experiments, and to offer the analytical tools necessary to interpret such data. currently, vipr contains data from multiple host factor experiments involving sars-cov and influenza a virus infections in cell culture and in experimental animals, and provides a boolean search function to identify shared, unique or combined lists of factors found to be significant between such experiments. additional datasets from experiments using other viruses will be imported in the future.access to data in vipr, together with the integrated analysis and visualization tools begins by clicking on the coronaviridae family name on the vipr home page. the system was designed to separate data by family to ideally manage the genome structure, data requirements and other specific nuances that are unique to each virus family. constructing a custom query for any data type, including sequence records, is both fast and easy using the custom interfaces designed to reflect the contents in the vipr system. whole and partial genome sequence records can be searched with user-specified criteria including genera, species, virus host, and geographical and/or temporal point of isolation. currently, the coronaviridae component in vipr contains sequence data for viruses annotated as being isolated from 68 different host types across 59 countries between 1941 and 2011. keyword searches can be used to retrieve database entries based on any available metadata. more advanced pattern-matching search capabilities also exist to retrieve sequence records that contain specified sequence strings. search results are reported in tabular format on a genome search results page, which provides hyperlinks to strain details pages for each respective strain. the strain details page ( figure 2 ) is specific to each virus strain and contains various annotations, including strain name and taxonomy, as well as a description of the host and geo-temporal point of specimen isolation. genome-level information such as genbank record name and accession number, sequence length and number of proteins encoded by the genome are also displayed on the strain details page together with genome image map graphics and protein information tables. choosing a specific protein from either the graphic or the table will load a gene/protein details page ( figure 3 ) that displays additional information obtained from public archives, including experimentallydetermined immune epitopes and go annotations, and data derived from vipr analysis procedures, including predicted molecular weight, isoelectric point, domains/motifs, predicted immune epitopes, blastp results and ortholog information. . gene and protein information in vipr. the gene/protein details page combines annotations at the gene and protein levels and presents them in a single comprehensive page in vipr according to the source of the information. the information associated with the nucleocapsid protein from the sars-cov tor2 strain is shown, including information such as uniprotkb and genbank protein accession numbers, the corresponding protein sequence, genomic location, isoelectric point, molecular weight, pfam (and other) domains, relevant 3d protein structures, predicted epitopes, experimentally-determined epitopes, gene ontology classification, results from blastp searches, and ortholog information, which are derived from uniprot, genbank, interproscan algorithm, pdb, netctl algorithm, immune epitope database, gene ontology consortium, blast, and the orthomcl algorithm, respectively.once the desired sequence records are obtained from the search results page, an integrated collection of tools is provided to perform various comparative genomics analyses and visualization tasks. the suite of tools currently available in vipr includes: multiple sequence alignment (msa) calculation using either muscle (with uclust) or mauve [29] [30] [31] , msa visualization and modification with jalview [32] , msa format conversion with readseq [33] , phylogenetic tree reconstruction using the fastme, phyml or raxml algorithms [34] [35] [36] , evolutionary model selection using either modelcompare or prottest [37] , phylogenetic tree visualization and manipulation with archaeopteryx [38] , 3d protein structure visualization and exploration using jmol [39] , metadatadriven comparative genomics statistical analysis using meta-cats, nucleotide and amino acid sequence search against custom databases using blast [40] , sequence variation calculation using the weblogo algorithm [41] , short peptide search with exact, fuzzy or pattern match, annotation mapping for new sequences using the genome annotation transfer utility [42] , and custom pcr primer design using the primer3 algorithm [43] ( table 2 ). the use of a subset of these tools will be described in more detail as part of an exploratory scientific use case described below. find short amino acid strings in target proteins using exact, fuzzy, or pattern matching genome annotation transfer utility annotate a new genome sequence using an existing well-annotated reference genome primer3design pcr primers to amplify specific virus sequence(s) based on the data within viprthe vipr workbench is a relatively unique feature that allows users to save search criteria and results, selected sequence records as working sets, and analysis results for future access. any user can register for their own free private workspace for each virus family in the vipr system simply by providing an email address and password to enable future log in. working sets of nucleotide sequences can be converted into sets of amino acid sequences, and vice versa, using integrated sequence type conversion tools. the workbench also facilitates the virtual sharing of user-selected content with collaborators around the world, regardless of their physical location. when saving search criteria in the workbench, the system can automatically notify the user via email whenever new records that match the original query are added to the database. selected sequence records from multiple searches can be merged using boolean logic, and can be combined with user uploaded data to be analyzed with the integrated suite of tools in vipr, while keeping the uploaded data private. results from multiple sequence alignments, sequence variation analysis, and phylogenetic tree inferences can be saved for quick future retrieval.the vipr team is constantly working to improve and extend the vipr resource. development of new system capabilities is frequently guided by scientific use cases that involve data access and storage approaches, novel analytical methods, and exploratory workflows that could be helpful to vipr users. as an example of how the various types of data and metadata can be combined with the integrated analysis tools, we will employ one of these scientific use cases to demonstrate the utility of the vipr system.recently, an analysis that characterized the sequence relationships between whole sars-cov genomes isolated from civets and humans was performed [8] . as an example use case, we have extended this previous study by performing an in-depth comparative genomics analysis of these sequences together with all other publicly available sars-cov sequences isolated from humans and civets between 2003 and 2004 using the capabilities and tools existing in the vipr system. the bioinformatics workflow that was used follows these steps: (i) identify all whole genome sequence records of interest from human and civet through the coronaviridae-specific search interface in vipr, (ii) save the resulting sequence records as a working set in the integrated personal workbench area of the resource, (iii) visualize the multiple sequence alignment, (iv) construct a maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree, (v) perform a metadata-driven comparative genomics statistical analysis of sequence variation between the host groups, and (vi) visualize where significantly differing residues are located on a 3d protein structure.we begin by searching for all sars-cov sequences in vipr derived from isolates taken from either humans or civets. as of september 2012, this query returned 79 complete genome records consisting of 62 human records from 9 annotated countries and 17 civet records from 2 annotated countries isolated between 2003 and 2004, including strains taken during the height of the main and recurrent sars-cov outbreaks. query results are displayed on the genome search results page with contents sortable by clicking on the column headings. desired records from the search results page can then be directly analyzed by selecting any of the integrated tools accessible as menu options under the "run analysis" pull-down tab, or saved as a working set in the users personal workbench. for the purposes of this use case, the sequence set was additionally filtered to remove fifteen genome records that did not have metadata for the year of isolation, two genome records that were derived from passaging of a virus strain already in the list, and one duplicate record for the refseq strain already in the list.all 61 genome sequence records matching the search and passing the filtering criteria were selected and saved to the workbench for more in-depth analysis by clicking the "add to working set" button on the search results page. this filtered dataset consisted of 15 isolates taken from civets and 46 isolates taken from humans.sequence data in fasta format can be used as input for performing a fast customized multiple sequence alignment (msa) in real-time. data sources for this analysis can include search results, working sets and/or uploaded custom sequences. sequences for rna viruses are aligned with the muscle algorithm on the vipr server, with the ability to download the msa results in fasta format and/or save the msa results to the workbench. once the alignment is finished, the integrated jalview tool allows the viewing and editing of the sequence and label information associated with the alignment to assist in interpreting the results. for the current use case, the nucleotide sequence alignment for the selected sars-cov strains confirms that these genomes are extremely well conserved across the entire length of the alignment even though they are derived from two very different host species (figure 4a ).nucleotide or amino acid sequence data can be used to construct phylogenetic trees in vipr. sequence data can be obtained from search results, working sets or custom data uploaded either to the workbench or directly to the phylogenetic tree input page. alternatively, phylogenetic trees can be constructed through the "run analysis" pull-down tab on the multiple sequence alignment results page directly. once a phylogenetic tree is completed, the results can be saved in the workbench or downloaded in the phyloxml or newick formats [44] . vipr provides the fastme algorithm for constructing minimum evolution phylogenetic trees from the selected sequence data using the 'quick tree' option. the phyml and raxml maximum likelihood tree inferencing algorithms (with bootstrapping) have also been included in vipr together with the modelcompare software to determine the evolutionary model best suited for use with any individual dataset.when the phylogenetic tree construction is finished, the integrated archaeopteryx phylogenetic tree viewer can be used to easily visualize, explore, interpret and manipulate the tree using built-in functions such as re-rooting, branch swapping, selecting sub-trees, etc. [38] . this visualization tool has been further customized to take advantage of the extensive metadata associated with the various sequence records stored in the vipr database, to allow user-driven coloration of the labels at the terminal nodes (i.e. "leaves") of the phylogenetic tree according to the host, country or year of isolation. a high-resolution image of the customized phylogenetic tree display can be exported in a variety of formats to enable more in-depth interpretation and/or inclusion in presentations or publications. for the current scientific use case, raxml was used to reconstruct the phylogenetic tree for all sequence records that matched the original search and filtering criteria, which was subsequently colored based on the host of isolation (figure 4b) . the tree topology for this phylogenetic reconstruction shows two major clades that separate largely according to both the year and host of isolation. the majority of strains from the first clade were taken in 2003 with all but two members of this clade being isolated from civets (hereafter referred to as the 'civet-predominate clade'). for the second clade, almost all of the strains were sampled in 2004 with all but two members isolated from humans (hereafter referred to as the 'human-predominate clade'). this topology confirms that at least two species-jump events between civet and human have occurred [9] . it also suggests that this species barrier does not appear to be a significant bottleneck for sars-cov.the metadata-driven comparative analysis tool for sequences (meta-cats) is an automated analysis workflow developed and implemented by the vipr team to support the calculation of userdriven comparative genomics statistical analyses. this tool allows users to not only take advantage of the numerous sequence records in vipr, but also the wealth of accompanying metadata for these records stored in the vipr database. such metadata may include date and/or geospatial point of specimen collection, host species, severity of disease, etc. since this tool examines both the sequence and the associated metadata, statistically significant genotype-phenotype correlations can be detected. input for this tool can include sequence search results, working sets, or custom upload of both sequence data and the associated metadata. once the desired sequences are selected, the tool guides the user through the necessary steps of 1) assigning the sequences to up to five different groups based on metadata or other user criteria, 2) aligning all assigned sequences, 3) performing automated statistical analyses on the sequences, and 4) viewing the results.for the current use case, the original sequence search results were automatically divided into two groups by the vipr system based on the annotated host of isolation (human vs. civet). the meta-cats results page displays the significant residues differing between the specified groups (figure 4c ), identifying 117 nucleotide positions in the entire sars-cov genome that significantly differed between the civet and human isolates. these positions were scattered throughout the genome and had calculated p-values ranging from 4.33x10 -12 to 0.02492 (supplementary table 1 ). when this list was compared against the 26 nucleotide positions that differed between civet and human isolates reported in a previous study [8] , all 26 of the previously identified positions were also found to be significant in this meta-cats analysis.vipr has integrated the jmol protein structure viewer application to facilitate the exploration and visualization of 3d protein structures either for custom uploaded data or for protein data bank (pdb) structures from any taxa present in vipr. the application has been enhanced to allow users to highlight active sites, immune epitopes and ligands, customize the appearance of the protein structure and quickly save an image or animated video of the structure. in addition, residues from the 3d protein structure(s) for each pdb file are mapped to the homologous positions in the stored uniprot records to facilitate quick and accurate comparison between structural data and amino acid sequence data.for the current use case, we decided to explore the sars-cov spike protein structure (pdb id: 2ghv) in more detail since multiple residues were found to significantly differ between the civet and human isolates in the spike coding region. two of these significant nucleotide positions, 22942 and 22965, located in codons for amino acids 479 and 487, respectively, were particularly interesting since they were found to lie within the receptor-binding motif of the sars-cov receptor-binding domain of the spike protein and had been reported to influence species-specific binding affinity for the host angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) [45] . the selected 3d structure includes most of the sars-cov receptor-binding domain of the spike protein, which is located between residues 318-510 [46, 47] . secondary structures were displayed as ribbons and spike amino acid positions 479 and 487 were highlighted in blue to confirm that they are exposed on the exterior surface of the protein in a position accessible for host receptor binding (figure 4d ).the workflow that was followed throughout the scientific use case confirms and extends results obtained through previous comparative genomics analyses and demonstrates the power of the vipr system. specifically, our phylogenetic tree corroborates the theory that there were at least two separate human outbreaks from viruses closely related to two separate clades isolated from civets during the time of the sars-cov epidemic. our tree also shows a strong correlation between host and year of isolation, although this observation is not true for all strains included in the tree. the meta-cats analysis identified significant p-values for 117 nucleotide residues that were identified as having significant variation between the civet and human isolates. the positions that are located within the sars-cov spike protein receptor-binding motif, which were identified by meta-cats, appear to reflect virus sequence variations that affect binding to host-specific receptor proteins. additional wetlab experimentation will be required to elucidate the specific function of the remaining significant sequence variations and whether they alter the fitness of the virus. mapping residues and regions of interest onto a 3d protein structure can yield additional insight into their functional role. the scientific use case that was explored here serves as an example of the ability of vipr to support data exploration and the generation of biologically relevant hypotheses that can then be subjected to more in-depth laboratory testing through experimentation. the virus pathogen database and analysis resource (vipr, http://www.viprbrc.org), supported by the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases (niaid) bioinformatics resource centers (brc) program, is a freely-available website that provides an intuitive search interface to access data about human pathogenic virus families, including coronaviridae, obtained from public repositories, custom algorithms and direct-submission. these data are integrated with a suite of unique analytical and visualization tools for exploratory analysis. the vipr resource provides researchers with an easy mechanism to not only perform complex analytical workflows, but to save the results and share them with collaborators to expedite discovery through the generation of experimentally-testable hypotheses. such experimental discoveries can then be translated from the 'bench' to the 'bedside' in the form of diagnostics, prophylactics, vaccines and treatments for viruses belonging to the coronaviridae family.comprehensive analysis of sars-cov-2 genomes is critically important to determine transmission patterns and identify haplotype and variant signatures that may be associated with evolving pathophysiology and virulence. the rapid accumulation and sharing of sars-cov-2 genome sequences at an unprecedented speed have greatly facilitated such efforts. since the first sars-cov-2 genome sequence was reported in january of 2020, as of june 18th, there have been over 48,000 sequences deposited to gisaid (https://www.gisaid.org/; elbe and buckland-merrett, 2017; shu et al., 2017) and 8,000 sequences submitted to ncbi virus (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/sarscov-2-seqs/), the china national center for bioinformation (cncb) 2019 ncov resource (https://bigd.big.ac.cn/ncov/; zhao et al., 2020) and other data repositories. these data have been used to generate phylogenetic studies most of which have been country-private, while others have focused on global virus phylogenetic and transmission analyses. however, the full-scale characterization of sars-cov-2 genomes reported to date, at the time of this writing exceeding 50,000 worldwide, has not yet been reported.in our previous study, we established a comprehensive covid-19 genomic resource, chla card (https://covid19.cpmbiodev.net/), by harmonizing data from gisaid, ncbi virus, cncb and other resources . using chla card, we performed a comprehensive analysis of all publically available sars-cov-2 genome sequences at the time of study. we called variants from each genome sequence, and annotated each isolate and variant with associated demographic data and functional predictions. our categorical analyses of variants and haplotypes provided a snapshot of sars-cov-2 viral genetics globally, six months into the covid-19 pandemic. the functional and pathophysiological importance of these variants and haplotypes remains to be determined. however, based on the differential selections of variants in different genes, there is the potential for emergence of a number of different strains, at least some of which might differ in their transmissibility and virulence. continuous monitoring of the country-private variant and haplotype profiles will lead to in-depth understanding of how the covid-19 pandemic evolves from the viral genetic perspective, and will be critical as countries across the world move to re-open, often with variable degrees of control of covid-19. such an approach may hopefully aid in the timely identification of variants and haplotypes that are potentially associated with significant changes in transmissibility and virulence as they emerge.the merged sars-cov-2 collection as of june 18, 2020 consisted of ~50,500 isolates after removing duplicates among data sources. these were complete or near complete genome sequences (> 29,600 bases) with over 97% of the isolates originating from asia, europe and usa. non-human host sequences were excluded. sars-cov-2 genome sequences of ~700 isolates were identical to the reference genome nc_045512.2. the remaining isolates carried at least one variant when compared against the reference, and were included in the subsequent variant and haplotype analyses. the number of variants per isolate ranged from 0 to over 30, and isolates with 30 or more variants were excluded from the analysis because they were regarded as likely low-quality sequences. the remaining 49,637 isolates belonged to 93 geographic locations; 22,068 (44.5%) isolates in the united kingdom (uk) and 10,397 (20.9%) isolates in the us. notably underrepresented were isolates from african (578) and south american (647) countries (table 1) . a total of 459 isolates were classified as imported based on the reported country of exposure being different to the country of the resident. iceland had a highest number of imported isolates (198) followed by india (34) and china (30) . a total of 17,100 variants and 24,633 potential haplotypes were detected from any isolate. however, the submitted genome sequences were generated by a variety of laboratories and sequencing technologies, not all of which provided the same or uniform coverage across the viral genome. to account for this variation, we further filtered the variants and haplotypes by requiring their presence in at least 3 isolates to be included in downstream analysis (table 1, 4) .a total of 6,070 variants and 2,513 haplotypes were identified in at least three global isolates independently and were deemed reliable and less likely to be sequencing artifacts ( table 1 ). in total, these 6,070 variants included 3,486 missense, 2,167 synonymous, 336 intergenic, 12 inframe deletions/insertion, 10 frameshift, 41 stop gained/lost, and several other noncoding variants ( table 2 ). the number of missense variants was significantly higher than that of synonymous variants, overall across all genes, and for each individual gene. the number of missense variants was 77% more than synonymous variants but less than the in silica predicted ratio of ~3.0 based on random chance. the gene level numbers were 279 vs 135 (2.0x) in n gene, and 384 vs 239 (1.6x) in s gene for the global isolates ( table 3 ). the four most common mutations (241-c-t/5utr-orf1ab, 3037-c-t/orf1ab:p.phe924phe, 14408-c-t/orf1ab:p.pro4715leu, 23403-a-g/s:p.asp614gly ) were each present in 70.3%-71.8% of non-us isolates and 67.5%-69.3% of us isolates (figure 1) . the multi-nucleotide variant "28881-g-a, 28882-g-c, 28883-g-a" causing a 2-amino acid variant n:p.arg203_204lysgly -> n:p.arg203_204lysarg, was present in 32.0% of the non-us isolates, with a significant presence in isolates from the uk (41.3%), other european countries (24.0%) and australia (13.5%), but not in the isolates from the usa (3.4% ) (figure 1 ).across geographic locations, the total number of variants was highest in the uk isolates (3,649), followed by usa (2,481), while asia (1,593) and oceania (965) collections had far fewer variants. it is worth noting, however, that rates of sequencing vary significantly across these geographies.the largest three haplotypes were the 1,771-isolate haplotype "241-c-t, 3037-c-t, 14408-c-t, 23403-a-g, 28881-g-a, 28882-g-a, 28883-g-c", the 1,458-isolate haplotype "241-c-t, 1059-c-t, 3037-c-t, 14408-c-t, 23403-a-g, 25563-g-t", and the 727-isolate haplotype "241-c-t, 3037-c-t, 14408-c-t, 23403-a-g". they were all predominantly present in europe and usa.the missense variants predicted in silica based on random chance were about 3 times that of synonymous variants per gene, in the range of 2.7~3.8 ( table 3) . the observed ratios of variant ranged from 1.03 for m gene, to 3.30 for orf3a gene, but all the ratios were lower than the in silica predicted ratios based on random chance. the ratio of isolates with at least one missense variant in a gene versus isolates with at least one nonsynonymous variant in the same gene, was 0.93 in the m-gene (chi-squared test p-value of depletion < 2.2e-16), suggesting the possibility that this gene was undergoing strong purifying selection. purifying selection could have affected the m gene whose missense variant-carrying isolates were significantly less frequent than expected from the in-silica predicated variant types. in contrast, the ratios of isolates were 20.6 in orf8, 14.0 in orf3a gene, and 6.1 in s-gene with the chi-square p-values of enrichment for missense variants all below 2.2e-16, suggesting the possibility that these genes may have been under positive selection for missense variants. further analysis including functional validation would be required to confirm the significance of these changes. in-depth analyses that take into consideration of emergence timing, geographic location, founder effect, and ancestral haplotype are needed before any conclusion can be reached. ultimately, questions about the fitness of variants require in vitro functional studies. there have been speculations that some supercontagious lineages of sars-cov-2 may be evolving towards higher transmissibility. 25563-g-t (orf3a:p.57q>h) is a noteworthy candidate. it emerged first in france on 2/21/2020, later in usa on 02/27/2020 (figure 3) , and quickly dominated the usa isolates since 03/02/2020, present in 60.0% of isolates. it also appeared in 22% and 11.4 % of isolates from asia and european union, but was rare in the uk. in france, the frequency of this allele had continued to change and the allele was rare in isolates since mid-april. tracing this allele in the context of haplotype evolution may help clarify whether it was imported or spontaneously occurred again in usa isolates. the 23403a>g (s:p:614d>g) mutation which quickly dominated usa and europe caused 4-time increase of higher transmissibility in vitro . the 25563-g-t (orf3a:p.57q>h) variant that has become dominant in usa is worthy of in vitro validation.twenty-six percent of the variants (1,583) present in at least 3 isolates were country-private variants ( table 4) . country-private variants, and similarly country-private haplotypes, were defined as variant where at least 98% of the variant-carrying isolates are from the same country and at most 2 isolates come from other countries no matter the total isolates. a single isolate could carry 2 or more country-private variants. they were identified in 10,238 isolates from 50 countries, with 25 countries having at least 10 isolates carrying the country-private variants. the uk had 896 private variants involving 6,142/22068 (28.8%) sequenced isolates whereas the usa had 329 private variants involving 2,166/10,402 (20.8%) sequenced isolates. each of these private variants occurred in on average 30.0 isolates in the usa to 40.6 isolates in uk. most other countries had less than 100 reported isolates carrying country-private variants. for instance, australia had 52 private variants involving 428/2,169 (19.7%) of sequenced isolates and iceland had 12 private variants involving 82 /596 (13.8%) sequenced isolates. this number is much lower than reported in a study comparing iceland isolates against the 1,300-isolate gisaid march 22 collection (gudbjartsson et al., 2020) , because a larger 50k-isolate global collection was used for comparison in this study. variants mentioned in that report may have strictly kept its iceland-private status (i.e. 5142-c-t, gene orf1ab: p.thr1626ile; 25958-a-g, gene orf3a:p.tyr189cys), or subsequently observed in other countries when more viral genome sequences were available (i.e. 24054-c-t, gene s:p.ala831val ). italy, a early covid-19 epicenter has only one private variant 2269-a-t that was seen in 4 isolates.by variant functional annotations, the majorities of country-private variants were missense variants totaling 896 variants involving 6,904 isolates, which were about 77% more frequent than the 586 synonymous variants affecting 3,893 isolates. high impact nonsense/stop gained variants affected only 86 isolates. for the genes affected, orf1ab ranked the first, as expected because of its large size, with 899 variants from 6,015 isolates, followed by s gene with 149 variants from 1,432 isolates. the n gene ranked the 3 rd with 80 variants in 515 isolates.regarding the emergence timeline of country-private variants and associated isolates, the numbers were low before mid-march when sequences genome numbers were less than 1,000. the new emergence peaked between mid-march and mid-april followed by a plateau that may be attributed to fewer genome sequences released since april 19 th (figure 2 (figure 2 ).country-private haplotypes were identified in 39 countries when we limited it to haplotypes shared by at least 5 isolates, and required that at least 99% of the isolates were clearly from the same country and at most 2 isolates from other countries. a total of 802 haplotypes from 8,372 isolates were classified as country-private. private haplotypes represented 22.4% (4,492), 16.6% (1,728) and 16.4% (356) of uk, usa, and australia isolates, respectively.iceland and thailand private haplotypes also represented 12.6% (75) and 33.7% (68) of the nation's sars-cov-2 genome sequences, respectively. iceland is geographically isolated from other countries. all members of the 74-isolate iceland-private 6-variant haplotype "241-c-t, 3037-c-t,10323-a-g, 14408-c-t, 20268-a-g, 23403-a-g", and the 34-isolate private 5-variant haplotype, "5142-c-t, 11083-g-t, 14805-c-t, 17247-t-c, 26144-g-t", and all their 27 descendent isolates, were only seen from iceland although they were present at about the same period of mid-to late-march 2020. their potential immediate ancestral haplotypes with 5 and 4 variants were inferred with chla card genome tracker , and they were observed widely from asia to europe and america which was mostly sampled from late march. this may imply the importation of these haplotypes or their ancestors to iceland, and then followed by localized outbreak without re-exportation to other countries.austria had a 36-isolate private haplotype "241-c-t, 3037-c-t, 12832-g-a, 14408-c-t, 23403-a-g, 28881-g-a, 28882-g-a, 28883-g-c" and its 2 austria -private descendent haplotypes in 9 isolates. the isolates were collected from february 26 to late march. this haplotype's earliest isolate originated from italy (epi_isl_419656). the immediate ancestral haplotype was present in multiple european countries including austria itself since february 24.uk isolates had 464 private haplotypes from 4,942 isolates, which was 22.4% of all uk isolates. the 4 largest uk-private haplotypes were "1440-g-a, 2891-g-a, 28851-g-t" (uk-h1, 97 isolates) and its immediate descendant "1440-g-a, 2891-g-a, 28851-g-t and 1440-g-a, 2891-g-a, 25669-c-t, 28851-g-t" (uk-h2, 110 isolates), and "241-c-t, 3037-c-t, 10798-c-a, 13862-c-t, 14408-c-t, 23403-a-g, 28836-c-t" (uk-h3, 109 isolates), and "241-c-t, 3037-c-t, 14408-c-t, 22879-c-a, 23403-a-g" (uk-h4, 97 isolates). with chla card genome tracker and offline analysis, we found that the immediate ancestor of uk-h1 (2-variants, 1440-g-a, 2891-g-a) was widely circulating in multiple european countries including uk and germany. all but one of the 986 isolates carrying these 4 haplotypes or any of their 403 immediate and remote descendent haplotypes were uk-private. their evolutionary context was inferred from the closest ancestral and descendant isolates with genome tracker tool, and then combined with a randomly sampled representative global isolate collection for joint phylogenetic analysis. the result showed that these country-private clusters formed distinct clades (figure 4) . as the more comprehensive global summary, 700 of the 807 country-private haplotypes had 8,151 smaller decedent same-country private haplotypes each with fewer than 5 isolates per haplotype. the total isolates from them was 14,061, together with the major private haplotypes, 22,171 (45.8%) isolates carried country-private haplotypes globally. the percentage of isolates carrying private haplotypes were 29.9%, 28.2%, 46.4% and 59.6% in january-february, march, april and may 2020 respectively. it stayed low till march, but increased rapidly in april and may.there were relatively fewer private haplotypes or related isolates from asia. it should be noted that the asia private haplotypes were usually on the ancestral side, consisted of mostly 1 to 3 variants. this could reflect the earlier emergence and the gradual extinction of such private haplotypes as sars-cov-2 rates significantly declined in asia. 21707-c-t was only seen in 21 isolates with china exposure and 1 singapore isolate, and its identical and immediate descendant haplotypes were all sampled during the earlier phase (january to early february 2020) except for one china isolate epi_isl_454976 on march 4 th , whereas most of the closest european or north american isolates carrying the 21707-c-t variant had 2 to over 10 extra variants which were evolutionarily remote and were sampled later between mid-march to late april, at least one month later. similarly limited to a single country, the 8782-c-t haplotype was present only in 13 singaporean isolates between jan 27 to match 2, but in no other country despite the fact that 3,965 other isolates across the world also carried this variant along with other variants.clear patterns of geographic specific distributions were evident at both variant and the haplotype levels from our stratified phylogenetic analysis. geographic specific haplotypes were present in 8,372 of 20,414 isolates carrying haplotypes seen at least 5 times (41.0%). the uk, usa, australia and iceland together contributed 7,213 (86%) of the 8,372 isolates carrying countryprivate haplotypes. these countries are all geographically isolated from mainland europe and asia, where the initial outbreaks occurred. there were 19 private haplotypes that each had from 50 to 311 isolates. they were often continuously sampled across months but yet not "exported" to other countries despite the large numbers of isolates in circulation (over 20%). in contrast, only three country-private haplotypes with over 30 isolates were identified from the mainland european countries. one 35-isolate haplotype was from austria, ("241-c-t, 3037-c-t, 12832-g-a, 14408-c-t, 23403-a-g, 28881-g-a, 28882-g-a, 28883-g-c"), the other one is a very young 36-isolate haplotype from netherlands, only sampled between may 18 to 22 ("241-c-t, 1594-c-t, 3037-c-t, 11109-c-t, 13458-c-t, 14408-c-t, 22206-a-g, 23403-a-g, 25563-g-t, 27654-c-t"), and the third is spain-private with 43 isolates ("8782-c-t, 9477-t-a, 14805-c-t, 25979-g-t, 28144-t-c, 28657-c-t, 28863-c-t, 29870-c-a") and its 4 spain-private descendent haplotypes. other country-private haplotypes from mainland european countries usually had lower numbers of isolates under 30 ( table 6 ). the uk-private haplotypes (figure 4 , colored in red) were mostly on different major clades than the usa-private haplotypes (figure 4 , colored in blue). this suggests reduced country-to-country transmissions potentially associated with travel restrictions.the global isolates were assigned to major gisaid clades according to the diagnostic variant signatures and existing gisaid clades designations ( table 7) . the largest clades were gr, g and gh clades. the smallest was the o clade. examining the variants from the o clade isolates confirmed that there was no dominant variant or haplotype, where the most frequent haplotype ("6312-c-a, 11083-g-t, 13730-c-t, 23929-c-t, 28311-c-t") presented in 3.6% isolates (77/2138), and the more frequent variants presented in the o clade isolates were 11083-g-t at 46.7%, 28311-c-t at 22.7%, and 13730_c-t at 20.4%. isolates carrying the country-private haplotypes were less frequent for the o-clade (34.7%), but not far from other clades, between 40-50% among the haplotypes seen in 3 or more isolates. for per country clade ratios, usa has more gh (55.3%) and s (17.2%) clade isolates, whereas uk has more gr (44.2%) and g (25.3%) clades isolates but only 6.2% of gh and 1.1% of s clades (table 8 ).the generous and collaborative joint efforts by laboratories world-wide in generating and sharing sars-cov-2 genomes have made available a large amount of viral genome sequences and associated meta-data, for research, diagnosis, treatment development. we characterized the variants and haplotypes from all ~50,500 viral genome sequences available from multiple resources as of june 18, 2020. 6,070 variants were found to be present on 3 or more isolates, and 1,386 (26.8%) of them were country-private. the per gene variant density was quite consistent despite few hotspots. the comprehensive set of variants and haplotypes was integrated with demographic data, timeline of collection, and functional annotation, and made accessible at chla card web resource for searching, browsing, and phylogenetic analysis. the global isolates were assigned to major gisaid clades ( table 7) , but the clades were large with over 10,000 isolates in the g/gr/gh clades thus lacked resolution. there was an attempt to provide granularity for fine-scale lineage assignment (rambaut et al., 2020) , but a lineage classification system may need to handle the hierarchical structure with natural variant and haplotype profiles along the virus evolution as well as the reversal mutation and independent co-evolution. in our opinion, a system similar to the mitochondrial haplogroup such as modeled in the phylotree (http://www.phylotree.org) is worthy of consideration.the travel restrictions between countries were mostly enforced in late march. march had the lowest percentage of isolates carrying country-private variants (14.2%) when compared to january and february (16.6%), and the percentage quickly doubled in april (28.4%) and tripled in may (39.8%) (figure 2) . sars-cov-2 may appears to have been spreading freely across countries through passenger traveling until late march, allowing for the spread of virus variant profiles to multiple countries. with the imposition of strict global travel bans in late march, the newly occurred variants were largely restricted to individual countries or even local regions as we observed in the us . it is concerning that over 40% of the recently sampled isolates carried country-or even province/state-private variants, which suggests a significant number of new variants are emerging and accumulating in a matter of months. the real-time monitoring of new viral genomes and in silica modeling of mutation effects are critical to timely identification of mutation similar to 23403a>g (s:p:614d>g) which quickly dominates and cause 4-time higher transmissibility in vitro (daniloski et al., 2020; . it will be worthwhile to integrate the sars-cov-2 genotype and haplotype data with clinical data, and the national level transmission and morbidity data to search for potential highly transmissible haplotypes/genotypes or, conversely, high-morbidity but less-infectious ones. the host-virus genotype interaction possibility can also be assessed through multifaceted data integration. such information can aid in the development of covid-19 clinical management guided by both viral and host genotypes.in summary, we performed an up-to-date and comprehensive variant and haplotype characterization of all reported sars-cov-2 sequences and isolates using the chla card (https://covid19.cpmbiodev.net/). sign of positive and purifying selections were detected for further computational and experimental verification. there were a significant number of strongly localized outbreaks as evident from the country-private haplotypes and genotypes that involved multiple continents. their locations, temporal transmissions, and timings of countrywide lock-down together demonstrated the effectiveness of existing travel restriction policies which may have been greatly enhanced by the natural geo-isolation, and the public health measures in controlling the transmission of sars-cov-2. the discovery of such a large number of country-private variants and haplotypes, in a matter of 6 months, raises legitimate concerns about the potential emergence of novel strains with increased virulence and/or transmissibility.source of sras-cov-2 sequences. the major external resources of sars-cov-2 isolates, genome sequences, and variants were gisaid, genbank, cncb, and nextstrain. data was downloaded in various formats depending on the exact implementations of these external resources. eighty-three viral sequences from the center for personalized medicine, children's hospital los angeles (chla) were also included. the viral genome sequences and metadata were cross-examined to identify and to remove duplicate entries present in multiple resources.variant & haplotype analysis. variants were called against the sars-cov-2 reference sequence (nc_045512.2) using dnadiff from mummer (marçais et al., 2018, v.4 ). the analysis was automated with custom batch scripts. variant functional annotation was carried out by snpeff (v4.31t). the ribosome slippage region positions in cdna and protein were manually adjusted to account for the coronavirus programmed translational frameshift. the combination or constellation of all variants called in an isolate constitutes the haplotype of the isolate.the isolates with excessive numbers of variants (>=30 per isolate) were excluded from the down-stream analysis as they likely represented low-quality sequences. all raw sequence, metadata, and analysis results were loaded into a mysql database for integration and summarization.phylogenetic analysis. evolution inference or relatedness analysis of viral isolates was carried out with full-length sars-cov-2 sequences using the virus genome tracker tool of chla card ). an isolate's variant profile was compared against the global collection of over 50,500 viral sequences in card. the closest isolates with identical or the most similar variant profiles were identified and classified into identical, ancestral, or descendent categories.for comprehensive and representative phylogenetic analysis to profile the over 50,000 viral genomes, 2 to 6 best quality sequences per haplotype were picked. more sequences were picked from the larger haplotypes. a total of 4,044 sequences were included in the final analysis. leading and trailing missing bases "nnnn" were trimmed off genome sequences. multiple sequence alignment (msa) was done with mafft version 7.460 (katoh et al, 2002; katoh and toh, 2008) using speed-oriented method fft-ns-i (iterative refinement method, two cycles) optimized for large data-sets of thousands of full-length viral genomes. the original multiple sequence alignment (msa) was manually examined in bioedit to remove obviously low quality or outlier sequences. the resulting msa was trimmed off 55 bases from the start, then 65 bases from the end to exclude these likely low coverage regions. internal gaps over 5 bases in length or ones caused by missing bases were removed. the final trimmed msa was used in mega-x (kumar et al., 2018) for evolutionary inference via the maximum likelihood method assuming protein-coding sequences and under the general time reversible model (nei and kumar, 2000) . positions with over 2% alignment gaps, missing data, and ambiguous bases were excluded. the closest coronavirus sequence from bat (epi_isl_402131|mn996532, bat/yunnan/ratg13/2013) was included in msa and tree building as the outgroup to root the tree.the phylogenetic tree was visualized in mega x and figtree v1.4.4 (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/).variants and haplotype were labelled and stratified with isolate metadata, including residential and exposure counties, along with the date of sample collection, sequence technology and quality, and other demographic data such as patient gender and age.enrichment tests among groups defined by meta-data were carried out with the chi-square test. for missense vs synonymous variant analysis, the in-silica predicted missense and synonymous variant numbers were used as the background assuming neutral selection on all coding sites. then the observed variant and isolated numbers were used in the pearson's chi-squared test with yates' continuity correction to identify enrichment and depletion by function types.the clade assignments from the gisaid.org were included when available, and used in stratification of the haplotypes from the matching isolates ( table 7) . the clades were g, gh, gr, l, o, s and v clades.we are thankful to other staff members of the chla virology laboratory and the center for personalized medicine laboratory for their strongest support of this project, while providing patient care and battling the covid-19 pandemic together. the sars-cov-2 genomes and meta data were generously shared via gisaid, genbank, china national center for bioinformation (cncb), nextstrain and other sources. we gratefully acknowledge the originating and submitting laboratories for making the sars-cov-2 sequences and associated metadata available via these public resources. for a full list of such contributors, please see from "virus isolate" tool on chla card (https://covid19.cpmbiodev.net/) the full lists of "originating labs", "submitting labs" and "authors". maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of representative isolates carrying country-private or non-private haplotypes from the global isolates. blue in yellow: clade names. red: uk-private haplotypes, blue: usa-private haplotypes, green: isolates with other country-private haplotypes; black: non-country private haplotype isolates. 2e-4: distance scale bar; rooted at the outgroup (mn996532| epi_isl_402131 bat/yunnan/ratg13/2013) and reference nc_045512 (mn908947|epi_isl_402125). up to 6 isolates from each haplotype were included in the phylogenetic analysis. each branch in the phylogenetic tree may represent a group of isolates. wuhan, hubei province of china in december 2019. the death toll rose to more than 68,000 among 1,250,000 confirmed cases around the globe (until april 4, 2020) [1] . the virus causing covid-19 is named as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). based on the phylogenetic studies, the sars-cov-2 is categorized as a member of the genus betacoronavirus, the same lineage that includes sars coronavirus (sars-cov) [2] that caused sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) in china during 2002 [3] . recent studies showed that sars-cov-2 has a close relationship with bat sars-like covs [4, 5] [7] ].interestingly, s glycoprotein is characterized as the critical determinant for viral entry into host cells which consists of two functional subunits namely s1 and s2. the s1 subunit recognizes and binds to the host receptor through the receptor-binding domain (rbd) whereas s2 is responsible for fusion with the host cell membrane [ [8] , [9] , [10] ]. mers-cov uses dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (dpp4) as entry receptor [11] whereas sars-cov and sars-cov-2 utilize ace-2 (angiotensin converting enzyme-2) [12] , abundantly available in lung alveolar epithelial cells and enterocytes, suggesting s glycoprotein as a potential drug target to halt the entry of sars-with remarkable properties like glutamine-rich 42 aa long exclusive molecular signature (dsqqtvgqqdgsednqtttiqtivevqpqlemeltpvvqtie) in position 983-1024 of polyprotein 1ab (pp1ab) [16] , diversified receptor-binding domain (rbd), unique furin cleavage site (prrar↓sv) at s1/s2 boundary in s glycoprotein which could play roles in viral pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment [17] . to date, few genomic variations of sars-cov-2 are reported [ [18] , [19] ]. there is growing evidence that spike protein, a 1273 amino acid long glycoprotein having multiple domains, possibly plays a major role in sars-cov-2 pathogenesis. viral entry to the host cell is initiated by the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of s1 head. upon receptor-binding, proteolytic cleavage occurs at s1/s2 cleavage site and two heptad repeats (hr) of s2 stalk form a six-helix bundle structure triggering the release of the fusion peptide.as it comes into close proximity to the transmembrane anchor (tm), the tm domain facilitates membrane destabilization required for fusion between virus-host membranes [ [20] , [21] ]. insights into the sequence variations of s glycoprotein among available genomes are key to understanding the biology of sars-cov-2 infection, developing antiviral treatments and vaccines. in this study, we have analyzed 320 genomic sequences of sars-cov-2 to identify mutations between the available genomes followed by the amino acid variations in the glycoprotein s to foresee their impact on the viral entry to host cell from structural biology viewpoint.analysis. the ncbi reference sequence of sars-cov-2 s glycoprotein, accession number yp_009724390 was used as the canonical sequence for the analyses of spike protein variants.variant analyses of sars-cov-2 genomes were performed in the genome detective coronavirus typing tool version 1.13 which is specially designed for this virus the dataset was then aligned with muscle [24] . entropy (h(x)) plot of nucleotide variations in sars-cov-2 genome was constructed using bioedit [25] . mega x (version 10.1.7) was used to construct the msas and the phylogenetic tree using pairwise alignment and neighborjoining methods in clustalw [26, 27] . tree structure was validated by running the analysis on 1000 bootstraps [28] replications dataset and the evolutionary distances were calculated using the poisson correction method [29] .variant sequences of sars-cov-2 were modeled in swiss-model [30] using the cryo-em spike protein structure of sars-cov-2 (pdb id 6vsb; [8] ) as a template. the overall quality of models was assessed in rampage server [31] by generating ramachandran plots (supplementary table 1 ). pymol and biovia discovery studio were used for structure visualization and superpose [32, 33] .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 3. resultsmultiple sequence alignment of the available 320 genomes of sars-cov-2 were performed and 483 variations were found throughout the 29,903 bp long sars-cov-2 genome with in total 115 variations in utr region, 130 synonymous variations that cause no amino acid alteration, 228 non-synonymous variations causing change in amino acid residue, 16 indels, and 2 variations in non-coding region (supplementary table 2 ). among the 483 variations, 40 variations (14 synonymous, 25 non-synonymous mutations and one deletion) were observed in the region of orf s that encodes s glycoprotein which is responsible for viral fusion and entry into the host cell [34] . notable that, most of the sars-cov-2 genome sequences were deposited from the usa (250) and china (50) (supplementary fig. 1 ). positional variability of the sars-cov-2 genome was calculated from the msa of 320 sars-cov-2 whole genomes as a measure of entropy value (h(x)) [35] . excluding 5′ and 3′ utr, ten hotspot of hypervariable position were identified, of which seven were located at orf1ab (1059c>t, 3037c>t, 8782c>t, 14408c>t, 17747c>t, 17858a>g, 18060c>t) and one at orf s (23403a>g), orf3a (25563g>t), and orf8 (28144t>c) respectively. the variability at position 8782 and 28144 were found to be the highest among the other hotspots ( fig. 1 ).the phylogenetic analysis of a total of 66 sequences (26 unique sars-cov-2 and 40 different coronavirus s glycoprotein sequences) was performed. the evolutionary distances showed that all the sars-cov-2 spike proteins cluster in the same node of the phylogenetic tree confirming the sequences are similar to refseq yp_009724390 (fig. 2) . bat coronaviruses has a close evolutionary relationship as different strains were found in the nearest outgroups and clades (bat coronavirus bm48-31, bat hp-beta coronavirus, bat coronavirus hku9) conferring that j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof coronavirus has vast geographical spread and bat is the most prevalent host (fig. 2) . in other clades, the clusters were speculated through different hosts which may describe the evolutionary changes of surface glycoprotein due to cross species transmission. viral hosts reported from different spots at different times is indicative of possible recombination.the s glycoprotein sequences of sars-cov-2 were retrieved from the ncbi virus variation resource repository and aligned using clustalw. the position of sars-cov-2 spike protein domains was measured by aligning with the sars-cov spike protein (fig. 3 ) [36, 37] . from the sequence identity matrix, 26 unique variants among unique sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein sequences were identified to have 25 substitutions and a deletion ( fig. 4a and supplementary table 3 ). 215 sequences were found identical with sars-cov-2 s protein reference sequence (yp_009724390) while 64 sequences were identical with the same variation of d614g (supplementary table 4 respectively due to substitution of amino acid that differs in charge. the remaining 15 variants were mutated with the amino acids that are similar in charge (fig. 4 a) . the sars-cov-2 spike protein variants were superposed with the cryo-electron microscopic structure of sars-cov-2 spike protein [8] . fig. 3) . the s2 subunit of spike protein, especially the heptad repeat region 2, fusion peptide domain, transmembrane domain, and cytoplasmic tail, were found to be highly conserved in the sars-cov and the sars-cov-2 variants while the s1 subunit was more diverse, specifically the n-terminal domain (ntd) and receptor-binding domain (rbd).the spatial distribution of s protein sequences having different variation over time reveals that most of the variants (17 out of 240 s glycoprotein sequences) were reported from the us j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof followed by 3 out of 2 sequences (including y145 deletion) and 2 out of 50 sequences from india and china, respectively (fig. 5) . only one variant was found out of only one available sequence in the repository from sweden, australia, south korea and peru. interestingly, all sequences are unique among countries from the sequence reported except d614g, which was found in the us and peru (fig. 5) . moreover, we have also analyzed sequences from brazil, italy, nepal, pakistan, spain, taiwan and vietnam but there is no variation in the s glycoprotein sequence was found when compared to refseq yp_009724390.covid 19 is one of the most contagious pandemics the world has ever had with 1,250,000 confirmed cases to date (april 4, 2020) and the cases have increased as high as 5 times in less than a month [1] . phylogenetic analysis showed that the sars-cov-2 is a unique coronavirus presumably related to bat coronavirus (bm48-31, hp-betacoronavirus). during this study, we [38] , [39] , [40] ]. likewise, a number of studies targeting sars-cov-2 spike protein have been undertaken for the therapeutic measures [41] , but the unique structural and functional details of sars-cov-2 spike protein are still under scrutiny. we also found a variant (r408i) at receptor binding domain (rbd) that mutated from positively charged arginine residue to neutral and smaller sized isoleucine residue (fig. 4 i) . this change might alter the interaction of viral rbd with the host receptor because the r408 residue of sars-cov-2 is known to interact with the ace2 receptor for viral entry [42] . similarly, alterations of rbd (g476s, v483a, h519q, and a520s) also could affect the interaction of sars-cov-2 spike protein with other molecules j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f which require further investigations. qia98583 and qis30615 variants were found to have an alteration of alanine to valine (a930v), and aspartic acid to tyrosine (d936y) respectively in the alpha helix of the hr1 domain. previous reports have indicated that hr1 domain plays a significant role in viral fusion and entry by forming helical bundles with hr2, and mutations including alanine substitution by valine (a1168v) in hr1 region are predominantly responsible for conferring resistance to mouse hepatitis coronaviruses against hr2 derived peptide entry inhibitors [43] . this study hypothesizes the mutation (a930v) found in that of sars-cov-2 might also have a role in the emergence of drug-resistance virus strains. also, the mutation (d1168h) found in the heptad repeat 2 (hr) sars-cov-2 could play a vital role in viral pathogenesis. moreover, we found that 20 variants including one deletion out of 26 were located within s1 especially within ntd and rbd region of glycoprotein s (fig. 4a) which region is responsible for the preliminary interaction with the host cell receptor ace2.this indicates that the ntd and rbd are very prone to mutations. however, the ntd and rbd portions harbour potential epitopes that might serve as potential peptide vaccine candidates against sars-cov-2 as reported in different studies [44] [45] [46] . the reason behind choosing the sequences from s protein domain ntd and rbd is they are situated in the outer surface of the virus that could be more accessible for the immune system (fig. 3c ). so the variations reported herein within the outer domains of s glycoprotein could help to design effective epitope-based vaccines or antivirals.the sars-cov-2 s protein contains additional furin protease cleavage site, prrars, in s1/s2 domain which is conserved among all 320 sequences as revealed during this study ( supplementary fig. 3 ). this unique signature is thought to make the sars-cov-2 more virulent than sars-cov and regarded as novel features of the viral pathogenesis [9] .according to previous reports the more the host cell protease can process the coronavirus s can accelerate viral tropism accordingly in influenza virus [[9] , [47] , [48] , [49] ]. apart from that, this could also promote viruses to escape antiviral therapies targeting transmembrane protease j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f tmprss2 (clinicaltrials.gov, nct04321096) which is well reported protease to cleave at s1/s2 of s glycoprotein [50] . comparative analyses between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein showed 77% similarity between them where the most diverse region was covid-19 was declared a global health pandemic on march 11, 2020 [1] . it is the biggest public health concern of this century [22] . it has already surpassed the previous two outbreaks due to the coronavirus, namely, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov). the virus acting behind this epidemic is known as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 or in short sars-cov-2 virus. it is a single stranded rna virus which is mainly 26,000 to 32,000 bases long in average [2] . the novel coronavirus is spherical in shape and has spike protein protruding from its surface. these spikes assimilate into human cells, then undergo a structural change that allows the viral membrane to fuse with the cell membrane. the host cell is then attacked by the viral gene through intrusion and it copies itself within the host cell, producing multiple new viruses [3] .as of mid-april, 2020, about 10,000 of high-quality complete genome sequences were present in the gisaid initiative database [23] collected from clinicians and researchers from around the world. to understand the viral evolution and its nature of spread among the different countries, we present an analysis pipeline of the genome sequence leveraging the power of machine intelligence. this paper makes the following key contributions.a. an alignment-free phylogenetic analysis is carried out with a goal to uncover the evolutionary history of sars-cov-2. the resulting phylogenetic tree is able to highlight evolutionary relationships that can be explained by facts and figures and has further identified some mysterious relationships. b. several machine learning and deep learning models are used to identify the virulence of the strains (i.e., to classify a virus strain as either severe or mild). additionally, from the classification pipeline, important features are identified as sites of interest (sois) in the virus strains for further analysis. c. several cnn-rnn based models are used to predict mutations at specific sites of interest (sois) of the sars-cov-2 genome sequence followed by further analyses of the same on several south-asian countries. d. overall, we present an analysis pipeline that can be further utilized as well as extended and revised (a) to study where a newly discovered genome sequence lies in relation to its predecessors in different regions of the world; (b) to analyse its virulence with respect to the number of deaths its predecessors have caused in their respective countries and (c) to analyse the mutation at specific important sites of the viral genome. figure 1 : the whole analysis pipeline consisted of three phases. in the first phase, the genome sequences are divided into subsets based on country and a phylogenetic tree is constructed considering only the "representative" sequences of each such subset using an alignment-free sequence comparison approach. in the second phase, we employed state of the art classification algorithms, leveraging both traditional and deep learning pipelines to learn to discriminate the viral strains of many countries as either mild or severe. we also identify the features that contributed the most as the discriminant factor in the classification pipeline. finally, we use the identified features from the previous stare to predict the mutation of the interesting sites in the viral strain using a deep learning model. figure 1 presents our overall analysis pipeline. below we present the details of the pipeline.we have collected 10179 hcov genome sequences upto the date 24 april, 2020 (cut-off date) from the gisaid initiative dataset [23] . these are high quality complete viral genome sequences submitted by the scientists and scientific institutes of individual countries.we also have collected country wise death statistics (upto cut-off date) from the official site of who [6] . the label was assigned based on a threshold of deaths which is the estimated median of the number of deaths in the data points. any genome sequence of a country having deaths below (above) the threshold were considered a mild (severe) strain, i.e., assigned a label 0 (1). a sample labelling is shown in the supplementary table 1. informatively, we have also considered some other metrics for labeling  purposes albeit with unsatisfactory output (please see supplementary file for details) . we divided the whole dataset into training and testing subset in 80/20 ratio with a balanced number of data points per class for traditional machine learning pipeline and for deep learning classification routine, we created the subsets training/validation/testing in 68/12/20 ratio. figure 2 : the viral genome sequences were divided into subsets of sequences based on country. for each subset, each viral genome sequence is converted into a vector representation and pairwise euclidean distance was calculated among the vectors to create the distance matrix. as the matrix is very highdimensional, we used principal component analysis to find the principal component matrix from the distance matrix. representative sequences were identified through k-means clustering on the pca matrix, and a phylogenetic tree was constructed from the representative sequence of each country.we aim to identify and interpret the evolutionary relationships among the hcov genome sequences uploaded at gisaid from different regions around the globe ( figure 2 ). to do that we have used an alignment-free genome sequence comparison method as proposed in [5] as briefly described below. notably, we do not consider any alignmentbased method since it is not computationally feasible for us to align thousands of viral sequences for analysis and clustering purposes [4] .at first the sequence set is divided into subsets of sequences based on the location. all sequences are converted into representative ℝ 18 vector. pairwise distance among vectors derived from the fast vector method [5] are computed using euclidean distance. due to the high dimensionality of the resulting distance matrix, we resort to principal component analysis (pca) technique [9] to reduce the dimension of the matrix. subsequently, we use k-means clustering [43] to identify the corresponding cluster centers. for the k-means clustering algorithm, we have used the implementation of [38] and used the default parameters except for the number of clusters which were set to 1 for determining the cluster center for each of the subsets. for each location-based cluster, the representative sequence (i.e., the "centroid" of the cluster) is then identified and used in the subsequent step of the pipeline.the evolutionary relationship among the representative sequences of different clusters (from section 2.2) has been estimated by constructing a phylogenetic tree. we have used the neighbor joining algorithm [37] for phylogenetic tree construction since it is more reliable [25] . we have used euclidean distance among the vectors, as described in the section 2.2, to prepare the distance matrix. while we predominantly have used the alignment-free method of [5] , in this stage, we have only 67 representative sequences and hence we have also attempted a few other alignment-free and alignment-based methods to estimate the phylogenetic tree; however, these didn't produce satisfactory results (more details are in supplementary file). for traditional machine learning, we use a pipeline similar to [12] (see figure 3 in supplementary file). we extracted three types of features from the genomic sequence of novel sars-cov-2. inspired by the recent works [12] [14] [64] [65] that focus only on sequences, we also extract only sequence-based features. these features are: position independent features, n-gapped dinucleotides and position specific features (see details in section 3 of supplementary file). we use the gini value of the extremely randomized tree (extra tree) classifier [13] to rank the features. subsequently, only the features with gini value greater than the mean of the gini values are selected for training a lightgbm classifier model [15] (with default parameters) and performed 10-fold cross validation. lightgbm is a highly efficient and fast gradient boosting framework which uses tree-based algorithms.we use shap values and univariate feature selection to compare the importance of the features. shap (shapley additive explanations) is a game theoretic approach which is used to explain the output of a model [44] . univariate feature selection works by selecting the best features based on univariate statistical tests [50] . we use selectkbest univariate feature selection to get the top k highest scoring features according to anova f_classif feature scoring [56] function.we leverage the power of 3 different deep learning (dl) classification models, namely, vanilla cnn [7] , alexnet [40] and inceptionnet [41] . we transform the raw viral genome sequences into two different representations, namely, k-mers spectral representation [7] and one hot vectorization [8] to feed those into the dl networks in a seamless manner. details of these representations are given in section 5.2 of the supplementary file. for k-mers spectral representation we experimented with different values of k (k = 3,5,7 for vanila cnn and k = 3 & 5 only for the rest due to resource limitation). for one hot vectorization, we have trained inceptionnet for 150 epochs for both 3-and 5-mers and trained alexnet for 135, 100 and 100 epochs for 3-,4-and 5-mers respectively. we design a pipeline to predict mutation on specific sites (chosen in an earlier stage of the pipeline) in the sars-cov-2 genome (figure 4 ). we follow a similar protocol followed by [10] and adopt it to fit our setting as follows. we divide all the available countries and the states of the usa into different time-steps by the date of the first reported incidence of sars-cov-2 infected patients of that location. thus, every resulting time-step represents a date (tk for cluster k) and contains the clusters of genome sequences of the countries/states. then the time series samples are generated by concatenating sites from different time-step one-by-one that represent the evolutionary path of the sars-cov-2 viral strain. for example, t1 is the very first date when the virus is discovered in china. so, the time-step 1 contains only one country, china. likewise, time-step t2 contains clusters for those countries where the virus is discovered on date t2 and so on.(check table 3 in supplementary file for more details). we generate 300000 time series sequences by concatenating genome sites from t1,t2,....,tn (in our case, n = 40) and then fed the samples to the model which consists of a convolutional one dimensional layer and a recurrent neural network layer [34] . we experiment with both pure lstm and bidirectional lstm as our rnn layer (see section 4.3 of supplementary file). the model has a dense layer of 4 neurons in the end which predicts the probability of the next base pair of the next time-step. so, in a nut-shell the model takes concatenated genome sequences from t1,t2,....,tn-1 as input and predicts the mutation for time tn.we further use our mutation prediction pipeline to identify and analyze possible parents of a mutated strain. for this particular analysis, we trained the models specifically for some south-asian countries, namely, bangladesh, india and pakistan. we only used the best performing model for this analysis and generated five time series samples. at the time of generating these samples, the country/location having the minimal euclidean distance was taken for each time-step.we have implemented our experiments mostly in python. we have used scikit-learn library [38] for clustering and plotting the graphs. for deep learning models, scikit-learn, tensorflow and keras neural network libraries are used and for lightgbm classifier, python lightgbm framework has been used. the phylogenetic trees are constructed using the dendropy library of python [57] keeping default parameters. we use the tree visualizer tools dendroscope [11] and evolview [24] for tree visualization and annotation. the experiments have been conducted in the following machines:a) clustering and phylogenetic analyses have been carried out in a machine with intel(r) core (tm) i7-6500u cpu @ 2.50ghz, ubuntu 19.04 os and 8 gb ram. b) experiments involving the deep learning pipelines (i.e., both classification and mutation prediction) have been conducted in the work-stations of galileo cloud computing platform [35] and the default gpu provided by the google colaboratory cloud computing platform [36] . c) the lightgbm classifier model was trained in a machine with intel core i5-4010u cpu @ 1.70ghz x 4, windows 10 os and 16 gb ram.all the codes and data (except for the genome sequences) of our pipeline can be found at the following link: https://github.com/pythonloader/analyzing-hcov-genome-sequence.the genome sequence data have been extracted from and are publicly available at gisaid [23] .we identify the representative sequence of each of the 67 countries as present in the gisaid dataset (upto cut-off date). the estimated phylogenetic tree constructed from the representative sequences is shown in figure 5 . in what follows, we will be referring to this tree as the sc2 (sars-cov-2) tree. the phylogenetic tree generated is expected to reveal the evolutionary relationship of the viral strains. however, with careful scrutiny we have some apparently unusual but interesting observations. for example, it is generally expected that the countries sharing (open) borders (e.g., countries in europe) should be either neighbours or at least in the same clade in the tree. however, surprisingly from the tree, we do not notice geographically adjacent countries in europe as neighbors; rather we see for example that china and italy are immediate neighbors. it is to be noted that these two countries are also the first countries to get hit by the first pandemic wave. in addition to that, although the usa and canada share the longest un-militarized international border in the world, representative strains do not appear to be sister branches as they should have been. also, we notice that the usa, uk, canada, turkey and russia are in the same clade which have a higher number of deaths than most of the other countries.all our classifiers are trained to learn whether a given strain is mild or severe. the classification accuracy of the lightgbm classifier (~91%) is superior to that of the deep learning classifiers (~84-89%), which, while is somewhat surprising, is in line with the recent findings of [12] . it should be noted that lightgbm had produced better results in significantly less time than deep learning models for this dataset. the results of the classifier models are shown in figure 6 . quantitative results aside, we also have applied our classifiers on the sequences that have been deposited at gisaid after the cut-off date (i.e. april 18, 2020). since the cutoff date, the country wise death statistics [6] has certainly changed significantly and this has pushed a few countries, particularly from asian regions and several states of the united states of america transition from mild to severe state (based on our predefined threshold). interesting, our classifiers have been able to predict the severity of the new strains submitted from these countries/states correctly. table 6 in the supplementary file shows a snapshot of a few such countries/states with the relevant information.we preliminarily identify the top 10 features of shap and selectkbest feature selection (with k=10). from these features, as sois, we have selected the features that are also biologically significant, i.e., cover different significant gene expression regions ( figure  7 ). in particular, we have selected the position specific features pos_8445_8449, pos_19610_19614, pos_24065_24069 and pos_23825_23829 as the sois for the mutation prediction analyses down the pipeline. here, pos_x_y indicates the site from positions x to y of the virus strains. the reason for selecting these features as sois are outlined below. according to gene expression studies [62] [63], our sois, namely, pos_8445_8449 and pos_19610_19614 encode to two non-structural proteins, nsp3 and nsp11, respectively. and, our other two sois, namely, pos_24065_24069 and pos_23825_23829 correspond to the spike protein of sars-cov-2. nsp3 binds to viral rna, nucleocapsid protein, as well as other viral proteins, and participates in polyprotein processing. it is an essential component of the replication/transcription complex [51] . so, the mutation in this protein is expected to affect the replication process of the sars-cov-2 in host bodies. on the other hand, the spike protein sticks out from the envelope of the virion and plays a pivotal role in the receptor host selectivity and cellular attachment. according to wan et al. there exists strong scientific evidence that sars and sars-cov-2 spike proteins interact with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) [52] . the mutation on this protein is expected to have a significant impact on the human to human transmission [53] . therefore, it is certainly interesting and useful to predict the mutation of such sois.cnn-lstm and cnn-bidirectional lstm performed in a similar manner for different sois of the genome registering 94.98% and 95% accuracy, respectively, considering all sois together. for detailed results please check table 7 and table 8 of the supplementary material.for the model involving only bangladesh, we applied the cnn-bidirectional lstm model (as this is the best performer among the two) and achieved almost 100% accuracy. then we analyzed the ancestors in the time series test samples and noticed that some of the states of the usa are present in these samples. these states are california, massachusetts, texas, new jersey and maryland. for india and pakistan, we got similar results for some sites but for other sites, accuracy was not as high as bangladesh (check table 9 of the supplementary file for details).our analyses reveal a very close (evolutionary) relationship between the genome sequences of china and italy. also, similarity was found among the virus strains of the usa, germany, qatar and poland. these countries have similar numbers of deaths and although not geographically directly adjacent (except for germany and poland) they have strong air connectivity among them. in fact, a number of interesting relationships can be inferred from the estimated phylogenetic tree as follows.chinese tourists [26] . this relationship is clearly portrayed in the sc2 tree where the two strains appear to be immediate siblings. 2. poland's strain is in the same clade as that of germany, which can be explained by the fact that its strain (through poland's patient zero) came from germany [27] . 3. taiwan is geographically very close to china. the virus was confirmed to have spread to taiwan on january 21, 2020, through a 55-year-old woman who had been teaching in wuhan, china [28] . the virus strains from these regions are also close together as can be seen from the sc2 tree, about 6 branches apart. similar relationship can also be inferred from the tree between china and south korea: the strain of the virus in south korea is believed to be transmitted from china firstly through a 35-year old chinese woman and secondly by a 55-year old south korean national [29] . interestingly, from the sc2 tree it can also be deduced that the south korean strain is very close to that of taiwan and also near to the strain from china. the incident of a taiwanese woman being deported from south korea after refusing to stay at a quarantine facility can be a probable explanation as to how the south korean strain might have found its path to taiwan [46] . 4. on march 2, 2020, the virus was confirmed to have reached portugal, when it was reported that a portuguese 33 year-old man working in spain was tested positive for covid-19 after returning home [49] . subsequently, within a span of 9 days, 5 more cases were reported all originating from spain [49] [61] . the fact that the first cases of covid-19 in portugal originated from spain is clearly captured in our sc2 tree.5. the sc2 tree suggests that india's strain is closely related to that from china and also italy (around 4 branches) and that it is also connected to that from saudi arabia. these relationships can be explained as follows.a 7. turkey's first identified case was a man who was travelling europe [33] . turkey also announced a huge number of cases and subsequent deaths, which were originating from europe [47] . in our inferred relationship, we can see that the turkish representative strain is quite close to several central and western european countries like russia, iceland and ireland which can be backed up by the two facts stated above.8. it is visible from the sc2 tree that the strain of germany is very close to the strains of both poland and the usa. it might be the case that the community transmission occurred concurrently in both usa and poland from germany which hit the peak of pandemic before both usa and poland [42] .9. qatar has the second highest number of covid-19 patients in the middle-east [48] . the first case of qatar was reported on february 27,2020 to be a man working in iran [55] . qatar introduced a travel ban to and from germany and the usa as precautionary measures in mid-march, quite a while later following the first occurrence. qatar has 5 air-routes with germany and usa, with more than 10 airlines operating in that route [59] [60] . though the first case has originated from iran, it might be the case that subsequent patients were found to be travelling from the aforementioned countries as a result of which the travel ban was introduced. our estimated sc2 tree places qatar very close to both the usa and germany.10. while we can certainly explain many of the relationships identified by the estimated sc2 tree a above, there are some relationships which are not that apparent. one such example is the direct relationship between vietnam and greece. while apparently, there exists no direct relationship, when investigated further, we identified something interesting. patient zero of greece is believed to have been contaminated during her trip to the milan fashion week which took place during february 18-24, 2020 [45] . interestingly, the first covid-19 patient in hanoi [16] left hanoi on february 15 to visit family members living in london, england and three days later, she traveled from london to milan city. could she be in contact with patient zero of greece or any other who had been contaminated by the latter, before returning to london on february 20? we can't be certain, but our inferred relationship between vietnam and greece certainly put a lot of legitimacy to that question.11. finally, we are unable to find any apparent explanation analyzing the reported news sources for a few other strong relationships inferred by the tree (e.g., congo-iran, panama-malaysia, sweden-singapore, japan-australia, etc). this could be because of the inherent inaccuracies of the distance matrices as well as the limitations of the tree estimation algorithms: none of these algorithms are 100% accurate. from another angle, perhaps, the tree did identify these relationships correctly; but the relevant incidences were not accurately identified or not documented.in recent times, the number of deaths is increasing rapidly in india. we have been closely following the change in the virus strains of india before and after the cut-off date. a genome sequence (epi_isl_435050) was collected on april 13, 2020 (before our cutoff date) from a patient in ahmedabad, gujrat, india. it was predicted to be a severe strain (with low confidence) even though at that time we trained the classifier to consider the indian sequences as mild. according to our evolutionary relationship, india is very close to both italy and china. so, we calculated the distance between the representative sequence of both italy and china with this strain. we considered another strain (epi_isl_437447) which was collected from another patient from the same place in india on april 26, 2020 (after our cut-off date) and predicted the severity thereof. the classifiers declared this isolate to be severe with very high confidence (about 98%). we did the distance calculation like before. interestingly, it was identified that this isolate is closer to both italy and china's representative sequence than the previous less severe one. this strongly suggests that there were some mutations that turned the indian sequences from mild or less severe to severe or highly severe, respectively.also, the sequences from the us states of pennsylvania, maryland, indiana, illinois and florida that were collected on may 25, 2020 (about one month after our cut-off date) were analyzed and our classifiers could correctly capture the severity of the genome sequences (see table 4 in the supplementary file).we conduct an analysis to predict possible parents of the (mutated) virus strains of the south asian region (bangladesh, india and pakistan). our mutation prediction pipeline suggests that the strains of some states of the usa, namely, california, massachusetts, texas, new jersey and maryland could be the parents/ancestors of these south asian strains. now, the total deaths in these states up to june 1, 2020 are 4240, 6846, 1686, 11711 and 2532 respectively [58] and the strains thereof are also classified to be severe by our classification pipeline. it thus seems quite likely that the sars-cov-2 situation in these south-asian countries will worsen in near future.bangladesh, india and pakistan are ranked 88 th , 112 th and 122 nd in global health performance compared to the united states of america which is at the 37 th position [54] .in the majority of lower middle-income countries such as bangladesh, india and pakistan, available hospital beds are < 1 bed per 1000 population and icu beds are < 1 bed per 100,000 population [39] . additionally, an uncontrolled epidemic is predicted to have 6,000,220 deaths having a duration of nearly 200 days in the majority of these countries [39] . these predictions coupled with our findings call for stern actions (i.e., interventions) on part of these countries.bibliography:towards the end of the first decade of the 21st century, during december 2019, numerous pneumonia incidences of unidentified cause appeared in wuhan, hubei, china, with clinical presentations greatly resembling flu and viral pneumonia. after virus isolation and analysis of viral genome sequence from infected patient's samples, a novel coronavirus named as severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2 or sars-cov-2 (initially designated as novel coronavirus or ncov-2019) was identified from an unknown source. sars-cov-2 is the causative agent of respiratory disease which is recently named as coronavirus disease 2019 by the world health organisation (who). human-to-human transmission of sars-cov-2 is a major concern for the health care workers and a preliminary r0 (reproductive number: as the number of new infection one infected person generates on average throughout its infectious period) measure of 1.4-2.5 was reported by the who (https://www.who.int/healthtopics/coronavirus). since its appearance within a months' time enormous number of new cases are piling up and the actual r0 value may be quite higher than previously calculated . epidemiological data suggest that approximately (as of february 29 2020) 79,251 people infected with this virus in mainland china and multiple cases also reported from other parts of the world (https://who.sprinklr.com;https://www. medpagetoday.com/infectiousdisease/publichealth/ 84698). so far 60 other countries reported sars-cov-2 infection; although most of the cases are migrants of china, indicating a single introduction of this virus. among the other countries, south korea (3,150 cases), italy (889 cases), japan (234 cases), iran (388 cases), singapore (96 cases), hongkong (94 cases) and usa (64 cases) reported significant number of cases and the situation is getting complicated with time. current findings indicate that various subtypes of coronaviruses are in circulation within the bat population including other species such as birds, cats, dogs, pigs, mice, horses, whales before they acquire the ability to cross the species barriers to cause human infection. it is still unanswered that how sars-cov-2 has caused an outbreak in wuhan. the initial wave of infection found associated with the seafood market of wuhan, strengthening the hypothesis that close contact between the live or dead animal with an individual may be responsible for the initiation of the outbreak. in the recent past there are examples of zoonotic transmission of bird flu which directly jumped from avian species to human, but no transmission between the humans were established which kept the disease under control. however, the ability to spread among human to human upon close contact makes sars-cov-2 as a very important contagious agent to study and monitor whose devastation has already been established in wuhan, hubei, china.covid-19 is one of the most alarming diseases in the globe at this moment. the number of patients infected with sars-cov-2 is increasing in almost steady rate, although in some days less number of cases was reported. total number of cases reached to 20,000 in first 12 days, 40,000 in next 7 days and more than 80,000 in just 33 days. infections are causing varied clinical manifestation from mild symptoms to severe respiratory attacks, although there is possibility of asymptomatic infection. it has spread in many other countries beyond china, therefore proper handling and management of the disease is critically important to prevent a pandemic.history has taught several lessons regarding the endemic nature of emerging viral infections. virus faces major challenges from pre-existing immunity to remain in the population. other important factors such as case fatality rate (cfr), r0 and the reservoir hosts are crucial in influencing viral endemicity. by analysing cfr of different rna viruses and their longevity in circulation throughout the globe, it was found that viruses with higher cfr (cfr >5%) die out after few passages of infections sooner or later, whereas viruses with low cfr remain endemic with a seasonal outbreak like common flu caused by influenza viruses (figure 1 ). although it is very difficult to calculate actual cfr until the outbreak ends, an initial estimate suggests that cfr for sars-cov-2 is 2.58%, much closer to seasonal flu than the other coronaviruses (sars-cov and mers-cov) of the recent past (i.e. 10% and 35%, respectively, https:// www.who.int/emergencies/mers-cov/en/) indicating the ability of the sars-cov-2 to remain in circulation with figure 1 . relationship between high and low cfr virus infection and outbreak outcome. when viruses with low cfr infect an individual, gradually, it induces the host immune system. the induced immunity may enable the spread of mutant viruses in the population, whereas viruses with high cfr causes robust infection and rapid immune responses leading to death. imprisonment of the different viral species within the dead host will lead to a reduction in the diverse or mutant virus population in the circulation result the outbreak to its conclusion. low cfr throughout the world. as per the recent data, covid-19 has already claimed 2,924 lives, mainly in china although few deaths reported from other parts of the world. however, as of february 29 2020, 39,556 infected individuals already recovered from sars-cov2 infection, who will eventually acquire immunity to the virus.(https://www.medpagetoday.com/infectiousdisease/publichealth/84698). the covid-19 recovered population increases day by day, with herd immunity of the population. a virus may re-infect a person with preexisting immunity, either in its present form (which is very unlikely), or with acquired mutations to persist in the circulation. sars-cov-2 recovered populations may enable the selection of mutant viruses, and their spread in the community.in this review, we will discuss the critical factors influencing the continued viral appearance and periodical infection. we will also discuss the novelty of this virus and its potential threat to cause periodic infection. we have collected data from different studies and also analysed the genome sequence to define the evolutionary relationship of this virus. moreover, we have predicted the reason for the severity of this disease with literature support.coronaviruses are enveloped and belongs to the family coronaviridae which is further subdivided into four genera: alpha, beta, gamma and delta coronaviruses (woo et al. 2007; lefkowitz et al, 2018) . they possess a long positive-sense single-stranded rna genome ranging between 26.4 kb to 31.7 kb which is largest for any rna virus. big rna genome of coronavirus provides additional flexible power in host adaptation and genome modification. the genome organisation is overall same in all coronaviruses ( figure 2 ). two short untranslated regions (utr) are present at the 5 0 and 3 0 end of the genome and the coding genes are present in between the utr. the arrangement of the coding gene is; 5 0 -replicase orf1ab, spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m), nucleocapsid (n)à3 0 . however, variable numbers of additional orfs are present in between spike and nucleocapsid genes in different strains of coronaviruses. the transcription regulatory motif (trs) is present at the 3 0 end of the genome, which plays an important role in rna replication and recombination (lai et al. 1985) .the complete genome size of the sars-cov-2 is approximately 29 kb (29825 nt-29903nt).the orf1ab gene is the largest gene segment of the coronavirus and it constitutes two orf i.e. orf1a and orf1b. the position of the orf1ab gene in sars-cov-2 (251-21541 nt) slightly changes to starting codon position as compared to sars-cov (265-21486 nt) and mers-cov (279-21514) . generally, a slippery sequence (uuuaaac) followed by a putative pseudoknot structure sequence is present in between the orfs. the replicase orf1ab is cleaved by papain-like protease (plpro) and 3 c-like protease (3clpro). the orf1ab gene of the coronavirus genome encodes15-16 non-structural proteins (nsp) at the consensus cleavage site. the nsp 12 and nsp 13 encode the rna-dependent rna polymerase and helicase protein respectively. the newly emerging sars-cov-2 possesses a single point mutation at a slippery sequence. a haemagglutinin esterase (he) gene is present downstream to orf1ab and upstream to the s gene which is absent in coronaviruses infecting humans.three surface glycoproteins are found in all classes of coronaviruses i.e. spike (s), envelope (e) and membrane (m). the s proteins are type i membrane glycoproteins responsible for the formation of "spikes", present on the surface of coronaviruses. the s proteins are cleaved into the receptor binding s1 domain, and cell membrane fusion s2 domains. the sars-cov-2 s2 domain represents higher identity with bat derived coronavirus strains than the s1 domain. therefore, the receptor-binding domain of sars-cov-2 is more similar to that of sars-cov 2002-03 and it has found that it uses angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as cellular receptor (lu et al. 2020 ). however, some key amino acid substitution (at positions 439, 501, 493, 485 and 486) were observed in the sars-cov-2 receptor-binding domain those were thought to be important in sars-cov (lu et al. 2020) . the e and m genes are conserved among all the coronaviruses. these two genes encode two small transmembrane proteins associated with the envelope of all coronaviruses.the coronavirus nucleocapsid (n) protein is a virion structural protein. the n protein interacts with the viral genomic rna and helps in packaging of rna genome into virus particles by recognising a specific sequence. the n protein-dependent assembly of the viral rna packaging signal is already established in sars-cov. intracellular co-localization of n with replicase components is required for rna synthesis. variable numbers of small orfs are present between the various conserved genes downstream to the n gene. the 3a protein of sars-cov modulates virus release by forming a transmembrane homotetramer complex within channel protein. other than the virus release, the 3a protein helps in sars-cov-induced cell death, golgi fragmentation, and the accumulation of intracellular vesicles. like the sars-cov and mers-cov the sars-cov-2 virus possesses several other small orfs (orf9, orf13, orf14, orf10) at the downstream to n gene (marra et al. 2003) . the function of the n gene and small orfs of sars-cov-2 is not yet known.before the emergence of sars-cov in 2002, construction of phylogenetic tree for coronaviruses based on the pol or n gene was a standard practice. using this method, initially, sars-cov was proposed as a member of gammacoronavirus (marra et al. 2003; rota et al. 2003) . however, further analysis of the amino-terminal domain of the spike protein of the sars-cov revealed that 19 out of the 20 cysteine residues was spatially conserved within the betacoronavirus group (rota et al. 2003 ). on the other hand, only five residues were found conserved within the alphacoronavirus and gammacoronavirus group (rota et al. 2003) . furthermore, the subsequent whole genome-based phylogenetic analysis concluded that sars-cov is a member of the betacoronavirus lineage. phylogenetic analysis based on rdrp gene of sars-cov-2 revealed that it belongs to the genus betacoronavirus (eickmann 2003) .we have constructed a phylogenetic tree of the sars-cov-2 based on available sequences in genbank and gisaid data bank (figure 3 ). phylogenetic analysis based on the spike gene of the sars-cov-2 represents that it belongs to the genus betacoronaviruses. from the analysis of the sequences published since the emergence of sars-cov-2, it is evident that this virus is stably spreading without any noticeable mutation as they are clustered in a single group. analysis from the phylogenetic tree represents that all the sars-cov-2 strains are distinctly separated from previously reported coronavirus endemic strains; sars-cov and mers-cov. hence, the sars-cov-2 is termed as "novel" coronavirus. analysis performed in our study also revealed that this virus is very similar to the bat derived coronavirus strain. the sars-cov-2 and bat derived yunnan/ ratg13/2013 coronavirus strain derived from common ancestor, although they differs in in the size of the spike genes (spike gene size in ratg13:3809 bp; sars-cov-2:3822bp). since sars-cov and mers-cov also derived from the bat, bat originated human infecting coronavirus strain is not a novel event. as shown in earlier studies that sars-cov and mers-cov used civets and camel, respectively, as an intermediate host to gain infection potentiality towards human (guan et al. 2003; alagaili et al. 2014) . it may be predicted that in case of sars-cov-2 transmission there may be one or more intermediate host present in between bats and human.previous cases of human coronavirus infection commenced by sars-cov and mers-cov was accountable for severe pneumonia leading to high mortality. the mechanistic explanation of their high morbidity and mortality is inadequately explained. rapid virus replication reaching to high titres and associated enhanced inflammation is believed to be a cause of disease severity. initial data from china shows that the sars-cov-2 produced observable symptoms, primarily ards (acute respiratory distress syndrome) in elderly populations similar to human cases of h7n9 infection in china ( table 1 ). an earlier study with h7n9 infection also found the clinical exhibition of disease with high fever and rapidly progressive pneumonia that did not respond to antibiotics (chen et al. 2013) . a recent study on sars-cov-2 infection showed that all the 41 patients had pneumonia and manifestations of a critical respiratory ailment similar to severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus and was associated with icu admission and high mortality .it is known that coronaviruses such as human sars-cov and, bat sars-like cov sl-covzxc21 utilizes angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), as their receptor and recent reports suggest that sars-cov-2 also uses the identical receptor for entry into the host cell . ace2 is an essential enzyme in the renin-angiotensin system (ras) that plays a significant role in regulating blood pressure and maintaining electrolyte and fluid homeostasis. ace2 also protects an individual against severe acute lung damage that can be triggered by sepsis, acid aspiration, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and the lethal avian influenza a h5n1 and h7n9 virus infection (kuba et al. 2005; yang et al. 2014; zou et al. 2014) . moreover, recent studies have shown that ace2 negatively regulates inflammatory responses during bacterial or viral infections (yang et al. 2014; sodhi et al. 2019 ). sars-cov-2 infection utilizes ace2 for viral attachment and subsequent entry into cytosol, therefore rapid replication of sars-cov-2 may reduce the surface expression of ace2 in the lung tissue which may cause further intensification of the inflammation and severity of the disease pathology (glowacka et al. 2010) (figure 4) . a recent study have found that smoking is associated with higher expression of ace2 when compared with the non-smokers, which may be one of the reasons of some population for the vulnerability towards novel sars-cov-2 infection cai 2020) .the pathophysiology of disease outcome depends on the extent of inflammatory responses within the host. in absence of any specific antiviral drugs, the primary therapeutic strategy to treat sars-cov-2 infection should be managing the inflammatory responses with anti-inflammatory drugs such as corticosteroids. previous studies on sars patients have found a positive outcome when treated with corticosteroids (chen et al. 2006 ). who recommendations for managing this novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) infection discourage the application of corticosteroids. the explanation for not using corticosteroids could be delayed viral clearance from the respiratory tract or blood with other corticosteroid-induced complications in the treated patients previously infected with sars and mers (lee et al. 2004; arabi et al. 2018; russel et al. 2020) . during the pandemic in 2009 of influenza a infection, a prospective cohort study showed reduced mortality in patients with (h1n1) pdm09 viral pneumonia when treated with mild doses of corticosteroid . therefore these disparities in findings suggest that randomized controlled trials must be carried out to conclude the beneficial effect of corticosteroid medication in coronavirus-induced inflammation associated difficulties. however, doctors from the chinese thoracic society have recommended the application of corticosteroids to critically ill patients with sars-cov-2 pneumonia with a low to moderate dose ( 0.5-1 mg/kg per day methylprednisolone or equivalent) for short term (<7 days) ).there are several attributes of any infection caused by an organism for persistence presence in circulation that must fulfil some basics criteria. sars-cov-2 is no longer an exception if it able to cause endemic disease. the criteria for endiminicity are as follows.a. virus must have low cfr, has the ability to cause mild infection and asymptomatic moderate incubation period within its host. b. virus must be contagious (r0 > 2) c. virus must have steady mutation rate to avoid pre-existing immunity. d. virus must have reservoir other than its primary host or it must have latent phase in its primary host.current findings suggest that sars-cov-2 has very lower cfr when compared with sars-cov, mers-cov or influenza a h5n1 infection in human and the virus spread by a german individual and a chinese woman before the onset of the symptoms, or disease allow us to believe fulfilling of the first criteria for periodic infection (rothe et al. 2020) . although later it was found that they have mild symptoms like fever. who predicted the r0 measure for sars-cov-2 remain 1.4-2.5 although recent estimates suggest r0 of 2.2 indicating their contagious potential .viruses face potent challenges from the host pre-existing immunity before they establish periodical infection. the role of pre-existing immunity broadly studied for influenza virus infection (biswas et al 2020) . host immunity also allows the selection of mutant viruses to cause a new round of infection within the host with pre-existing immunity towards the earlier strains. if the sars-cov-2 can withstand the new mutations and remains flexible to infect its host towards disease progression, it will persist in circulation. the primary wave of sars-cov-2 infection is under progress at present. the majority of the exposed population will acquire some immunity eventually and the real hurdles for the viruses to defeat or bypass existing immunity will reflect with the acquired mutations within the virus in future. to defeat host immunity, viruses must mutate without losing their infectivity. so far there are no published data regarding infection ability of sars-cov-2 and their mutation potential under robust immunological selection pressure within the host. previous data from sars-cov and mers-cov infected individuals indicated that antibody response tends to be short-lived but remain longer depending on the severity of the infection. t cell responses often target highly conserved internal proteins and are long-lived (channappanavar et al. 2014; alshukairi et al. 2016 ). sars-cov-specific memory t cells but not memory b cells or antibody could be detected six years after infection in sars survivors (tang et al 2011) . in conclusion, these studies present some ideas regarding selection pressure from the host immunity, i.e. milder coronavirus infection may produce a short-lived humoral immune response. as of february 29 2020, sars-cov-2 infected 85,406 people and the infection turns into fatality for more than 2,924 cases. however, as per the available data, 39,561 individual got recovered after infection. percent recovery from this population indicates that $ 93% of the population already recovered from sars-cov2 infection. this percentage was calculated as below within infected population: (total no recovered/total no of recovered þ total no of death). it can be predicted that at least 93% of the total population, which may likely to go higher with the end of this outbreak, will develop immunity towards this novel virus. so far there is no vaccine available, although in future vaccinated individual will also acquire some immunity. the possibility of the future outbreak by sars-cov-2 will depend on the longevity of host immunity and bypassing of existing or pre-existing immunity by the mutant virus ( figure 5) .the transmission dynamics of infectious diseases critically depend on reservoir hosts, which can sustain the pathogen with a moderate or asymptomatic infection in the population, even in the presence of resistance from primary hosts. coronaviruses are found widely within bat, pig, cow and several other species. previous reports also suggest that this virus is also presents in birds. molecular phylogenetic analysis performed in this study showed that neighbouring virus to sars-cov-2 was from bats with 96% similarity suggesting novelty of sars-cov-2. we don't know how this virus mutated and its time frame. however, recent estimates with bedford's analysis predicted that sars-cov-2 and ratg13 derived from a common ancestor sometimes between 25 and 65 years ago (https://www.sciencemag. org/news/2020/01/mining-coronavirus-genomes-cluesoutbreak-s-origins). these observations are indicative of the existence of intermediate host or reservoir before the sars-cov-2 gained entry into the human population (figure 4) . it is utmost important to find out its intermediate host to control the ongoing and future outbreak.based on the gene bank data, apart from the lung and oropharyngeal fluid this virus also isolated from faces and blood. this observation represents that sars-cov-2 transmitted through droplet and human to human, might be through the orofecal route but immune-pathogenesis of this novel virus is probably different from the previous endemic strain of coronaviruses. the faecal oral route is very common in birds for transmission of avian viruses. migratory birds play a very important role in the dissemination of avian influenza viruses from different parts of the globe during seasonal migrations (bailey et al. 2018 ). coronaviruses such as human sars-cov and bat sars-like cov sl-covzxc21 uses angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as their receptor and recent reports suggest that sars-cov-2 also uses the same receptor for entry into the host cell. we have compared the ace2 gene from avian species and the data suggest conservation of amino acids of ace2 protein within most of the birds figure 5 . viral selection during an outbreak. host induces immune response when infected by the virus, which can protect the individual from the same virus but not from the mutated one. reservoir host allows the virus to replicate and mutate, leading to an expansion in viral diversity with altered antigenicity within the viral pool. the antigenically mutated virus can be selected when it infects a host with pre-existing immunity towards the earlier strain. this will allow the selection of mutated viruses within a host and dissemination if the mutant virus remains contagious.(data not shown). we examined the interacting residues of the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of the spike protein of sars-cov-2 with critical residues of ace2 from different species (from human, poultry; gallus gallus, mallard;anasplatyrhynchos, swan goose; ansercygnoidesdomesticus, shelduck; tadornacana) and we found limited amino acids conservation in comparison to human counterpart (table 2) . moreover, there is no experimental proof for betacoronavirus (like sars-cov and sars-cov-2) infection in the birds; although a recent study has shown the significant presence of alpha and gammacoronaviruses in ducks, shorebirds, and herons in australia (chamings et al. 2018) . these observations allow us to believe that the birds are less prone to betacoronavirus infection or the least chance of bird infection from betacoronaviruses. significantly, the bird poses alpha and gammacoronaviruses that are incompetent to infect a human. hence, the risks of spread of the sars-cov-2 through bird to human are very unlikely at its present form. qinghai lake in china is one of the biggest breeding sites for different migratory bird species. there may be a possibility that this novel virus may acquire the ability to infect other animals including the migratory birds. therefore, it is extremely important to find out the reservoir of this novel coronavirus within the other animals including the migratory birds, if there are any ( figure 6 ).one of the most worrying things about any outbreak is the spreading of viruses from mild or asymptomatic individuals, which is probably happening in case of sars-cov-2 infection. if this trend continues then the virus may establish itself in the population and quarantine will be very difficult to stop the virus spread. phylogenetic analysis based on the spike gene nucleotide sequence performed in this study has shown that all the sars-cov-2 sequences are forming a single cluster without any branching indicating sars-cov-2 conservation throughout this ongoing outbreak. earlier studies have shown that spike protein was a target of a robust humoral immune response in case of sars or mers viral infection. these findings advocate that virus that caused the initial outbreak of sars-cov-2 is still in circulation without any major changes. very little or absence of pre-existing immunity in the community or selection pressure within the population probably allowed sars-cov-2 to remain in circulation in its original form. moreover, sars-cov-2 has very limited cfr as opposed to sars-cov and mers-cov without killing its host (table 1) , will able to produce new virus particles alongside some mutations. till now most of the deaths have occurred in the elderly population due to novel coronavirus infection whereas, children and table 2 . key interacting residues between rbd of spike protein of different corona viruses and host receptor ace2 of human, bat, mouse civet and different avian species (modified from dong et al. 2020 the table is shaded to make its representation more attractive. young adults exhibit relatively milder disease. therefore, sars-cov-2 infection will enable the host to develop humoral and cell-mediated immunity and simultaneously the immune selected viruses may acquire mutations with higher infection potential or altered antigenicity. this will likely empower them to evade pre-existing immunity (towards their predecessor counterpart) in the host during the subsequent waves of infection (as depicted in figure 1 ). current estimates based on the available information, suggest that more than $93% individual have recovered from this novel coronavirus infections. the virus may adapt itself to produce infection within the recovered population in future to sustain its presence in the environment. "the ability of the virus to cause infection in the host with pre-existing immunity" will be the most important criteria to establish itself in the circulation. the recovered population may keep under monitor to find if any reinfection leads to the creation of any mutant strain due to the selection pressure. therefore, we must prepare ourselves for mutant strains of this novel virus to avoid future devastation.since there is no antiviral and vaccine to fight against sars cov-2, a vaccine or therapeutics is a primary need at this moment. currently, several companies have started preparing vaccines for this novel virus although efficacy will depend on the selection of antigen and the virus's ability to bypass the vaccineinduced immunity. we must look at the conservation among different epitopes in immune selected strains while choosing the right vaccine candidates. structurally spike protein carries rbd like haemagglutinin (ha) of the influenza virus with a similar function. we must look at the amino acid conservation in different domain of the spike protein. mutation in the immune dominance region of the vaccine candidate will make them ineffective for future outbreaks. recently, physicians from china are urging recovered patients to donate plasma which may be useful to protect covid-19, something like a 100 years old practice during 1918 flu. in case of pandemic 1918 influenza infection, three waves of infection killed more than 50 million worldwide in two years, where the second wave was the most devastating. the first wave of the 1918 flu pandemic flu had resembled common flu epidemics; people most at risk were the weak and elderly, while younger, healthier people recovered easily apparently resembling covid-19 in its present form. most of the studies have found an analogy between covid-19 and influenza disease pathophysiology. time will tell us whether sars-cov-2 and associated covid-19 will be established as the new flu of 21st century.no potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).recent studies have suggested that bats are the natural reservoir of a range of coronaviruses (covs), and that rhinolophid bats harbor viruses closely related to the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) cov, which caused an outbreak of respiratory illness in humans during [2002] [2003] . we examined the evolutionary relationships between bat covs and their hosts by using sequence data of the virus rna-dependent rna polymerase gene and the bat cytochrome b gene. phylogenetic analyses showed multiple incongruent associations between the phylogenies of rhinolophid bats and their covs, which suggested that host shifts have occurred in the recent evolutionary history of this group. these shifts may be due to either virus biologic traits or host behavioral traits. this fi nding has implications for the emergence of sars and for the potential future emergence of sars-covs or related viruses. s evere acute respiratory syndrome (sars) emerged in november 2002 in southern people's republic of china (1) , and a sars coronavirus (sars-cov) was identifi ed as the etiologic agent (2) . these events and the identifi ca-tion of sars-cov in animals associated with the wildlife trade in southern china (3) have led to a rapid resurgence of interest in covs of different origins. this resurgence led to discovery of 2 novel human covs (4, 5) ; identifi cation of sars-like covs in horseshoe bats (rhinolophus macrotis, r. ferrumequinum, r. pearsoni, and r. sinicus) (6, 7) ; and identifi cation of other covs in bat species (r. sinicus, r. ferrumequinum, miniopterus magnater [m. magnater has been misidentifi ed as m. schreibersi (8) in reports on sars-like cov], pipistrellus abramus, p. pipistrellus, tylonycteris pachypus, myotis ricketti, and scotophilus kuhlii) (7, (9) (10) (11) (12) . however, evolutionary relationships among these covs and their bat hosts have not been examined.studies in species other than bats have examined hostvirus phylogeny and identifi ed coevolutionary relationships (13) (14) (15) (16) or incongruous phylogenetic patterns (17) . these fi ndings suggest recent pathogen host shifts (defi ned as interspecies transmission followed by establishment and long-term persistence in the new host species [18] ). other studies have demonstrated that the relationship between viral phylogeny and geographic location and identifi cation hosts (viral phylogeography [19] ) can yield information on the origin of emerging zoonoses (19, 20) .knowing the high genetic diversity of bat covs, we carried out a systematic phylogenetic study of the viruses and their hosts to examine evolutionary relationships between bat covs and bats. the aim was to further investigate the origin of sars-like covs and sars. our results suggest host-pathogen divergence and host shifts in the recent evolutionary history of these viruses and their hosts. we discuss host behavioral traits and viral traits that might have given rise to these patterns and comment on the implications of our fi ndings for the emergence of sars-cov.only covs from bats were included in this study. we used gene sequences that tang et al. obtained from 10 bat species (r. sinicus, r. ferrumequinum, r. macrotis, r. pearsoni, m. magnater, p. abramus, p. pipistrellus, t. pachypus, s. kuhlii, and myotis ricketti) (10) . an additional 57 bat cov sequences available in genbank were also included in this analysis.tissue samples were obtained from 3-mm wing membrane biopsy specimens from wild bats, which had been caught in 9 provinces of china, that had been preserved in 99% ethanol. genomic dna was extracted by using the dneasy tissue kit (qiagen, valencia, ca, usa) and stored at -20°c. we used complete cyt b sequences of r. ferrumequinum, p. abramus, and p. pipistrellus, which have recently been published and are available in genbank. we generated cyt b sequences from m. magnater (n = 4), t. pachypus (n = 3), r. macrotis (n = 2), r. pearsoni (n = 2), r. sinicus (n = 2), s. kuhlii (n = 1), and myotis ricketti (n = 1).pcr mixtures were prepared in 50-μl volumes containing 25 μl 2× extaq dna polymerase (takara, kyoto, japan). two pairs of primers, bat_cytb_1 (5′-tag aat atc agc ttt ggg tg-3′) (21) with bat_cytb_2 (5′-aaa tca ccg ttg tac ttc aac-3′) (21) , and bat_cytb_2 with bat15r (5′-tca gct ttg ggt gtt gat gg-3′) (22) , were used because of amplifi cation specifi city of certain primers in some species. amplifi cation was conducted at an initial denaturing temperature at 94°c for 30 s; 34 cycles of denaturation at 94°c for 30 s, annealing at 55°c for 30 s, and extension at 72°c for 90s; and a fi nal extension at 72°c for 10 min. the pcr samples were then stored at 4°c. the complete mitochondrial cyt b gene (1,140 bp) was amplifi ed and sequenced. these sequences have been submitted to genbank and accession numbers are shown in the table.for virus phylogeny studies, sequences from a 440bp fragment of the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) gene, which is highly conserved among different covs, were obtained and analyzed (10) . multiple alignments of the 440-bp rdrp partial sequence of bat covs were conducted in clustalx version 1.81 (23) . bayesian analyses were conducted with mrbayes version 3.1.2 (24) . four consecutive metropolis-coupled markov chain monte carlo computations were run for 2 million generations, with trees sampled every 100 generations. initial trees were random. on the basis of stabilization of preliminary runs, the fi rst 3,000 trees were discarded before generation of the consensus tree. the bayesian consensus tree was rooted to breda virus (ay427798), a related cov ( figure 1 ).for bat phylogeny, we used the complete mitochondrial cyt b gene to construct maximum likelihood (ml) and bayesian phylograms. the cyt b sequence data were aligned by using clustalx version 1.81 as above. ml analysis was performed by using paup* version 4.0b (27) . the most appropriate substitution model (generalized time reversible + γ + i) with the parameters matrix = 0.4835 × 9.6665 × 0.3815 × 0.2973 × 7.1418, base frequency = 0.3576 × 0.3420 × 0.0748, rates = gamma, shape = 0.6008, and proportion of invariable sites unable to accept substitutions = 0.4078 for ml and subsequent bayesian analysis was calculated by using the program modeltest 3.7 (26) . we used heuristic searches (10 replicates, random addition of taxa, with tree bisection and reconnection branch swapping), followed by 100 bootstrap iterations for robustness of the ml tree. bayesian analysis was also used to construct a tree with 4 simultaneous markov chains for 1 million generations. trees were sampled every 20 generations, and the fi rst 5,000 trees were discarded before the consensus tree was made (on the basis of practical values of stabilizing likelihood).we compared the genetic diversity of covs isolated from rhinolophids and vespertilionids and the corresponding diversity among bat taxa by using the index of nucleotide diversity (π) described by nei (28) in arlequin version 3.1 (29) . analyses were performed on uncorrected pairwise genetic distances between sequences.by combining information derived from the phylogram of bat covs, together with data on the geographic origin of viruses, we were able to describe the phylogeographic distributions for known covs from bats in china (figures 1, 2 ; table) . bat sars-like covs formed a monophyletic clade. species-specifi c host restriction was found for covs in 4 of 7 bats species (myotis ricketti, m. magnater, p. abramus, and t. pachypus) sampled from >1 geographic location, and these clustered with high bayesian posterior probability. overall phylogenetic relationships between virus lineages were similar across our analyses, and well-supported genetic structure was observed within some cov lineages. for example, covs isolated from m. magnater were monophyletic but formed 3 well-supported clades with no evidence of geographic structure (bayesian posterior probability [pp] = 1.0 for each). a similar pattern was apparent in covs from myotis ricketti, which formed 2 geographically overlapping independent clades (pp = 0.99 and 1.0, respectively). one t. pachypus was infected by a virus that clustered with moderate statistical support (pp = 0.91) within the larger clade associated with p. abramus, which indicated a potential interspecies transmission event or recent evolutionary host shift (defi ned as interspecies transmission followed by establishment and long-term persistence in the new host species [18] ) (figure 1) .phylograms of host sequences were also constructed and were essentially of the same topology with high support whether derived by using mrbayes version 3.1.2 or mega3 (data not shown). when we mapped host phylogram to virus, virus phylogeny did not always track host phylogeny (figure 3 ). when separate host-virus phylograms were constructed for the 2 bat families (verspertilionidae and rhinolophidae), different corresponding relationships were evident. verspertilionids and their covs showed phylogenetic congruence, and rhinolophids and their covs showed incongruous phylogenies (figure 4) .we found evidence for evolutionarily divergent relationships for some vespertilionid viruses and their hosts when analyzed at the family scale (figure 4, panel a) . for example, divergence between viruses harbored by p. pipistrellus and p. abramus is congruent with their hosts. the divergence among other viruses was incongruent with divergence of host species, e.g., those from s. kuhlii and myotis ricketti.rhinolophid bats and their viruses were analyzed at a different taxonomic scale (within genus). in this co-phylogeny, viral host shifts were the evident virus-host feature (figure 4, panel b) . except for r. macrotis, all rhinolophidae bats had 2 distinct lineages of covs, and host shifts were found among viruses carried by r. ferrumequinum, r. pearsoni, and r. sinicus.genetic diversity of covs harbored by rhinolophids and vespertilionids was similar (vespertilionids π = 0.27 ± 0.13; rhinolophids π = 0.25 ± 0.13). in contrast, genetic diversity of cyt b sequences from bats was much higher among the vespertilonids (π = 0.17 ± 0.007) than among the rhinolophids (π = 0.09 ± 0.006).covs sequenced from different bats of the same species clustered together, even when bats were collected in locations 1,000-2,000 km apart. this pattern was found for covs from p. abramus, t. pachypus, myotis ricketti, and m. magnater. bats of the genus miniopterus are known to migrate long distances (30) , which explains why the phylogeny of viruses isolated from m. magnater sampled in distant places (guangxi, anhui, fujian, and hong kong) although some of these values are low, our analysis demonstrated a pathway for future study (28) . lines between the 2 trees were added to help visualize virus and host sequence congruence or incongruence. lacks geographic structure. in nonmigrating species such as bats of the genera pipistrellus and tylonycteris, intimate physical contact of bats in same cave or the same bamboo roost site, as well as periodic exchange of bats among neighboring colonies, may facilitate virus transmission among populations.despite the co-roosting of many bats species, we found little evidence of host shifts for some viruses. for example, covs from m. magnater and myotis ricketti sampled in the same cave in guangxi were divergent, although sample size was limited. although myotis ricketti has a closer phylogenetic relationship with t. pachypus, p. pipistrellus, and p. abramus than with m. magnater and s. kuhlii, its behavior and habits are closer to those of the last group. for example, myotis ricketti and s. kuhlii bats roosts in caves (although s. kuhlii also roosts under palm leaves), whereas t. pachypus roosts inside bamboo and p. abramus roosts almost entirely in old buildings. thus, it seems plausible that the close phylogenetic relationship between viruses harbored by myotis ricketti and s. kuhlii refl ects the similar behavior and ecology of their hosts.the phylogenetic and phylogeographic associations we found suggest that there may be a coevolutionary relationship between some bat covs and their hosts. for example, sister taxa within the genus pipistrellus independently maintained 2 distinct viruses that share a most recent common ancestor. a similar relationship was apparent among the viruses of some closely related genera (e.g., pipistrellus and tylonycteris), whereby divergence of each genus was mirrored by divergence in viral phylogeny. however, viruses are usually thought to have evolved more recently than their hosts (31) . thus, apparent coevolutionary patterns may refl ect either a high frequency of host shift among closely related bat species or simultaneous lineage splitting of hosts and viruses. host shifts among related bats might be favored by a variety of mechanisms, including preadaptation to overcome immune defenses or greater rates of interspecifi c contact relative to distantly related bat species. phylograms with better resolution would enable statistical comparison of phylogenetic congruence and estimation of divergence times.in the vespertilionids, close phylogenetic concordance between host and virus suggests a close, possibly evolutionarily divergent relationship. however, there are different scales of comparison between the vespertillionidae, in which all but 1 cov came from separate genera, and the rhinolophidae, in which we examined a co-phylogeny of multiple species within 1 genus. genetic diversity in the vespertilionids sampled was nearly double that of the rhinolophids, which was probably due to the greater number of species sampled and their broader taxonomic range. despite this greater genetic diversity among vespertilionid bat hosts, the genetic diversity of covs did not differ between vespertilionids and rhinopholids. this diversity suggests that vespertilionids may maintain undiscovered covs or that rhinolophids might harbor disproportionate cov diversity relative to diversity of their genus. we propose that future work may identify more vespertilionid bat covs, which would enable an accurate comparison of propensity for host shifts within this group.in the rhinolophids, the host phylogram demonstrated genetic divergence between r. ferrumequinum and other species, as shown by the division of rhinolophus bats into 2 groups. each of these groups harbors covs from 2 clusters (sars-like covs and other covs), which suggests multiple introductions of covs into these species.lack of concordance between phylogenies of rhinolophid bats and their covs can be interpreted as evidence for host shifts between bats of the genus rhinolophus. different species of rhinolophus are often observed roosting rm, r. macrotis. boldface branches in panel b contain severe acute respiratory syndrome-like covs reported. lines between bat and virus trees were added to help visualize congruence or incongruence. although this fi gure implies differences in propensity for host shifts between these families, all but 1 of the vespertilionid covs are from different genera, whereas all rhinolophid covs are from the same genera, which make meaningful comparisons diffi cult. overall mean genetic differences are much greater between vespertilionid species than between rhinolophid species.inside the same cave, which facilitates virus transmission between species. however, the degree of host shifting of rhinolophid bat covs may not be particularly high relative to other genera of bats. this observation will be clarifi ed when a greater diversity of covs from other bat genera is reported and the sequences are analyzed. these requirements support the need for further research on bat viruses (32, 33) .host-shifting within the genus rhinolophus would likely be promoted if these bats shed covs in a way that makes them more available to other rhinolophus spp.; had behavioral traits that lead to increased contact with other rhinolophus spp.; or if covs harbored by these bats have structural, biologic, or other traits that make them more readily transmitted to other rhinolophus spp. two lines of evidence suggest that host traits are the most parsimonious explanation for host shifts within the genus rhinolophus. first, sars-like covs and other rhinolophid covs (rfv1 and rpv1) show evidence of interspecies transmission. second, covs from other bat groups that are phylogenetically much closer to rfv 1 and rpv 1 than to the sars-like covs do not show evidence of successful host shifts. thus, the ability to jump hosts is unlikely to be a strictly viral trait.the phylogeography of bat covs suggests that the bat sars-like covs form a monophyletic clade that is both phylogenetically distinct from other bat covs and geographically isolated. although we acknowledge that this interpretation may be limited by sample size, it may also indicate that rhinolophid bats, the hosts of a cluster of sars-like covs within which human and civet sars cov nestle phylogenetically (6, 7) , are more likely to foster the host shifts of covs than are other bat species. the potential for close contact between bats, civets, and humans in the wildlife trade in southern china, coupled with a possible propensity of these bats to foster cov host-shifts, could explain sars-like covs as the source of sars-cov. this potential supports molecular results on bat covs that suggest a recent host shift from bats to civets or other animals and humans (34) . such host shifts may indicate a risk posed by other bat covs for novel disease emergence. finally, the ability of sars-like covs to be transmitted between and establish in new species (i.e., to undergo host shifts) is consistent with other covs. this has been shown for several covs of livestock species (35) and has been used to support their inclusion as 1 of the groups of viruses most likely to be responsible for emerging zoonoses, even before the emergence of sars (36) .the total diversity of covs (including sars-like covs) in bats has likely not been fully described. the genus rhinolophus (8) contains 77 bat species distributed in asia, europe, and africa. the recent discoveries of bat covs in the united states (37) and sars-covs in african bats (38) support the hypothesis that covs are diverse and widespread in bat species. given the diversity of covs in this group, and their propensity for host shifts, further viral discovery in rhinolophids may assist in understanding and ultimately controlling the emergence of zoonotic viruses. bats are increasingly recognized as reservoirs of many highly lethal zoonotic agents (32) . understanding their diversity, behavior, and mechanisms of virus transmission may play a key role in preventing future outbreaks of both known and unknown zoonotic diseases of bat origin.the emergence of the novel betacoronavirus, recently renamed as severe acute some variants of covs are associated with outbreaks, some others are continuously circulating and cause mostly mild respiratory infections (eg, the common cold). the most well known of these covs is the sars-cov, which between 2002 and 2003 was responsible to cause an outbreak that spread around the world and resulted in over 8000 cases and 774 deaths, with a case fatality rate of around 9% to 11%. 3 in 2012, a novel cov, mers-cov, causing severe respiratory symptoms was identified. 4 very recently, in december 2019, a novel beta-cov, was responsible of a new illness, first detected in wuhan, china. 5 we now know this to be another outbreak of cov in humans (the 7th), that was recently renamed as sars-cov-2. the origin of the virus is still unclear, however, genomic analysis suggests ncov is most closely related to viruses previously identified in bats. 6 in the first week of march 2020, over 98.192 confirmed cases and 3,380 deaths have been reported globally. 7 the case counts are dramatically rising in part due to increased surveillance and testing.while the outbreak seems to be centered in wuhan, which is now under quarantine, the virus has spread throughout china and abroad, including western and south-eastern pacific regions, european regions, eastern mediterranean regions as well as many states in the united states of america. 8 it comes amid signs of the virus's shift away from its origins in china, with italy, iran, and south korea emerging as the other countries hit hardest by the deadly disease.italy is the worst affected country in europe, with more than 4636 cases, a rise of 778 in a day, and a death toll of 197, an increase of 49. 9 nevertheless, there is still limited information about the genomic epidemiology of the sars-cov-2 circulating in italy from genomic surveillance studies that impairs our understanding of the virus introduction, establishment, and dissemination in the country.thus, to better understand the emergence of the recent sars-cov-2 epidemic in italy, we analyzed a larger and updated dataset of recently released data of the covid-2019 epidemic to improve more effective intervention strategies.the dataset comprised (n = 141) complete genomes sequences from the current (2019-2020) sars-cov-2 epidemic retrieved from gisaid (https://www.gisaid.org/) database. the alignment was performed using mafft online program. 10 the complete dataset was assessed for the presence of phylogenetic signal by applying the likelihood mapping analysis implemented in the iq-tree 1.6.8 software (http://www.iqtree.org). 11 a maximum likelihood (ml) phylogeny was reconstructed using iq-tree 1.6.8 software under the general time-reversible nucleotide substitution model with a proportion of invariant sites (gtr+i) which was inferred in jmodeltest (https://github.com/ddarriba/jmodeltest2) as the best fitting model. 12 to better understand the establishment and transmission of the novel sars-cov-2 in italy, the recent italian genomes available on the gisaid database were added to a dataset of 138 sars-cov-2 genomes from the global epidemic. an ml phylogenetic tree (figure 1 ) was built to f i g u r e 1 maximum likelihood phylogeny, estimated from complete and near-complete coronavirus (cov) genomes using genome data available in gisaid. colors represent different locations (panels a and b represent expansions of the clades containing the italian cov isolates [green]) in clade 1 closely related with sequence from england, in clade b closely related with sequences from germany explore the recent italian genomes relationship with previous worldwide isolates. ml phylogenies suggested that the three italian strains, grouped into two different well-supported phylogenetic clades (bootstrap score [bs] 0.80, 0.99, respectively). we found that two isolates from italy (epi_isl_410546 a chinese tourist from hubei province, and epi_isl_412974 the first italian case isolate in rome italy) fall within a clade (bs = 94%) ( figure 1a clade 1) including sequences from several countries as china, japan, singapore, england, australia, and canada.however, it is important to note that sequences from china are positioned basally to this first clade, reinforcing the idea that the first introduction event could be mediated, as suspected by china.we also identified that one italian strain (epi_isl_412973 from the province of lombardy) isolated in february 2020, grouped separately into a second clade ( figure 1b lance efforts during epidemics should be undertaken to provide enough data to make reliable inferences on the molecular epidemiology of the rapidly evolving virus. phylogenetic inference robustness will be improved if other genomic sequences will be available to build an even more informative dataset despite the low heterogeneity of the sequenced strains. consequently, this analysis has to be considered as the first preliminary report regarding the sars-cov-2 epidemic in italy that highlights two independent introductions probably mediated by china and germany, respectively. this could reinforce the tight connection within samples that have been isolated all over europe, indicating that the virus is spreading quite widely in europe suggesting that it could be likely spreading in the general population.in conclusion, our study shows that genomic data generated in real-time can be employed to assist public health in monitoring and understanding the outbreak of novel emerging viral 13 pathogens.a new virus-associated disease, coronavirus disease 2019 , was initially reported in china on 30 th december 2019 . the causative agent of covid-19 is the novel human coronavirus sars-cov-2 zhou et al., 2020) , and, as of 24 th march 2020, there have been 372,757 confirmed infections and 16,231 deaths reported worldwide (world health organization, 2020) . in china, the covid-19 epidemic grew exponentially during january 2020, peaking on 12 th february 2020 with 15,153 newly confirmed cases per day. one month later, reported covid-19 cases in china dropped to~20 per day, indicating the epidemic there was contained. however, the number of cases reported outside of china has risen exponentially since the second half of february 2020. by 11 th march 2020, the day that the world health organization (who) announced covid-19 to be a new pandemic, 37,371 cases had been reported outside of china (world health organization, 2020) .guangdong province and the pearl river delta metropolitan region contain some of the world's largest and most densely populated urban areas. guangdong is the most populous province of china (113 m people) and contains many large cities including guangzhou (12 m), shenzhen (10 m), dongguan (8 m), and foshan (7 m). the province has strong transportation links to hubei province, where the first cases of covid-19 were reported. the wuhan-guangzhou high-speed railway has been estimated to transfer 0.1-0.2 million passengers per day during the spring festival period, which started on 10 th january 2020. by 19 th march 2020, guangdong had 1,388 confirmed cases of covid-19, the highest in china outside of hubei province.understanding the evolution and transmission patterns of a virus after it enters a new population is crucial for designing effective strategies for disease control and prevention (faria et al., 2018; grubaugh et al., 2017; ladner et al., 2019) . in this study, we combine genetic and epidemiological data to investigate the genetic diversity, evolution, and epidemiology of sars-cov-2 in guangdong province. we generated virus genome sequences from 53 patients in guangdong using both metagenomic sequencing and multiplex pcr amplification followed by nanopore sequencing. through phylogenetic analysis, interpreted in the context of available epidemiological information, we sought to investigate the timing and relative contributions of imported cases versus local transmission, the nature of genetically distinct transmission chains within guangdong, and how the emergency response in guangdong was reflected in the reduction and elimination of these transmission chains. our results may provide valuable information for implementing and interpreting genomic surveillance of covid-19 in other regions.enhanced surveillance was launched in all clinics in guangdong province following the first reports of patients with undiagnosed pneumonia on 30 th december 2019. initially, screening and sampling for sars-cov-2 was targeted toward patients with fever and respiratory symptoms and those who had a history of travel in the 14 days before the date of symptom onset. the first detected case in guangdong had symptom onset on 1 st january and was reported on 19 th january 2020 (kang et al., 2020) . covid-19 cases in guangdong grew until early february 2020 (peaking at >100 cases per day) and declined thereafter (figure 1a) . after 22 nd february 2020, the daily number of locally infected reported cases in guangdong did not exceed one. however, since the beginning of march 2020 covid-19 cases imported into guangdong from abroad have been detected with increasing frequency. as of 26 th march 2020, a total of 102 imported cases were reported from 19 different countries ( figure 1a ), highlighting the risk that local covid-19 transmission could reignite in china.different surveillance strategies were applied during the epidemic in guangdong ( figure 1a ; star methods). more intensive surveillance was initiated on 30 th january 2020 in response to the spring festival period, which results in greater mobility among regions and provinces in china (kraemer et al., 2020; tian et al., 2020) and because asymptomatic covid-19 cases had been reported (guan et al., 2020) . this included monitoring (1) all travelers returning from hubei or other regions with high epidemic activity, (2) their close contacts, and (3) all hospitalized patients in clinics, including those without fever or respiratory symptoms, regardless of their exposure history. approximately 1.35 million samples were screened by six third-party institutions between 30 th january and 15 th march 2020. surveillance commenced at guangdong airports in early march, following the growth of covid-19 outbreaks outside of china. in total,~1.6 million tests were performed by 19 th march 2020, identifying 1,388 sars-cov-2 positive cases in 20 of 21 prefectures in guangdong province ( figure 1b) . around a quarter of cases (336) were judged to be linked to local transmission and two-thirds (1,014) had a likely exposure history in hubei (see star methods). for locally infected cases, 181 (53%) were linked to transmission among household members. more than half of the reported cases (60%) were from the cities of shenzhen ll and guangzhou ( figure 1b ). we note that the number of detected cases will be less than the true number of infections, although the degree of under-reporting is unknown. surveillance was targeted toward travelers, hence these data may overestimate the proportion of travel-associated cases.to understand the genetic structure of the covid-19 outbreak in guangdong, we generated near-complete and partial genomes from 53 covid-19 patients in guangdong province. the genomes were generated by a combination of metagenomic sequencing and multiplex pcr amplification followed by nanopore sequencing on a minion device (see star methods). sequence sampling dates ranged from 30 th january to 28 th february 2020 ( figure s1 ).sequencing was performed on 79 clinical samples (throat swabs, n = 32; anal swabs, n = 24; nasopharyngeal swabs, n = 10; sputum, n = 13) collected from 62 patients with varying disease symptoms, ranging from asymptomatic to very severe (see star methods). real-time reverse transcription pcr ct (cycle threshold) values of these samples ranged from 19 to 40.86. figure 2a displays the ct values for the 53 samples with >50% genome coverage for which we report whole and partial genome sequences (see figure s2 for details of all 79 samples). when ct values are <30, sequence reads covered~90% or more of the reference genome (genbank: mn908947.3) irrespective of the amplification and sequencing approach used (see star methods). however, genome coverage declined for samples with ct >30 (figure s2 ). using a kruskal-wallis rank-sum test we found an association between sample ct values and sample type ( figure 2b ; p < 0.001), and sample ct values and disease severity ( figure 2c ; p = 0.03) (see also , however, we note that sampling was not undertaken with these hypotheses in mind.sequences generated with nanopore sequencing indicate common regions of low coverage ( figure 2d ), indicating that the version 1 primer set used here did not amplify some regions efficiently. efficient primer binding may have been prevented due (d) genome coverage map for the 53 genomes reported here, ordered by % genome coverage. single nucleotide polymorphisms (with respect to the reference genome mn908947.3) are colored in red. each genome is colored according to the sequencing approach used. (e) genomic structure of sars-cov-2 and the genomic location and frequency of single nucleotide polymorphisms (with respect to the reference genome mn908947.3) among our 53 sequences. these mutations correspond to the red lines in (d). see also figure s2 , table s1 , and data s1. to genetic divergence from the reference genome (mn908947.3). an alternative explanation is the interaction between two particular primers, resulting in primer dimer formation (itokawa et al., 2020) . after completion of this study, the primers have been redesigned to address these issues and improve coverage (quick 2020). shared and unique single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) were observed at 97 sites across the sars-cov-2 genome (figures 2d and 2e) , with 77 snps present in only one genome. three snps were present in >10 genomes: (c8782t, c21711t, and t28144c). when compared to 49 previously released genomes from hubei and guangdong, 118 snps are present in only one genome and these three snps are still the only variants shared among >10 genomes (data s1).to understand the genetic diversity of the sars-cov-2 epidemic in guangdong, we performed phylogenetic analyses using maximum likelihood and bayesian molecular clock approaches. we added our new virus genomes from guangdong to 177 publicly available sequences, which includes 73 sequences from china, 17 of which were previously reported guangdong genomes. the final alignment comprised 250 sequences and increased the number of sars-cov-2 sequences from china by~60% when our data were submitted to gisaid (on 9 th march).the estimated maximum likelihood (ml) phylogeny is shown in figure 3a . the sars-cov-2 sequences from guangdong (red) are interspersed with viral lineages sampled from other chinese provinces and other countries (gray). this pattern agrees with the epidemiological time series in figure 1a , indicating that most detected cases were linked to travel rather than local community transmission. despite this, there were a number of instances where sequences from guangdong appeared to cluster together, sometimes with sequences sampled from other regions. to explore these lineages in more detail, we performed a bayesian molecular clock analysis that places the phylogenetic history of the genomes on an estimated timescale. a summary visualization of the maximum clade credibility tree from that analysis is shown in figure 3b and is largely congruent with the ml tree. the current low genetic diversity of sars-cov-2 genomes worldwide means that most internal nodes have very low posterior probabilities; we caution that no conclusions should be drawn from these branching events as they will be informed by the phylogenetic prior distribution rather than variable nucleotide sites ( figure 3a ). nevertheless, five clusters (denoted a-e) containing guangdong sequences had posterior probability support of >80% (i.e., their sequences grouped monophyletically in >80% of trees in the posterior sample; figure 3b ). these clusters were also observed in the ml phylogeny ( figure 3a ). some included only sequences sampled in guangdong (a, b), others included sequences sampled in other countries and provinces (c, d, e).from the molecular clock analysis, we were able to estimate the times of the most recent common ancestor (tmrca) of clusters a-e. we found that sars-cov-2 lineages were imported multiple times into guangdong during the second half of january 2020 (figure 4) . three clusters (c, d, e) have earlier tmrcas that coincide with the start of the guangdong epidemic and two (a, b) have later tmrcas, around the time of the epidemic peak in the province ( figure 4 ). the average time between the tmrca and the earliest ll sequence collection date in each cluster was approximately 10.25 days. the observed duration of each phylogenetic cluster (tmrca to most recently sampled sequence) ranged from 9.49 (cluster b) to 45.2 (cluster d) days. the clusters with earlier tmrcas contain more sequences from travelers sampled outside of china, possibly reflecting a decrease in air passenger travel from guangdong after january 2020 (flightradar24, 2020) . the median tmrca estimate of the covid-19 pandemic was 1 st december 2019 (95% hpd 15 th november to 13 th december 2019; figure 4 ), consistent with previous analyses (rambaut, 2020).the apparent clusters of guangdong sequences require careful interpretation because of the relative undersampling of sars-cov-2 genomes from other chinese provinces, including hubei. specifically, it is known that undersampling of regions with high incidence can lead to phylogenetic analyses underestimating the number of introductions into recipient locations and overestimating the size and duration of transmission chains in those recipient locations (grubaugh et al., 2017; kraemer et al., 2018) . for example, the largest guangdong phylogenetic cluster (denoted a in figures 3 and 4) comprises 8 sequences, none of which are placed at the root of the cluster, and it is tempting to conclude that the entire cluster derived from community transmission within guangdong. however, 6 of the 8 genomes reported travel from hubei and therefore the cluster in fact represents multiple sars-cov-2 introductions into guangdong, with dates of symptom onset around or shortly after the shutdown of travel from wuhan ( figure 4 ).our analyses of the genomic epidemiology of sars-cov-2 in guangdong province indicate that, following the first covid-19 case detected in early january, most infections were the result of virus importation from elsewhere, and that chains of local transmission were limited in size and duration. this suggests that the large-scale surveillance and intervention measures implemented in guangdong were effective in interrupting community transmission in a densely populated urban region, ultimately containing the epidemic and limiting the potential for dissemination to other regions (leung et al., 2020) . however, vigilance is still required as there remains a risk that sars-cov-2 transmission could reignite in guangdong following the recent increase in the number of covid-19 cases imported to china from other countries.the results also suggest that analyses of phylogenetic structure during the early phase of the pandemic should be interpreted carefully. the number of mutations that define phylogenetic lineages are small (often one), and may be similar to the number of sequence differences arising from errors introduced during reverse transcription, pcr amplification, or sequencing. bayesian estimates of divergence times (rannala and yang, 1996) , such as the tmrca of the pandemic, are based on aggregate numbers of mutations and informed by dense sampling through time, and are thus expected to be more robust. further, the low and variable sampling of covid-19 cases among different regions makes it challenging to evaluate phylogenetic clusters that comprise cases from a single region; although such clusters could indeed represent local transmission, our results show they can also include multiple introductions from a genomically undersampled location. therefore, as with all phylogenetic analyses, the sars-cov-2 genomes must be interpreted in the context of all available epidemiological information.detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following: the authors declare no competing interests.received: march 27, 2020 revised: april 9, 2020 accepted: april 14, 2020 published: april 30, 2020this study did not generate new unique reagents.the accession numbers for the sequences reported in this paper are gisaid: epi_isl_413850-413902. code for all figures, tree files, beast xml file, beast log file, and raw data for figures 1, 2, 3 , and 4 are available at https://github.com/laduplessis/ sars-cov-2_guangdong_genomic_epidemiology. a live version of figure 3b can be found at https://laduplessis.github.io/ sars-cov-2_guangdong_genomic_epidemiology/.this study was approved by ethics committee of the center for disease control and prevention of guangdong province. written consent was obtained from patients or their guardian(s) when samples were collected. patients were informed about the surveillance before providing written consent, and data directly related to disease control were collected and anonymized for analysis.after reports of hospitalized cases with undiagnosed, severe pneumonia on december 30 th 2019, enhanced surveillance was initiated in guangdong province to detect suspected infections, especially among cases with recent travel history to hubei or other epidemic regions over the last 14 days. suspected covid-19 cases were screened by 31 designated hospitals, local cdcs in 21 prefecture cities, and 6 third-party detection institutions with commercial real-time reverse transcription pcr (rt-pcr) kits (see below for further details). a subset of positive samples was sent to guangdong provincial cdc for verification and further sequencing (see below for further details). imported infections were defined when confirmed cases had travel history from hubei or other epidemic regions and did not have close contact with local positive cases in 14 days preceding illness onset. the severity of the disease was classified into mild, moderate, severe, or critical (see below for further details). further details of clinical case definitions are provided in star methods. demographic information, date of illness onset, and clinical outcomes of sequenced cases were collected from medical records. the exposure history for each case was obtained through an interview. information regarding the demographic and geographic distribution of sars-cov-2 cases can be found at the website of health commission of guangdong province (http://wsjkw.gd.gov.cn/xxgzbdfk/yqtb/).the surveillance scheme in guangdong included 3 main components:a. twenty-one prefecture cdcs and 31 designated hospitals. these are responsible for the suspected cases diagnoses launched on 30 th december 2019. a suspected case was defined if he/she met one of the following criteria: (i) epidemic history and (ii) fever or respiratory symptoms (see below for further details). epidemic history included: (i) a history of travel to wuhan or a person who lived in wuhan or another region where sustained local transmission existed in the 14 days prior to symptom onset; (ii) contact with a patient with fever/respiratory symptoms from wuhan or another region where sustained local transmission existed in the 14 days prior to symptom onset; (iii) originated from a cluster of covid-19 cases or is epidemiologically linked to other covid-19 cases. as of 15 th march, 1152 cases were identified through local cdcs and hospitals. b. six third-party detection institutions. more intense surveillance was initiated on 30th january 2020 in response to the spring festival period. this included monitoring (i) all healthy travelers returning from hubei or other regions with high epidemic activity, (ii) their close contacts, and (iii) all hospitalized patients in clinics, including those without fever or respiratory symptoms, regardless of their exposure history. approximately 1.35 million samples were screened by six third-party institutions between 30th january and 15th march 2020 and 199 sars-cov-2 positive cases were identified from travelers from hubei without clinical symptoms (76 in 316,214 or 0.02%), fever clinics (99 in 475,949 or 0.02%), non-fever clinics (3 in 447,702) and their close contacts (14 in 70,509 or 0.02%). c. airport enhanced surveillance. surveillance commenced at guangdong airports on 9 th march. as of 15 th , 3 positive cases were identified from 7,909 diagnoses in guangzhou baiyun airport and a total of 92 imported covid-19 cases were confirmed as of 26 th march.we collected 58 samples for sequencing from 44 patients (some patients were sampled more than once) in four sentinel hospitals in guangzhou, shenzhen and foshan (guangzhou eighth people's hospital, 9 samples from 9 patients, collected on 30 th january 2020; guangdong second provincial general hospital, 33 samples from 19 patients, collected between 31 st january and 9 th january 2020;the third people's hospital of shenzhen, 11 samples from 11 patients, collected on 5 th february 2020; foshan first people's hospital, 5 samples from 5 patients, collected between 10 th february and 12 th february 2020). these cities recorded the highest number of covid-19 cases ( figure 1b) . we collected a further 21 samples from 18 patients from a screening project of hospitalized covid-19 ll cell 181, 1-7.e1-e4, may 28, 2020 e2please cite this article in press as: lu et al., genomic epidemiology of sars-cov-2 in guangdong province, china, cell (2020), https:// doi.org/10. 1016/j.cell.2020.04.023 cases in guangdong, which was launched on 28 th february. we therefore attempted sequencing on 79 samples from 62 patients (table s1 .1). because this study focuses on epidemiological questions, we retained only one sequence per patient (the highest quality sequence) and we retained only genomes with > 50% coverage (our quality threshold). this resulted in a final total of 53 genomes.cases were diagnosed and the severity status was categorized as mild, moderate, severe, and critical according to the diagnosis and treatment scheme for covid-19 released by the national health commission of china (version 7).the clinical symptoms were mild, and there was no sign of pneumonia on imaging.showing fever and respiratory symptoms with radiological findings of pneumonia.adult cases meeting any of the following criteria:i) respiratory distress (s30 breaths/ min); ii) oxygen saturation % 93% at rest; iii) arterial partial pressure of oxygen (pao2)/ fraction of inspired oxygen (fio2) & 300mmhg (l mmhg = 0.133kpa).in high-altitude areas (at an altitude of over 1,000 m above the sea level), pao2/ fio2 shall be corrected by the following formula:pao2=fio2 x ½atmosphericpressureðmmhgþ = 760cases with chest imaging that showed obvious lesion progression within 24-48 hours > 50% shall be managed as severe cases. child cases meeting any of the following criteria:i) tachypnea (rr r 60 breaths/min for infants aged below 2 months; rr r 50 bpm for infants aged 2-12 months; rr r 40 bpm for children aged 1-5 years, and rr r 30 bpm for children above 5 ye pao2/ fio2 x [atmospheric pressure (mmhg)/760]ars old) independent of fever and crying ii) oxygen saturation % 92% on finger pulse oximeter taken at rest iii) labored breathing (moaning, nasal fluttering, and infrasternal, supraclavicular and intercostal retraction), cyanosis, and intermittent apnea iv) lethargy and convulsion v) difficulty feeding and signs of dehydrationcases meeting any of the following criteria: i) respiratory failure and requiring mechanical ventilation ii) shock iii) with other organ failure that requires icu carevirus amplification and sequencing virus genomes were generated by two different approaches, (i) untargeted metagenomic sequencing on the bgi mgiseq-2000 (n = 63) and illumina nextseq (n = 4) sequencing platforms, and (ii) using version 1 of the artic covid-19 multiplex pcr primers (https:// artic.network/ncov-2019), followed by nanopore sequencing on an ont minion (n = 45). untargeted metagenomic sequencing was initially attempted as it is well suited to the characterization of a previously unknown virus. subsequently, a protocol for sequencing sars-cov-2 using multiplex pcr with nanopore sequencing was made available, which showed good performance on samples with higher ct values (as described below and in table s1 .3). thereafter, most clinical samples were sequenced using this latter approach. we report only those genomes for which we were able to generate > 50% genome coverage, and report only one genome per patient.for metatranscriptomics, total rnas were extracted from different types of samples by using qiaamp viral rna mini kit, followed by dnase treatment and purification with turbo dnase and agencourt rnaclean xp beads. both the concentration and the quality of all isolated rna samples were measured and checked with the agilent bioanalyzer 2100 and qubit. for illumina sequencing, libraries were prepared using the smarter stranded total rna-seq kit v2 (according to the manufacturer's protocol starting with 10 ng total rna. briefly, purified rna was first fragmented and converted to cdna using reverse transcriptase. the ribosome cdna was depleted by using zaprv2 (mammalian-specific). the remaining cdna was converted to double stranded dna and subjected to end-repair, a-tailing, and adaptor ligation. the constructed libraries were amplified using 9-16 pcr cycles. sequencing of metatranscriptome libraries was conducted on the illumina nextseq 550 se 75 platform. for bgi sequencing, dna-depleted and ll e3 cell 181, 1-7.e1-e4, may 28, 2020please cite this article in press as: lu et al., genomic epidemiology of sars-cov-2 in guangdong province, china, cell (2020), https:// doi.org/10. 1016/j.cell.2020.04.023 purified rna was used to construct the single-stranded circular dna library with mgieasy rna library preparation reagent set following manufacturer's protocol. finally, 60fmol of pcr products were unique dual indexed (udi), circularized, and amplified by rolling circle replication (rcr) to generate dna nanoball (dnbs)-based libraries. dnbs preps of clinical samples were sequenced on the mgiseq-2000 platform.for the multiplex pcr approach, we followed the general method of multiplex pcr as described in (https://artic.network/ ncov-2019) (quick et al., 2017) . briefly, the multiplex pcr was performed with two pooled primer mixture and the cdna reverse transcribed with random primers was used as a template. after 35 rounds of amplification, the pcr products were collected and quantified, followed with end-repairing and barcoding ligation. around 50 fmol of final library dna was loaded onto the minion. the nanopore sequencing platform takes less than 24 hours to obtain 10gb of sequencing data, achieving between 0.3-0.6 million reads per sample. the artic bioinformatics pipeline for covid (https://artic.network/ncov-2019) was used to generate consensus sequences and call single nucleotide changes relative to the reference sequence. snp differences were sometimes observed when the same sample was sequenced using different sequencing approaches. these differences were random and not platform specific and, upon close inspection of the reads, most likely resulted from low coverage regions in the metagenomics data. only the single highest-quality genome was retained per patient.to test the precision and threshold of the multiplex pcr and nanopore sequencing method, we undertook a serial dilution experiment. viral rna was extracted from a cell strain of sars-cov-2. to mimic clinical samples with different viral loads, we diluted this viral rna with sars-cov-2-negative rna extracted from nasopharyngeal swab specimens. viral loads were estimated using rt-pcr with serial diluted plasmid as a standard. at each dilution level we performed multiplex pcr and nanopore sequencing and assembly as per the approach above, except that reads were assembled against the consensus genome obtained from the original sample using metagenomic sequencing. as expected, relative virus load, % genome coverage, and average read depth decreased at higher dilutions. genome coverage exceeded 75% for all except the final dilution (table s1 .3).virus genome assembly reference-based assembly of the metagenomic raw data was performed as follows. illumina adaptors were removed, and reads were filtered for quality (q30 threshold and read length > 15nt) using cutadapt 1.18 (martin, 2011) . the mapping of cleaned reads was performed against genbank reference strain mn908947.3 using bowtie2 (langmead and salzberg, 2012) . consensus sequences were generated using samtools 1.2 (li et al., 2009) . sites were called at depth > = 3 if they matched the reference strain, or depth > = 5 if they differed from the reference, otherwise sites were denoted n. ambiguity nucleotide codes were used if (i) the minor variant is observed at > 30% frequency and (ii) the minor variant is represented by 5 or more reads. assembly of the nanopore raw data was performed using the artic bioinformatic pipeline for covid-19 with minimap2 (li, 2018) and medaka (https://github. com/nanoporetech/medaka) for consensus sequence generation. for patient samples that were sequenced using both metagenomics and nanopore sequencing, we retained only the sequence with the highest genome coverage.all available sars-cov-2 sequences (n = 323) on gisaid (gisaid.org) on 13 th march 2020 were downloaded. sequences from gi-said that were error-rich, those which represented multiple sequences from the same patient, and those without a date of sampling were removed. finally, the dataset was reduced by only retaining the earliest and most recently sampled sequences from epidemiologically linked outbreaks (e.g., the diamond princess cruise ship). the resulting dataset of 250 sequences therefore represents the global diversity of the virus while minimizing the impact of sampling bias. sequences were aligned using mafft v7.4 (katoh and standley, 2013) and manually inspected in geneious v11.0.3 (https://www.geneious.com). the final alignment length was 29,923 nucleotides.we used both the maximum likelihood (ml) and bayesian coalescent methods to explore the phylogenetic structure of sars-cov-2. the ml phylogeny was estimated with phyml (guindon et al., 2010) using the hky+q 4 substitution model (hasegawa et al., 1985) with gamma-distributed rate variation (yang, 1994) . linear regression of root-to-tip genetic distance against sampling date indicated that the sars-cov-2 sequences evolve in clock-like manner (r = 0.592) ( figure s3 ). the bayesian coalescent tree analysis was undertaken with beast v1.10.4 (ayres et al., 2012; suchard et al., 2018) , also using the hky+q 4 substitution model with gamma-distributed rate variation with an exponential population growth tree prior and a strict molecular clock, under a noninformative continuous-time markov chain (ctmc) reference prior (ferreira and suchard 2008) . taxon sets were defined and used to estimate the posterior probability of monophyly and the posterior distribution of the tmrca of observed phylogenetic clusters a-e (table s1 .2). two independent chains were run for 100 million states and parameters and trees were sampled every 10,000 states. upon completion, chains were combined using logcombiner after removing 10% of states as burn-in and convergence was assessed with tracer . the maximum clade credibility (mcc) tree was inferred from the bayesian posterior tree distribution using treeannotator, and visualized with figtreejs-react (https://github.com/jtmccr1/figtreejs-react). monophyly and tmrca (time to the most recent common ancestor) statistics were calculated for each taxon set from the posterior tree distribution. plots of sars-cov-2 genome coverage against rt-pcr ct value (a) and the number of mapped reads (b). each sequence is colored by sequencing approach: blue = multiplex pcr nanopore sequencing, green = bgi metagenomic sequencing, orange = illumina metagenomic sequencing. open circles indicate sequences that were not reported here or used in phylogenetic analyses, either because of insufficient coverage, or because a higher-quality sequence existed for the same patient. the pearson correlation coefficient between root-to-tip distance and collection date is displayed in the top-right corner (r = 0.592). sequences are colored by sampling location (guangdong = red, other location = gray). j a n 0 5 j a n 1 2 j a n 1 9 j a n 2 6 f e b 0 2 f e b 0 9 f e b 1 6 f e b 2 3 m a r 0 1 m a r 0 8 epi_isl_413880 epi_isl_413883 epi_isl_413861 epi_isl_413885 0 1 2 b 1 epi_isl_413885 epi_isl_413861 epi_isl_413883 epi_isl_413880 j a n 0 5 j a n 1 2 j a n 1 9 j a n 2 6 f e b 0 2 f e b 0 9 f e b 1 6 f e b 2 3 m a r 0 1 m a r 0 8 j a n 0 5 j a n 1 2 j a n 1 9 j a n j a n 0 5 j a n 1 2 j a n 1 9 j a n 2 6 f e b 0 2 f e b 0 9 f e b j a n 0 5 j a n 1 2 j a n 1 9 j a n ll article figure s5 . screenshots of the online tree visualization tool, related to figure 3 the top image shows the 5 clusters a-e highlighted. the bottom image shows the genomes from guangdong highlighted.ll articlethe nature of the ongoing evolution of the sars-cov-2 coronavirus has been the topic of considerable speculation as the pandemic has unfolded. studies have raised concerns that new mutations may confer selective advantages on the virus, hampering efforts at control 4 , 5 . to date, attention has been focused on mutations observed in viral consensus genomes, which represent the dominant variants within infected individuals. understanding the full underlying within-host diversity of the virus is relevant for vaccine design, and understanding pathogenesis and patterns of transmission. of particular interest are loci or genetic regions that are diverse in multiple individuals, since shared diversity may reveal signatures of host adaptation, or indicate the presence of co-transmitted lineages.phylogenetic analyses of consensus genomes have enabled tracking of patterns of viral spread, both regionally 6 and across the globe 7 . clear lineage-defining single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have emerged 8 , and it has been postulated that some of these might represent mutations that increase the fitness of the virus, raising significant concern for public health. of specific importance are mutations in the spike (s) protein of the virus, at least one of which, d614g (genome position 23403) has been suggested to increase transmissibility 4,9 , 5 . snps at this and many other positions appear to have arisen multiple times on different lineages 4, 9 . the presence of such a large number of homoplasies against a background of low overall genetic diversity is puzzling, and could be the consequence of recurrent mutation and selection, susceptibility of specific sites to rna editing, mixed infections of multiple variants, or to artefacts arising from sequencing and/or processing errors 9 . untangling these possible explanations is vital, as homoplasies can bias phylogeographic analyses, giving a misleading representation of how the virus evolves and spreads.the united kingdom (uk) has experienced one of the most severe waves of infection, with 11% of the reported global death toll as of 26th may 2020 10 . multiple independent sars-cov-2 introductions have contributed to substantial viral diversity 7 , making the uk an important setting for understanding sars-cov-2 evolution and transmission. in this study, we collected and analysed sars-cov-2 samples from 405 symptomatic individuals who tested positive for covid-19 within two geographically-separate hospital trusts (oxford university hospitals and basingstoke and north hampshire hospital, located 37 miles (60 km) apart; supplementary table 1 ) . using veseq, a sequencing protocol based on a quantitative targeted enrichment strategy 3 , which we previously validated for other viruses 3 , 11 , 12 , we characterised the full spectrum of within-host diversity in sars-cov-2 and contextualised our findings within other high-quality, publicly available deep-sequencing datasets from the uk generated on the high-fidelity illumina platform 13 , 14 . all genomic data has been made publicly available as part of the covid-19 genomics uk (cog-uk) consortium [cogconsortium.uk] via gisaid 15 and the european nucleotide archive (ena) study prjeb37886.to examine patterns of within-host diversity, we first considered the distribution of minor allele frequencies (mafs) in the mapped reads at every position along the genome. this analysis was supported by data curation to ensure that only high-confidence variants were examined, which included analysis of in-batch quantification controls as well as a stringent computational clean-up to eliminate any residual cross-mapping 16 , previously validated for targeted metagenomics 11 (see methods and supplementary text for a full description). in combination with unique dual indexing (udi), these procedures generated highly robust minority variant calls, which were reproducible in independent replicates and distinguishable from methodological noise above a threshold of 2% of reads at a given position (supplementary figure 1) . the distribution of mafs was a close fit to that expected under the model of an exponentially growing population (supplementary figure 2) , giving high confidence that mafs generated by veseq were representative of true within-sample diversity. we likewise observed a good fit for data from other uk centres, with slightly reduced goodness of fit consistent with some bias in maf recovered by amplicon sequencing.we used a conservative threshold of 5% to define an initial set of intrahost single nucleotide variant (isnv) sites, and subsequently examined all samples at these isnv sites for variants with maf of at least 2%. we found extensive within-host diversity in sars-cov-2 samples from oxford and basingstoke (figure 1 ), consistently higher than those observed between-host (supplementary figure 3) , with a median of 11 isnv sites per sample (range 0 -137), consistent with previously reported levels 17 . intrahost diversity was shared by multiple individuals (figure 1 and supplementary table 2) , and this observation was robust to batch effects (supplementary figure 4) . on the sars-cov-2 consensus phylogeny, we found 1628 single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) of which 171 (11%) were homoplasies (supplemental table 3 ). of these homoplasies, 18 corresponded with shared isnv sites in the oxford/basingstoke data, increasing to 56 sites when also considering data from wales and scotland (supplementary table 4 ). that is, 33% (56/171) of homoplasic sites are also shared isnv sites, despite only 7% of the genome consisting of shared isnv sites. this suggests within-host diversity is associated with a considerable proportion of the homoplasies observed in sars-cov-2, and which in turn may interfere with correct inference of the phylogeny and downstream analyses. figure 1 : with-host diversity of sars-cov-2 is more widespread than between-host diversity . above: proportion of consensus sequences in the global alignment with minority variants at each genome position. below: proportion of genomes in the oxford/basingstoke dataset with within-host diversity (minor variant frequency of at least 5%), at each genome position. the x-axis is annotated with a map of the reading frames in the viral genome, with homoplasic sites marked by black vertical lines. although homoplasic sites often correspond with shared within-host variable sites (isnv sites), the most commonly shared isnv sites do not correspond with homoplasic sites or the most diverse between-host sites.we identified 37 isnv sites shared by over ten individuals, with the four most common isnvs found in over 50 individuals each ( figure 1 , supplementary table 2) . three of these, genome positions 24156 (l865p), 22565 (l335v), and 23434 (synonymous), fall within the s gene encoding the spike protein, which mediates cell entry, is a target of antibodies, and is also the focus for new vaccines, making mutations in this region a specific concern 4 , 18 , 19 . the fourth site, 26524 (m1k/r/t), lies in the m gene, which encodes the membrane protein.overall, the elevated ratio of 1st/2nd versus 3rd codon position variants in sites shared by 15 or more individuals gives the appearance of positive selection by standard methods (p<0.05, binomial test; supplementary figure 5 ). they may, for example, represent adaptive changes in sars-cov-2, associated with its recent change in host. however, a recent study has concluded homoplasies are typically neutral or mildly deleterious for sars-cov-2 fitness, arguing against positive selection at homoplasic sites at least 20 . moreover, the appearance of homoplasies may be the result of host rna editing of viral rna at certain favoured contexts in the sars-cov-2 genome 21 , 22 . overall, the high number of individuals in which we see identical isnvs suggests their de novo generation in many individuals is unlikely. the most commonly shared isnv sites, and specifically those which are closely spaced on the genome, tend to be clustered within individuals, with a disproportionate number of individuals variant at either all sites, or no sites. for the four most commonly shared isnv sites in oxford/basingstoke, 87 out of 405 individuals had isnvs at all four sites at maf >0.02, whilst 78 individuals had no isnvs at these sites (p<0.001, binomial test). these linkage blocks of commonly shared isnvs tend to be associated with specific locations, leading to strong geographical patterns in the distributions of shared variation (figure 2 ; supplementary table 4) .to better understand the geographical patterns of within-host diversity, we considered the location from which the samples were collected. we found 31 isnv sites that were significantly more likely to be within-host diverse in samples from oxford compared to those from basingstoke (p<0.05, fisher exact test with holm correction) and two sites more likely to be diverse in samples from basingstoke (p<0.05; supplementary table 5 ). since these oxford and basingstoke samples were sequenced in the same lab, using the same methodology across multiple batches, and within-host diversity at the same sites was observed amongst samples from multiple batches (supplementary figure 4) , these geographical effects are unlikely to be artefactual.we next investigated whether phylogeny can explain these patterns; that is, whether isnvs are associated with phylogenetic lineages determined at the consensus level. using a parsimony approach, we found that diversity at only five of the 31 sites (357, 22565, 25628, 25807, and 28469), is significantly associated with phylogenetic topology (p<0.05 by tip randomisation with bonferroni correction; figure 3 ). however, closer inspection reveals that even at these positions, phylogenetic structure is confounded by geography, with diversity at specific sites regularly occurring in numerous distinct clades that are specific to either oxford or basingstoke. as it is unlikely that diversity spontaneously appeared or disappeared in multiple lineages as they moved between uk locations, these results suggest that the consensus-based phylogeny lacks the resolution to uncover the geographical patterns that we observe in minor variant diversity.consensus phylogenies illustrating within-host diversity in oxford and basingstoke samples, for sites in the sars-cov-2 genome where an association was detected both between minor allele frequency (maf) >= 2% and sampling location, and between maf >= 2% and phylogeny. tips are sized by maf at the genomic site in each panel's header and coloured by sampling location. we see a large number of independent clades with shared within-host diversity, each drawn largely from the same sampling location. this suggests that within-host diversity is not a trait that has emerged a limited number of times on specific tree branches, but rather that it is primarily associated with geography and that this confounds the apparent statistical association with the consensus phylogeny. in the absence of a host effect or sequencing artefact, the most parsimonious explanation is that the genomic differences between the oxford and basingstoke viral populations are not visible if the analysis is limited to the consensus genome.the single long branch is due to a complex variant at position 20716 -20726 in individual oxon-add0e. a variant at the same position has been previously identified 17 , suggesting either susceptibility of this locus to mutation, or a cryptic recombination event.we explored whether consideration of within-host diversity, in addition to the consensus genome, could provide further resolution for identification of transmission clusters. we identified a group of 46 samples from the oxford/basingstoke data with indistinguishable consensus genomes (differing only by the presence or absence of the n ambiguity code; figure 4a , red dots). we selected the 15 most commonly-shared isnv sites in all oxford/basingstoke samples (using a threshold of 2% and a minimum coverage of 100 to identify diversity) and calculated the proportion of those sites (identical at the consensus level) at which each pair from the 46 samples shared within-host diversity, finding a median of 0.067 (iqr 0-0.2). a distinct clustering effect was evident, most clearly in a group of 9 of the 33 samples from basingstoke (figure 3 ), including a highly correlated triplet of samples (ae81b, ae417, ae893; mean proportion of shared isnv sites 0.489), which on investigation we found had been collected from individuals closely linked by employment and sampled on consecutive days. another triplet of clustered samples from oxford (aca62, aeff8 and aefbc; mean proportion of shared isnv sites 0.267) had been collected from the same hospital within two days of each other. as further support, we identified a pair living in the same household, who have the same consensus genome and shared similar minor allele frequencies (mean proportion shared isnv sites 0.267, supplementary figure 6 ). further studies are needed to confirm whether this additional diversity can be reliably used to help resolve transmission clusters, even where the consensus sequences differ.oxford and basingstoke samples that are indistinguishable in the consensus phylogeny, highlighted by the red dots. b) for each pair of samples, we calculated the proportion of the 15 most commonly within-host diverse sites in oxford and basingstoke that showed diversity in both samples of at least 2%. this demonstrates structure in the genetic data by considering minor variants even though the consensus genomes are indistinguishable. c) and d) highlight pairs of samples which are coming both from basingstoke (c) or both from oxford (d). the largest cluster is exclusively from basingstoke.to contextualise our observation of co-transmission of variants from the oxford and basingstoke samples, we analysed a larger uk dataset including additional samples whose sequences have been made available by two other cog-uk collaborating centres. we again found a large number of loci diverse in multiple individuals, many with a strong geographical distribution (supplementary table 4 ). to identify patterns beyond the regional level, we focussed on three common polymorphic sites in the uk. the first is the d614g (a-to-g base change at locus 23403) that arises on the b.1 lineage 8 , and has been speculated to be linked to higher rates of transmission 4 , 5 . the other two polymorphic sites, 241 and 14408, we chose since they span a large part of the genome and have previously been identified as having linked variants with 23403 23 . at these loci, 89% of consensus genomes in oxford and basingstoke with coverage at these sites have haplotype t-t-g (sites represented in ascending order; lineage b.1), with the rest having haplotype c-c-g (representing lineages a.2, b.2, and b.3). only 21 individuals had isnvs at any of these sites above 2% frequency, and none at all three loci, suggesting we do not see mixed infections of lineage b.1 with any of the other lineages among the oxford/basingstoke samples.including samples from oxford/basingstoke, scotland and wales, we see a markedly different pattern. overall, 1446 of 1599 samples have coverage of at least 100 at all three sites, of which 66% are t-t-g at consensus, and 34% c-c-a (plus one with t-c-a and one c-c-g haplotype, potentially representing earlier recombination events as neither had minor alleles >2% at these sites). of the 20 individuals with minor variants above 2% frequency at all three sites,15 are c-c-a (with t-t-g as the major haplotype) and 5 t-t-g (with c-c-a as the major haplotype). within each sample, the frequencies at these three sites are remarkably similar, suggesting that these sites are far from linkage equilibrium even within patients (supplementary figure 7) . these patterns are evident in the consensus phylogenetic tree ( figure 5) . a possible explanation is superinfection (coinfection from two different infection sources) initially creating the mixed infection(s), followed by co-transmission of these two lineages. co-transmission is supported by the observation that samples that share any of these isnv sites are phylogenetically closer on the tree than would be expected by chance (supplementary figure 8) . these patterns also suggest the phylogenetic tree based on consensus genomes might not always reflect the transmission tree, particularly when lineage defining variant frequencies are similar within individuals.since we do not have linkage information, we are determining putative haplotypes based on the major and minor allele frequencies, and therefore cannot rule out within-host recombination. however, the small number of possible recombinants at the consensus level requires explanation. wide transmission bottlenecks could act to keep minor variants at low frequency along transmission chains, regardless of recombination. alternatively, epistatic effects, including within-host spatial structuring due to different selective environments 24 , could help to maintain the separate lineages. the patterns we see are consistent with consensus genomes circulating in specific locations. the b.1 lineage is dominant in oxford and basingstoke and it is therefore unsurprising that mixed infections including other lineages are not observed. single-coloured tips are isolates for which there was no or little within-host nucleotide diversity, with at least 98% of reads having the major nucleotide or an overall depth of less than 100. these are coloured by the major nucleotide. larger, bi-coloured tips represent isolates with a depth of at least 100 where less than 98% of reads showed the major nucleotide. in those cases the colour of the outer ring represents the major nucleotide, and the inner circle the most common minor nucleotide. some samples are diverse at one or two sites, but not all three; 20 samples are diverse at all three sites.we uncovered a consistent pattern of extensive within-host sars-cov-2 diversity, with shared isnv sites showing strong geographical patterns. throughout, we aimed to minimise sequencing artefacts and sample contamination where possible, and control for it where not (supplementary methods).wide transmission bottlenecks enabling multi-variant transmission, with these variants perpetuated along transmission chains, provides the most parsimonious explanation for these observations ( figure 6 ). transmission of minor variants has previously been reported in a small number of sars-cov-2 transmission pairs 17 , 24 , providing extra support to our hypothesis. wide transmission bottlenecks are consistent with the high transmissibility of sars-cov-2 25 , particularly in light of the lack of pre-existing immunity to this novel pathogen, which could enable more viral particles to establish infection. we expect transmitted variant lineages to be gradually eroded through within-host evolution, genetic drift, stochastic loss during onward transmission, and recombination, leaving a residual amount of underlying diversity but without a clear phylogenetic structure. restricted movement due the uk-wide lockdown imposed on 23rd march 2020 might also explain some of the more striking geographical patterns, and which we predict will be eroded as lockdown conditions are relaxed.although within-host selection and rna editing may be responsible for the original generation of within-host diversity, the sheer number of individuals sharing identical isnvs, and which are often closely linked on the genome and show strong geographical patterns, suggests they are unlikely to have arisen de novo in most individuals. in addition, superinfection from multiple transmission events is likely to occur in sars-cov-2 26 , 27 and could enable the generation of some within-host diversity. for example, at least one superinfection event is likely responsible for the pattern of mixed infections of the b.1 lineage with other major uk lineages. however, superinfection events are unlikely to be responsible for the bulk of the shared diversity we observe since shared isnvs often represent variants not present among individuals at the consensus level (94%, figure 1 ). for superinfection to drive this pattern, it would be expected substitutions present as minority variants in some samples would also be present as majority variants in others.mixed sars-cov-2 infections could provide an explanation for many of the homoplasies observed on phylogenies due to difficulty in resolving the consensus genome at sites that are highly diverse. the presence of mixed infection may also result in significant discrepancies between consensus phylogenies and the true transmission tree, potentially obscuring transmission clusters, particularly where variants are at high frequency. our observations provide evidence that accounting for all of the diversity within individuals could prove to be a better route for defining clusters than relying on the consensus sequences alone, as has been demonstrated in other viruses 28 , 29 , 30 . transmission of this variation as a result of a weak or absent population bottleneck is the most plausible explanation.within-host diversity might have consequences for immune-based approaches, including vaccine development. for example, significant effort is being directed to identifying therapeutic neutralising monoclonal antibodies, and it is possible that some of the variants we have defined and enumerated, and others yet to be identified, may affect the binding of antibodies and therefore their efficacy. our observations may also be of clinical relevance, particularly if infection by diverse viral populations leads to more severe and/or longer-lasting infections, as has been suggested for other viruses 31 , 32,33 .it is important to recognise that our sampling, as well as that of the majority of the uk sampling of sars-cov-2 at corresponding calendar dates, was dominated by symptomatic individuals presenting at hospitals, with moderate to severe infection. if mixed infections are more likely to lead to severe infection, it may be no coincidence that we find extensive evidence for high diversity in these samples, and these individuals might also have been exposed to high infectious doses. it will be important to compare these findings with those obtained from mild or asymptomatic infection, which are now increasingly becoming available due to widespread testing rollout, as well as those with a broad range of other clinical outcomes. our results emphasise the power of open data, and the importance of integrating genomic, clinical, and epidemiological information, to gain rapid understanding of sars-cov-2. we propose that much of this within-host diversity is transmitted between infected individuals, leading to the co-circulation of lineages. in this diagram we show three, non-exclusive scenarios: a) the rare blue minor variant lineage is gradually eroded through recombination, drift, and/or partial bottlenecking at transmission (even if the transmission bottleneck is large. b) two high frequency lineages recombinine with one another, with alleles from both lineages remaining. the consensus sequence may reflect different lineages at different sites due to fluctuations in allele frequencies. as in a) variants can gradually be lost. c) two high frequency lineages co-exist, but epistasis, within-host structuring, or other processes maintain the two distinct lineages without recombination. oxford university hospitals, extracted on the qiasymphony platform with qiasymphony dsp virus/pathogen kit (qiagen), and from basingstoke and north hampshire hospital, extracted with one of: maxwell rsc viral total nucleic acid kit (promega); reliaprep blood gdna miniprep system (promega); or prepito na body fluid kit (perkinelmer). an internal extraction control was added to the lysis buffer prior to extraction to act as a control for extraction efficiency (genesig qrt-pcr kit, #z-path-2019-ncov for basingstoke, ms2 bacteriophage 1 in oxford). the #z-path-2019-ncov control is a linear, synthetic rna target based on sequence from the rat ptprn2 gene, which has no sequence similarity with sars-cov-2 (genesig primerdesign pers. comm, 6 april 2020). the ms2 rna likewise has no sars-cov-2 similarity 1 . neither control rna interfered with sequencing. avoiding cross-contamination. next-generation sequence data produced at scale typically necessitates batching of large pools of samples together to make the process cost effective. we sought to avoid batch effects or contamination during library preparation or sequencing, which could otherwise obscure the true signal of sequence diversity. all samples had unique dual indexing (udi) to prevent cross-detection of reads in the same pool (known as index misassignment). across all sequencing runs, only 36 pairs of samples have colliding indices: these pairs were processed one month apart, sequenced on different instruments (miseq and novaseq 6000), and share fewer isnvs than average. to guard against contamination, every batch of 90 samples was sequenced together with a series of controls. in addition, one sample was split and sequenced in two batches (as oxon-af346 and oxon-af179) , with ~50x difference in read depth. for all isnv sites present in at least one batch at maf>2%, we found a strong correlation in frequencies (no maf cutoff, linear regression, p<0.001; supplementary figure 1 ).the controls comprised: a negative buffer in-capture control; a standard curve consisting of a dilution series of a positive sars-cov-2 control (twist synthetic sars-cov-2 rna control 1 (mt007544.1),twist bioscience) from 100 through to 0.5 million copies per reaction; and a non-sars-cov-2 in-run control consisting of purified in vitro transcribed hiv rna from clone p92br025.8, obtained from the national institute for biological standards and control (nibsc) 3 . as additional negative controls, we sequenced 6 matched clinical samples from non-covid-19 patients. no sars-cov-2 sequences were detected in any negative controls or negative clinical samples in any pool; no hiv reads were detected in the sars-cov-2 samples, and the expected log-linear relationship between the number of reads and viral copy number was observed in the standard curve (supplementary figure 9) . as previously reported 2 , the veseq method is quantitative, and the number of sequenced reads is expected to correlate with the number of input copies. we were therefore satisfied that all sequenced runs were clean. to further minimise any concerns about residual contamination, we performed an additional stringent computational cleanup of the read data. for all reads in a pool, we identified any optical duplicates that shared the same mapping coordinates (start of reads 1 and 2, and template length), and in each case removed the duplicate cluster from all samples except the one containing the greatest number of these reads (see bioinformatics processing). in this way, no two samples within a run shared any duplicate reads. all reads with similarity to human sequences or known kit contaminants were removed prior to mapping, as detailed below.bioinformatics processing. de-multiplexed sequence read pairs were classified by kraken v2 4 using a custom database containing the human genome (grch38 build) and all refseq bacterial and viral genomes. sequences identified as either human or bacterial were removed using the filter_keep_reads.py script in the castanet 5 workflow ( https://github.com/tgolubch/castanet ). remaining reads, comprised of viral and unclassified reads, were trimmed to remove adapter sequences using trimmomatic v0.36 6 , with the illuminaclip options set to "2:10:7:1:true minlen:80", using the set of illumina adapters supplied with the software. the trimmed reads were mapped to the sars-cov-2 refseq genome of isolate wuhan-hu-1 (nc_045512.2), using the shiver_map procedure from the shiver pipeline 7 , without deduplication, using either smalt 8 or bowtie2 9 as the mapper. both mappers generated comparable results. to remove any possibility of index misassignment ("index hopping") that may result from sequencing multiple samples in a single pool 10 , the bam alignments were deduplicated by pool, for each set of mapping coordinates (start of read 1, start of read 2 and mapped length) retaining only the read pairs from the sample with the greatest number of reads at these coordinates, using the castanet scripts process_pool_grp.py and filter_bam.py ( https://github.com/tgolubch/castanet ). the median depth was 2,300x across the genome (iqr 800 -8,600) (supplementary figure 10) . for analysis of consensus genomes, consensus calls required a minimum of 2 unique deduplicated reads per position, to avoid calling consensus from optical duplicates. analysis of within-host diversity was restricted only to positions with minimum minor allele frequency (defined as 1 -major allele frequency) of 2% and a minimum depth of 10, to focus on high-confidence variants.we separately generated sequence sets for just the oxford and basingstoke sequences, and for those sequences combined with the other uk data. to place these data into the global phylogenetic context, a collection of non-uk consensus sequences from the gisaid database 11 were also selected. oxford and basingstoke samples were selected if the consensus sequence (inferred from unique mapped reads) consisted of no more than 25% n characters. for cog uk ( https://www.cogconsortium.uk ) samples this was lowered to 5%. as an alignment to the reference sequence was already performed in shiver , no further alignment was necessary. all gisaid 12 sequences were downloaded from the database on the 26th april 2020 and filtered to remove sequences that were less than 29800 base pairs in length, were more than 1% ns, or were from the united kingdom (as this set had considerable overlap with our other data). the remaining sequences were clustered using cd-hit-est 13 using a similarity threshold of 0.995, and then one sequence per cluster picked. the resulting set, along with the reference genome nc_045512, were aligned using mafft 14 , with some manual improvement of the algorithmic alignment and removal of problematic sequences performed as a post-processing step.phylogenetics. phylogenetic analysis was performed on both alignments using iq-tree version 1.6.12 15 , using the gtr+f+i substitution model. the tree was then rooted with respect to the reference sequence refseq id nc_045512. association of the phylogenetic topology with within-host diversity was performed by, first, pruning the tree of the reference sequence and all gisaid sequences (as within-host diversity for that data is unknown). the parsimony score for the tree for a given site was calculated using the presence or not of within-host diversity at that site (a cumulative minor nucleotide frequency of at least 0.02 and a read depth of at least 100) as a trait. the same score was also calculated after permuting the tip labels of the tree 1000 times, and an approximate p -value calculated by comparing the true score to the distribution of shuffled scores. this value was adjusted by bonferroni correction to account for the multiple testing imposed by applying this procedure to multiple genome positions. to identify homoplasic sites, we selected sites that changed state more than once along the tree, after inferring the states at internal nodes using ancestral state reconstruction as implemented in clonalframeml 16 and rooting the tree using the reference genome nc_045512.overrepresentation of shared isnvs within individuals. for highly shared isnvs on a similar region of the genome we computed the number of individuals with none or all isnvs, and determined the probability of each of these from 100,000 randomisations.to look for sites with an increased diversity in oxford, we computed the fisher exact test for the number of isnvs in either oxford or basingstoke samples and either at a given site or elsewhere in the genome. we repeat the test for each genomic position, looking for an overrepresentation of isnvs in oxford samples at that site. before applying multiple testing corrections, we ignored all sites that could not reach significance at level p<0.05 even if all diversity at the position would be concentrated in oxford. we also performed the corresponding analysis to look for an overrepresentation of isnvs in basingstoke samples at each site.overrepresentation of shared isnvs within clusters. for each cluster, we computed the average number of shared isnvs (sharing the same mutation as well) between two random samples from the cluster. to assess its significance, we compared it with the average number of shared isnvs from 1000 permutation of all variants among all clusters. throughout our sequencing and analysis, the possibility of sequencing artefacts and/or contamination was at the forefront. we first explain the protocols and controls we used to avoid and/or detect artefacts during sequencing and processing of data, and second how our main results are inconsistent with contamination of samples. although artefacts can never be ruled out entirely, they are extremely unlikely to explain the broad patterns that we observe.sample collection was carried out by several geographically separated hospitals, before being sent for rna extraction and testing to either ouh (oxford) or bsnh (basingstoke) laboratories. alongside sars-cov-2 positive samples, we processed and sequenced six sars-cov-2-negative samples from ouh laboratories, and in each case found zero sars-cov-2 reads. this strongly suggests the absence of laboratory-level contamination in ouh data. similarly, from bsnh we collected a large number of very weakly positive sars-cov-2 samples (cycle threshold values > 36 using rdrp as the qpcr marker). these samples had near-zero sars-cov-2 reads mapped, again suggesting that laboratory contamination cannot be widespread or provide an explanation for the observed diversity in the data. while we cannot rule out laboratory-level contamination in other laboratories contributing samples to external cog uk datasets, if such contamination was present, it would have to have been pervasive in every hospital and/or sequencing centre across many weeks of sequencing and many sequencing runs to explain the observation of shared within-host diversity observed in these datasets.ii) library prep, bait capture and sequencing next-generation sequence data produced at scale typically necessitates batching of large pools of samples together to make the process cost effective. we sought to avoid batch effects or contamination during library preparation or sequencing, which could otherwise obscure the true signal of sequence diversity. to guard against contamination, every batch of 90 samples was sequenced together with a series of controls. the controls comprised: a negative buffer in-capture control; a standard curve consisting of a dilution series of a quantified sars-cov-2 control (twist synthetic sars-cov-2 rna control 1 (mt007544.1),twist bioscience) from 100 through to 0.5 million copies per reaction; and a non-sars-cov-2 in-run control consisting of purified in vitro transcribed hiv rna from clone p92br025.8, obtained from the national institute for biological standards and control (nibsc) 3 . as additional negative controls, we sequenced six matched clinical samples from non-covid-19 patients. no sars-cov-2 sequences were detected in any negative controls or negative clinical samples in any pool; no hiv reads were detected in the sars-cov-2 samples, and the expected log-linear relationship between the number of reads and viral copy number was observed in the standard curve (supplementary figure 9 ). as previously reported (bonsall et al. 2018 doi: 10.1101/397083 ), the veseq method is quantitative, and the number of sequenced reads is expected to correlate with the number of input copies. we were therefore satisfied that all sequenced runs were clean.all samples had unique dual indexing (udi) to prevent cross-detection of reads in the same pool (known as index misassignment or index hopping). we avoided using the same udi series in any run. of the 413 sequenced samples, only 36 pairs of samples have identical indices: these pairs were processed one month apart, sequenced on different instruments (miseq and novaseq 6000), and share fewer isnvs than average. the majority of the data were sequenced on the novaseq 6000 instrument which uses a patterned flowcell, which further reduces the chance of observing index hopping due to detection of hybrid optical clusters.to avoid mixed base calls that may appear as a result of mis-mapping of host or contaminant reads, we first screened all raw data for the presence of reads with sequence similarity to the human genome, the mitochondrial genome, or any bacterial genomes, and removed these reads prior to mapping (see methods).we considered the possibility of the presence of non-sars-cov-2 (seasonal) coronaviruses in the samples, which could cause closely-matching reads to be mapped to sars-cov-2 and appear as mixed base calls. to exclude this possibility, we analysed a subset of 90 samples (batch cov8) for the presence of other coronaviruses using the castanet bait enrichment panel (goh et al. 2019 doi: 10.1101/716902). we did not find any samples positive for coronaviruses other than sars-cov-2.to eliminate any residual index misassignment, we performed a stringent computational cleanup of the read data. for all reads in a sequencing run, consisting of up to three pools, we identified optical duplicates that shared the same mapping coordinates (start of reads 1 and 2, and template length), and in each case removed the duplicate cluster from all samples except the one containing the greatest number of these reads (see methods: bioinformatics processing). in this way, no two samples within a run shared any duplicate reads.one sample was split into two aliquots and sequenced in separate batches (as oxon-af346 and oxon-af179) , with ~50x difference in read depth. we first analysed the pre-cleaned data. as expected, we find strong concordance between isnv frequencies in the two replicates (supplemental figure 1) , with a noisier distribution for the cleaned data. although cleaning of the data reduces the number of reads, and consequently adds noise to isnv frequencies, the importance of eliminating index misassignment outweighed concerns that we had of losing meaningful signal. thus all of our results are conservative.if our main finding, of high within-host diversity that is geographically structured, is due to contamination of samples, or systematic sequencing errors, there are certain patterns in the data we would (and would not) expect to see.if patterns of diversity in the oxford and basingstoke data are due to batch effects, we would expect diversity at specific sites to be clustered within batches. for example, for the five sites shown in figure 3 , we find no sign of batch effects on patterns of diversity (supplementary figure 4) , and therefore batch effects are unlikely to be driving our observations. more generally, these isnvs are highly represented in at least two different batches.the oxford and basingstoke samples were sequenced in the same lab, by the same people (gmc, at, mdc), using the same protocols. the identification of shared isnv sites between oxford and basingstoke suggests that contamination at the point of sample collection and rna extraction cannot explain the presence of these isnvs. conversely, the statistically significant differences in the distribution of some isnvs between oxford and basingstoke suggests these do not arise from lab-based contamination or other sequencing artefacts.iii) shared isnv sites are typically not polymorphic at the consensus level if rare isnvs arise from contamination, we would expect minor variant alleles to be present in other samples at high frequency. 94% of the isnvs we detected in oxford and basingstoke are not polymorphic at the consensus (global) scale. this makes cross-contamination of samples unlikely.we find strong geographical patterns, with some isnv sites only found in a single location, but others found in two, three, and four locations (figure 2 , main text). this is unlikely to be caused by contamination among locations, and if it were, we would expect more isnv sites to be shared among locations. this is also unlikely to be due to systematic biases in sequencing methodologies. the only site that is repeatedly variant in samples is 11083, and is variant in most samples, not just a subset of samples. this site is a well-recognised homoplasy in sars-cov-2 in general, and appears to be due to a variable truncation of a long stretch of poly(t) at this position, which depending on the mapping software may present as a gap at the end of the homopolymer run or one position immediately afterward, which can present as a t/g isnv. we cannot rule out systematic biases at other sites found in multiple (e.g. >3 locations), but these sites are few.one of the most striking patterns we found was the repeated identification of minor variants at sites 241,14408, and 23403 in apparent linkage equilibrium in both wales and scotland. that is haplotype t-t-g as the major variant and c-c-a as the minor variant, or vice versa . contamination cannot be ruled out, but this would have to be at an unprecedented scale at two different locations. moreover, samples that share any of these isnv sites are phylogenetically closer on the tree than would be expected by chance ( supplementary  figure 8 ), strongly suggesting cross-sample contamination is not the cause.there are strong patterns of selection on isnvs that are not expected to arise from artefacts, as revealed by the localisation of shared isnvs in codons and by their effect on amino acid sequence. widely shared isnvs with frequency >5% are preferentially found in the 1st and 2nd base of each codon (see supplementary figure 5 ). this is significantly different from the uniform pattern that would be expected from artefacts, it is not observed in the controls, and it is a signature of positive selection at aminoacid level. oxford/basingstoke specific variants are also under positive selection at aminoacid level, as can be confirmed by a non-synonymous/synonymous comparison: the ratio of non-synonymous/synonymous polymorphisms pn/ps among this list of variants is about three times higher than pn/ps for random variants at >2% frequency (p=0.015 by fisher exact test).supplementary table 1 the recent pandemic due to novel coronavirus disease (covid-19) originated from wuhan, hubei province of china has affected more than 200 countries worldwide. on december 31 st 2019 china reported to who about the infection and on january 7 th the causative agent was identified as the novel coronavirus or severe acute respiratory syndrome -coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) (surveillances v; covid-19 situation reports). on march 11 th 2020, who declared covid-19 as a global pandemic (cucinotta & vanelli, 2020) . in india, the first incidence of covid-19 was reported from the thrissur district of kerala (timeline of the 2020 coronavirus pandemic in india).apart from china, many other countries from asia, europe and north america are severely affected and as per the who situation report as of 25 th april there has been 2,832,454 positive cases and 198,532 deaths worldwide (covid-19 situation reports).crossed the species barrier to infect humans (letko et al., 2020; ye et al., 2020) . this singlestranded, positive-sense rna virus shares about 79% and 50% genomic identity with that of the sars-cov and mers-cov respectively (lu et al., 2020) . although, it was reported that sars-cov-2 infection may be less severe as compared to that of sars-cov or mers-cov, it is now apparent that the current novel coronavirus has an accelerated rate of human-to-human transmission than its predecessors huang et al., 2020) . sars-cov-2 genome is around 29,903 nucleotides and organized in the following order from 5' to 3': orf1ab (replicase), structural spike glycoprotein (s), orf3a protein, structural envelope protein (e), structural membrane glycoprotein (m), orf6 protein, orf7a protein, orf7b protein, orf8 protein, structural nucleocapsid phosphoprotein (n) and orf10 protein. orf1ab is a large polyprotein (~21,291 nucleotides) encoding sixteen non-structural proteins: leader protein, nsp2, nsp3, nsp4, 3c-like proteinase, nsp6, nsp7, nsp8, nsp9, nsp10, rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), helicase, 3'-to 5' exonuclease, endornase, 2'-o-ribose methyltransferase, and nsp11 (wu et al., 2020) . studies have revealed that the highly mutable spike (s) protein of the virus is associated with the elevated human-to-human transmission rate through interaction with ace2 receptor of the host.s protein is one of the well-characterized proteins of the coronaviridae family; this ~1255 amino acid transmembrane protein helps the virus to attach and enter the host. thus analysing the structure and function of this spike protein would not only unveil the pathogenicity of the virus but also might illuminate its phylogenetic origin and diversity (babcock et al., 2004; zhang et al., 2006; yan et al., 2020) .very little is known about the divergence of the sars-cov-2 genome. although the earlier studies with similar rna pathogens (e.g. hiv-1, influenza viruses, sars-cov and hepatitis c virus) pointed towards the rapidly evolving nature of the viral genomes and are subjected to the strongest evolutionary forces. the ability to undergo host-specific adaptive changes in the viral genomes has enabled them to escape the innate as well as adaptive immune responses, acquire resistance towards drugs or infect new hosts (frost et al., 2018) . the rapid spread of sars-cov-2 around the world has enabled exposure of the virus to individuals with diverse genetic and immunological backgrounds having varied demographics (age, sex, environmental conditions, etc.) and thus potentially imposing significant selective pressures on the sars-cov-2 genomes. therefore, a study highlighting the genome divergence of sars-cov-2 would have tremendous importance during this pandemic, providing better understanding of the genetic and phenotypic characteristics of sars-cov-2 pathogenesis and valuable information towards the development of drugs and vaccines.a staggering number of genome sequences of sars-cov-2 are being submitted from around the world every day, and with the increasing number of positive covid-19 cases in india, we also intended to do a comparative genomic analysis of the indian sars-cov-2 isolates with respect to that of other countries. we performed the phylogenetic and other evolutionary analyses of the sars-cov-2 genomes, in order to reveal their shared ancestry, determine genetic diversity and detect structural mutations. this enabled us to study the divergence of this viral genome during the early phases of pandemic and identify multiple viral variants. through computational analysis we predicted the impact of structural changes on spike glycoprotein (s). additionally, we also studied the impact of the mutations on rdrp as it is considered to be one of the most promising target for drug development with remdesivir (warren et al., 2016; shannon et al., 2020) , a nucleotide analog targeting rdrp. we further discussed the potential outcomes of our findings in terms of public health response in india to better control and prevent the disease.we considered 109 genome sequences of sars-cov-2 isolates from different countries. the main source of genomes is the epicov database of the gisaid (www.gisaid.org) through valid registration. we collected all the 33 genomes available from india (as on april 15 th 2020), and the rest were obtained from among the earliest submissions from the respective countries of europe, asia and america (details of the country-wise genome selection provided in table1 of the supplementary information). this working set of 109 sequences were checked for the number of ambiguous bases (n<50) and the presence of gaps (gaps<10). also the index genome of sars-cov-2 (nc_045512.2) was considered from ncbi.the genome alignment was performed using muscle aligner in default mode present in the ugene v34 (edgar rc., 2004; okonechnikov et al., 2012) . the phylogenetic tree was reconstructed by using the maximum likelihood method and the general time reversible model.the initial tree for the heuristic search was obtained automatically by applying bionj algorithms (tavaré & miura., 1986; gascuel o., 1997) . evolutionary analysis was performed using phyml integrated in seaview 5.0.2 (guindon et al., 2005; gouy et al., 2010) . further, the tree was visualized and edited with figtree 1.4.4 (rambaut., 2012) .the orthologous average nucleotide identity between genome sequences (orthoani) was measured with the help of oau command-line tool using the usearch algorithm (lee et al., 2016; edgar rc., 2010) . the resulting orthoani values were represented by a clustered-heat map using the online clusvis tool (metsalu et al., 2015) .in order to extract all the annotated genes from all the sars-cov-2 genome sequences, the isolate obtained from wuhan, china (nc_045512.2) was used as the reference genome in our analysis. we used the standalone version of ncbi blast with an in-house developed perl script to fetch all the genes from each of the 109 genomes.using dnasp (rozas et al., 2017) , we calculated nucleotide diversity, synonymous and nonsynonymous substitution rates for each gene. further, the timezone software was employed for phylogenetic analysis of each gene and detection of structural mutations in them (chattopadhyay et al. 2013 ).we performed a sequential analysis of s protein of the sars-cov-2 from china and india.comparison of sequential alignment between wuhan isolated spike sequences with 33 sequences of indian origin was performed by multiple sequence alignment (msa) tool using clustal omega.secondary structure prediction of the aligned sequences was carried out on the cfssp (chou and fasman secondary structure prediction) server.in silico mutation on the sars-cov-2 associated s protein was done on the closed state conformation (pdb id: 6vxx). the s protein is present in a homotrimeric conditions with individual chains containing some basic loop. that loop building and modifications were done on the swiss-model server with respect to the wuhan isolated spike sequence followed by analysis of these mutations by mutprep server. the mutation on the identified protein residues was analyzed on pymol with a pre-existing suitable rotamer library. structural modification and kinetics change upon mutation were performed on dynemut server. the computational analysis figures were generated in pymol.phylogenomic study of sars-cov-2 reveals the appearance of distinct phylogenetic groups figure 2 ). the sub-group c contains the index case of sars-cov-2 with other isolates from china and other countries and seems to be the ancient group that emerged in the first phase of the pandemic. this group also contains the first indian genome sequence from kerala. the sub-group d comprises of many chinese isolates, european states and second indian genome, perhaps consolidating the hypothesis stating the emergence of multiple viral variants in china before the commencement of the pandemic. most interestingly, the sub-group e, mostly comprises of indian isolates with genomes from iran and germany, probably depicting the route of transmission of viral infection in india.the whole genome based phylogenomic analysis and subsequent nucleotide identity analysis pointed towards the presence of four distinct groups of sars-cov-2 genomes. it is to be mentioned here that these genomes are highly conserved as evident from >99.8% of ani values for any pair of genomes. coronaviruses are known to have accurate nsp14 mediated synthesis of their rna genome and hence may maintain the overall conservation of their genomes although the nsp12 (rdrp) is not accurate (ferron et al. 2018) . the presence of multiple variants within china indicates early divergence events in early phase of the pandemic. similar type of observations was also reported in a recent work on sars-cov-2 genomes (velazquez-salinas et al., 2020).we also considered the available date of collection of the isolates from the metadata of the repository and observed that in sub-group c multiple early stage isolates from china are present staring from december 30 th , 2019 collected from wuhan, hubei province of china. along with, other early stage isolates from different countries are also present in this group. the first reported genome sequence from kerala, india is also present in this group. in case of sub-group d, we again found multiple isolates from china and other countries collected between january 2020 and march 2020. the second reported genome from kerala, india is one of the members of this particular group. some of these isolates in different countries may emerge from the ancestors of the viral isolates although the presence of multiple viral isolates collected in the second or third week of january from china indicates the emergence of multiple variants in china itself before the initiation of the state of pandemic.the group b isolates were collected within the month of january to march and no isolates from china can be located. these are the emergent isolates mostly originating in europe and different from the ancestral strains and were transmitted to india. the group e is also devoid of any viral isolates from china and were collected in the month of march, 2020. these are another variant of viral isolates transmitted to india originating in iran/germany.after the extraction of all the protein-coding regions from 109 genomes considering index genome (nc_045512.2) as a reference, we calculated the overall average pairwise nucleotide diversity (π) for each set. while the regions nsp8, nsp11 and orf7b have a single variant, the regions, nsp2, nsp3, rdrp, genes and genen are found to have more than 10 variants. the π value for multivariant regions varies from 4.7 x 10 -4 to 8.8 x 10 -3 . we further compared the nucleotide diversity of indian isolates with that of other isolates ( figure 3a ). the comparison yielded several india genome-specific changes, for example, nsp15 and orf7a showed mutational changes only for indian isolates. on the other hand, mutations happened for nsp7, nsp9, nsp10, nsp16, genee and orf10 genes for some of the isolates from different parts of the world but no changes can be seen in indian isolates.next, we estimated the rates of silent or synonymous (ds) and amino-acid changing or nonsynonymous sites (dn) mutations for these sets of protein-coding regions in order to determine the types of mutations that occurred in each gene as well as if any selection pressure acting on them.the ds and dn profiles of the protein-coding regions depict selective mutational pressure for several of those regions ( figure 3b and c). the rate of non-synonymous mutation is higher for orf8 and orf10 while the opposite is true for nsp1 and orf6. we found almost similar rates of synonymous and non-synonymous case of nsp2 nsp4 and genes. thus, the rate of synonymous or non-synonymous mutations varies among the gene regions and for few genes the amino acid changing propensity is relatively higher than synonymous changes. for all these genes the dn/ds values are not significantly higher than 1 and the notion of purifying selection was found.nucleotide diversity, ds and dn values were also calculated for group b and sub-groups c, d and e (figure1 of supplementary information) and we have identified several protein coding regions of consistent changes. these are nsp2, nsp3, nsp4, nsp6, nsp12, nsp13, nsp14, genes, orf3a, orf8 and genen. thus, these regions are consistently evolving in sars-cov-2 in different lineages and may generate multiple variants. the two recently emerged groups b and e showed higher divergence of nsp9 and orf7a respectively and mostly by amino acid changes.we next wanted to identify the structural mutations in all 26 protein-coding regions and map them individually onto the genome level phylogenetic tree (figure2 of supplementary information). for this we utilized the timezone software on individual genes for alignment, phylogenetic analysis and tracking of structural mutations. as mentioned earlier, the protein-coding regions nsp1, nsp7, nsp8, nsp11, genee, orf6 and orf7b do not experience any structural changes and are maintaining their ancient structure. among them the small, integral membrane protein e is important at different stages of the life cycle of this virus, viz. assembly, budding, envelope formation, and pathogenesis. the highly conserved nature of this protein indicates that a specific structural requirement is necessary for the proper functioning of this protein in the viral life cycle as well as in its pathogenicity.several structural mutations were detected for nsp3 (proteinase) (figure2 of supplementary information) and structural glycoprotein (s) (figure 4) . apart from these two proteins nsp2, nsp4, rdrp, nsp13 (helicase), orf3a and genen also showed a considerable number of structural changes (figure 2 of supplementary information) . the mapping of all these structural mutations on to the genome-based phylogenetic tree revealed the association of several of these mutations with different groups as shown in figure 1 and 2.the association of mutation is based on the four genes: nsp2, nsp12 (rdrp), genes and orf8 (table 1 ). the amino acid change v198i in nsp2 is associated with the emergence of group e, comprising mostly of indian isolates and those from germany and iran. the change p323l in the rdrp gene is a signature for all the members of group b except isolate germany003. this group is also associated with the change of d614g in spike glycoprotein s. this particular group has probably emerged in the later phase of the pandemic and harbour a considerable amount of indian isolates. for group d, the change l84s in orf8 is present in all of its members. thus in comparison to the initial isolates of group c, all other groups has a unique signature of mutations, which can describe the phylogenic position of any isolate.our study revealed three protein coding regions: nsp8, nsp11 and orf7b to be conserved throughout all the genomes we have considered. among these gene products, nsp8 forms a complex with nsp7 which can work as multimeric rna polymerase in order to extend primer for rdrp action (te velthuis et al., 2012) . the diversity analysis in this study clearly indicates the conservation of such complex with no structural changes in both nsp8 and nsp7 (figure 3 ). thus both of these partner proteins are highly conserved probably due to the proper complex formation for rdrp activity. on the other hand, there are seven proteins experiencing structural changes in all four phylogenetic groups, these proteins are nsp3, nsp12 (rdrp), nsp13 (helicase), structural glycoprotein (s), orf3a, orf8 and nucleocapsid phosphoprotein (n). among these, the structural mutations in nsp12 and spike glycoprotein s are group specific and we have further studied that how these structural changes can potentially modulate its function.all these proteins are important for viral life-cycle and pathogenesis and the structural changes among them may manifest phenotypic alterations and in turn change the viral pathogenesis. with rigorous computational analysis we have further tried to evaluate the impact of these structural changes in spike glycoprotein functionality. it is important to note that many of the mutations identified by our study are present in single viral isolate, possibly this can also happen either due to presence of limited number of viral isolates in our study or due to sequencing errors. whereas, the cardinal mutations defining different groups are present in multiple viral isolates from different countries, collected in different time points.it is well established that spike (s) protein plays a pivotal role during viral entry into the host cell (gordon et al., 2020; ou et al., 2020) . the viral entry into the host cells is mediated by the initial binding of the receptor-binding domain (rbd) present at s1 subunit of the s protein to the host ace2 receptor followed by fusion of the viral spike and host membrane through s2 subunit located on the surface of the s protein. rbd consists of 331-524 amino acid residues of the sars-cov-2 s protein (tai et al., 2020) . in comparison with the s protein sequence pattern from index genome, indian spike protein sequences possess five different variants arising due to 5 different structural mutations. two of the protein variants are due to mutations present in the rbd at 408th (r408i) and 438th (s438f) position. thus, these two mutations may directly affect the structural conformation required for the receptor binding. the other three mutations (d614g, v622i and a930v) found on the indian specific sars-cov-2 s proteins are present outside the rbd.the mutation r408i at the rbd involved positively charged arginine (r) with hydrophilic basic side chain is mutated to non-polar hydrophobic isoleucine (ile) amino acid with c-beta branch.structurally, the guanidine moiety with three amino groups has been replaced with the small methyl substitution in this mutation (r408i). as a result, the non-polar hydrophobic side chains present in ile act as hindrance towards the accessible aqueous environment. also, arginine with its long sidechain has greater flexibility in comparison to the mutated ile with less to moderate side-chain flexibility which can affect the host cell bindings. the basic characteristics of these two proteins are so unique that their exchange through mutation will result in conformational change in the structure which may contribute towards the host cell recognition for receptor binding. according to our secondary structure prediction of india specific sequences with respect to the index s sequence, we observed a change in secondary structural conformation. in the 408 region of the index s protein possess a helices conformation which is changed into sheet like structures due to mutation in the indian isolated s protein. apart from this, tertiary structure analysis also shows changes in the structural conformation in rbd due to this mutation. the protein conformational space has been reduced from 131 ml/mol to the 121 ml/mol as the bulky terminal guanidine moiety in arginine is replaced by a small alkyl group. as a consequence, the electrostatic forces also get modified. the final protein binding conformational enthalpy (δδg) is 0.133 kcal/mol after mutation suggests much stabilized conformations. change in vibrational entropy (δδsvib encom: 0.178 kcal.mol -1 .k -1 ) suggest increase in the molecular flexibility of the protein backbones which might affect the interactions with the host cell receptors. a change in inter-atomic interaction is calculated for both wild type and mutated type. in both the conformations both arg408 and ile408 were able to form stable intra-hydrogen bond interactions with glu406 and ile410, whereas ionic interaction between arg408 and gln414 is absent after the mutations ( figure 5a , 5b).another mutation s438f at the rbd of the s1 subunit was observed in the indian isolates india026 and india028 specific s protein sequence in comparison to that of the index sequences. the polar uncharged residue, serine (s) is mutated to non-polar aromatic phenylalanine (f). similar to the previous mutations, due to this exchange it loses the hydrophilic polar nature of the hydroxyl (-oh) moiety and attains a hydrophobic aromatic side chain that can repel themselves away from the aqueous environment. interestingly, this replacement leads to gain in the flexibility which has an impact on their secondary structure. our analyses suggest that the β-turn like coil conformations on the wuhan isolated structures is converted onto the more flexible sheet-like conformations at 438 position. in tertiary structure analysis, it is observed that since a hydroxyl group has been substituted by phenyl substituent, more protein conformational space is occupied. as a result, the molar volume is increased from 67.8 ml/mol to the 121.1 ml/mol. expectedly, the electrostatic and binding entropies (δδg) have been modified to the 1.942 kcal/mol which signify more stabilized conformations. the introduction of bulky phenyl groups led to the change in vibrational entropy (δδsvib encom: -0.545 kcal.mol -1 .k -1), which implies lower molecular flexibility of the backbone protein. the mutation also has impact on the structural integrity. in the wild type structure, the intramolecular hydrogen bonding has been observed between ser438 to the leu441, asp442, ser443 and pro507. on mutation, there is a loss of ionic interactions and the hydrogen bonding has been modified between phe438 to the asn440 and pro507 ( figure 5c, 5d ). all these data suggest that the mutation s438f might affect the bindings of the s protein with the host receptor.the s protein for a considerable number of indian isolates experiences another mutation at the 614 th position (d614g) which is located outside of the rbd at the s2 domain for entire group b isolates.the negatively charged aspartic acid (d) containing the acidic side chain is replaced by the nonpolar glycine (g) residue. as a consequence hydrophilic nature and flexibility are lost, whereas the hydrophobic characteristic is acquired. as the properties of these two amino acids are different, the mutations may modify the structural conformations that can alter the functional modification towards the host cell recognition and fusion. apart from the change in physical characteristics, our analysis suggests that this mutation does not alter their secondary structures. both the wild type and mutated structure attain sheet like conformations in their secondary structure analysis. however, the mutation has a significant impact on the tertiary structure as the negatively charged acidic hydrophilic group is being replaced by neutral small hydrogen (hydrophobic) moiety. this residue is located on the water accessible surface at the s2 domain which is involved in the fusion of the viral and hosts cell membranes. thus, it is logical that due to loss in acidic nature and flexibility, this mutation might implicate the s protein-mediated viral membrane fusion towards the host cell membrane. however, the interatomic hydrogen bonding with the neighboring residues remains the same after mutation ( figure 6a, 6b ).mutation at the 622 nd (v622i) residue is present outside of the rbd domain, specifically at the s2 subunit of the indian isolated s protein sequence. the hydrophobic valine (v) is mutated to a similar class of residue isoleucine (i) with a greater aliphatic branch chain. as a result of this mutation changes in the vibrational entropy (δδsvib encom = -0.191 kcal.mol -1 .k -1 ) were observed, which indicates a decrease in molecular flexibility causing distortion of the protein main backbones. our analysis suggests that the mutation does not impact changes in their tertiary structure conformation. since both valine and isoleucine have a c-beta branching headed towards the main chains, it is difficult to attain α-helical conformations by twisting as suggested by the change in electrostatic binding energies (δδg = 0.786 kcal/mol). the interatomic interactions with the neighboring residues remain the same after mutation ( figure 6c, 6d ). this restricted conformation can deform the neighboring local backbone of the protein which might affect the sars-cov-2 spike protein-mediated viral fusion with the host cell membrane.we observed another mutation (a930v) in the indian isolated spike sequence at the s2 subunit. the hydrophobic aliphatic alanine (a) is mutated to valine (v) with similar hydrophobic characteristics.however, the valine contains a bulkier c-beta branched side chain that is bulkier with lesser flexibility. as a result of bulkier c-branching in valine the main skeletal backbone protein resists itself for twisting to attain restricted α-helical conformations, which is validated through the analysis of secondary structure prediction (figure3 of supplementary information) . whereas, the helix like conformation of alanine turns into a stable flat extended sheet like structure. this stable conformational change is confirmed by binding conformational enthalpy change (δδg = 0.636 kcal/mol). the vibrational entropy changes (δδsvib encom = -0.432 kcal.mol-1.k-1) for this mutation signify decrease in molecular flexibility. the mutation affects the intra-hydrogen bond and hydrophobic interaction (val722) with the neighboring amino acids. in the wild type protein, ala930 makes five hydrogen bonding with gln926, phe937, gly932, lys 933 and ile934, whereas val930 in the mutated protein makes three hydrogen bonds with phe927, gly932 and lys933 ( figure 6e, 6f) . as this mutation is present on the surface of the s2 subunit of the s protein, it may influence the spike protein driven fusion of the sars-cov-2 and host membrane.the sars-cov-2 nsp12 is rna dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) consists of 932 amino acids which are located in the polyprotein, from 4393 -5324 aa. structurally, sars-cov-2 nsp12 protein is categorized into n-terminal (1-397 aa) and a polymerase domain (398-919 aa) and is comparable to the previous sars-cov nsp12 (pdb id: 6nur). the polymerase domain can be subdivided into structurally different three subunits; a finger (398-581 and 628-687 aa), a palm (582-627 and 688-815 aa), and a thumb subunit (816-919 aa) which adopts a "right-handed" cupped shaped conformation (yin et al., 2020) . the active site of rdrp is present at the interface between finger and thumb subunits of the sars-cov-2 rdrp, which is a conserved domain with mers and sars-nsp12. the active site is situated in the center of the substrate domain where rna synthesis takes place on the entry of the rna template from template entry channel and ntp (nucleoside triphosphate) through the ntp entry channel (peersen ob., 2017) . the structural analysis of the sars-cov-2 specified nsp12 revealed the presence of seven conserved motifs (a-g motifs) (figure 7) . these motifs play crucial roles towards the binding of template and nucleotide as well as catalysis of the ntp addition (poch et al., 1989; bruenn ja., 2003; mirza et al., 2019) . several antiviral drugs act by attaching onto the first replicated base pairs and terminates the chain elongation process. the rdrp binding affinity towards the template rna has been increased by the association of the co-factor nsp7 and nsp8 with the nsp12. rna polymerization activity is found to be inhibited in presence of the active triphosphate form of remdesivir (rtp), which is under clinical trial (yin et al., 2020; shannon et al., 2020) . proper positioning of the polymerase active site is fully depended on the n-terminal structural conformations. in this mutation a hydrophobic proline (p) has been mutated to the similar hydrophobic aliphatic leucine (l). secondary structure analysis revealed the structural conformation changes after mutation. although proline is known as "helix breakers" since they interrupt the stability of the α-helical conformations of the backbone protein but in this case proline is present in β-turn-like conformations (figure4 of supplementary information). whereas mutated residue leucine contains the bulkier c-beta branched aliphatic side chains and found present as a sheet-like conformation (figure4 of supplementary information). in the tertiary structure analysis suggest that the mutation is present in the n-terminal region which is connected to the finger subdomain ( figure   7 ). so this mutation on the n-terminal domain may hamper the proper folding of the sars-cov-2 rdrp backbone protein, which can play a vital role for the protein's consequent degradation (te velthuis aj., 2010) .in comparison to the wuhan strain, indian isolated sars-cov-2 specified rdrp experienced two other mutations (a406v and n874s) as shown in figure 7 . alanine 406 is not in the active site domain but this is present on the template rna entry channel. in this mutation hydrophobic aliphatic alanine is converted to a similar class of non-polar valine residue. as a result such mutation is not expected to cause any significant change in protein functionalities. however, due to the presence of the bulkier c-beta branched-chain, it restricted the protein main backbone to attain the alpha-helical conformations. also, the heavy c-beta branching reduces the side chain flexibilities, which can modify the rna template entry and if the rna template cant enters on to the catalytic domain, rna synthesis finally gets hampered. in another mutation (n874s) the polar uncharged asparagine (n) is replaced with similar polar uncharged serine (s). however, there is a different polar group with asn carry an amide group and ser has a hydroxyl group. also, due to a slight reduction of side-chain length in ser as compared to asn, flexibilities of the β-turn conformation will be hampered. as this mutation is observed near the ntp entry channel (figure 7) , any changes in the conserved β-turn conformation of the backbone protein might affect the ntp channel and interfere the rna synthesis. interestingly, such asn to ser mutation has been found to confer oseltamivir resistance to h5n1 influenza a viruses (kiso et al., 2011) .in this study, we analyzed the whole genome as well as all the protein coding regions of 109 genomes of sars-cov-2 considered from different countries of higher incidence of covid-19.sars-cov-2 is the pathogen that causes severe pneumonia in several of the affected individuals and is responsible for about 0.2 million deaths worldwide. with the advent of high-throughput next generation sequencing technology the researchers around the world have access to huge number of sars-cov-2 genome sequences. we also took the opportunity of the availability of this resource in order to study the genome divergence pattern of this pathogenic virus for identification of emerging strains with distinct genotypes. this study has potential for better understanding of the evolution and transmission of sars-cov-2 genome globally, locally and even within a single host.although our dataset comprises of 109 genomes, we considered the isolates from various countries of the world with evidence of early viral transmission initially originating from china and with emphasis on india which is in its early stages of covid-19 pandemic.our results describe the clear association of four structural changes with that of group structure from phylogenomics analysis of the sars-cov-2 isolates in this present pandemic situation. also the structural studies performed here indicate the probable connection of these variants with varied level of virulence potentials of sars-cov-2. in case of india, this study with considerable number of genome sequences portrays to a certain extent the population structure of covid-19. further, it is apparent that multiple emergent variants of viral genomes are circulating in indian and new genome sequences can be characterised in this way. obviously more sequencing of viral genomes and associated clinical outcome data may further validate the relevance of our findings and implicate the viral phenotype with group structure. this prospect has tremendous impact on public health in order to mitigate the present pandemic situation.at and sp2 conceived and designed the experiments. db, sp1, al and sp2 performed the experiments. db, sp1, at and sp2 analysed the data. db, sp1, at and sp2 wrote the manuscript.the authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. both rows and columns are clustered using correlation distance and complete linkage. rdrp structure is depicted with the white cartoon representations with several structural motifs. the motifs are colored as follows a-orange; b-blue; c-yellow; d-green; e-cyan; f-light yellow; g-pink. the template rna is portrayed in cartoon representation with rainbow color. the highly contagious and pathogenic novel severe acute respiratory syndrome -coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2), causative agent ongoing covid-19 pandemic, has spread rapidly and posed a health threat of unprecedented magnitude on the global population. the novel sars-cov-2 was first reported in december 2019 to have emerged in the live wildlife market in the wuhan region of hubei province, where it has caused mystic pneumonia-like respiratory illnesses in the human population of the affected area [1] . according to data presented by the covid-19 situation report from world health organization (who), as of may 15, 2020, the virus has infected more than 4347935 people around the world including a staggering 297,241 deaths, with a cumulative mortality rate of >6.8% and exponentially increased in between march and april [2] . despite the instantaneous and monumental research efforts from the scientific community around the globe at present, no effective antiviral treatment or vaccine is available j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f for covid-19. however, significant efforts have been made to the development of vaccines and therapeutic drugs, which were under small scale clinical trials [3, 4] . presently the sars-cov-2 infected patient's treatments have been limited to the use of prophylactic and symptomatic management like mild symptoms such as dry cough, sore throat, and fever, and various fatal complications including organ failure, septic shock, pulmonary edema, severe pneumonia, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [5] . therefore, there is an urgent need for the discovery of a potential treatment therapy to check and control the sars-cov-2 pandemic.coronaviruses (covs), belong to family coronaviridae of viruses, constitute an important class of pathogens for humans and other vertebrates [6] . severe respiratory illness in humans [7] . the causative agent of the current outbreak sars-cov-2 also belongs to beta coronaviruses [8] and is closely related to sars-cov with an overall genomic sequence similarity of >79%. all of these covs belong to the coronaviridae, a family of viruses that possess a positive-sense single-stranded rna genome [9] .the virion of sars-cov-2 is consists of crown-shaped peplomers, 80-160 nm in diameter, and consists of a ~30 kb long single-stranded rna molecule of positive polarity with 5' cap and 3' poly-a tail [10] .the rna genome is composed of at least six open reading frames (orfs) of which the first orf (orf1a/b) makes up the 5'two-third and encodes two polypeptides pp1a and pp1ab both of which furthermore leads to the production of 16 nonstructural proteins (nsps). otherorfs that make up the remaining one-third of the viral genome give rise to the production of four main structural factors of the virion: spike protein (s), envelope protein (e), membrane protein (m) and nucleocapsid protein (n) [11] .the sars-cov-2 virus uses the heterotrimeric spike (s) protein, which consists of s1 and s2 subunit, on its surface to interacts with the ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) cellular receptor, abundantly expressed on many cell types in human tissues [12] . upon internalization into the cell, genomic rna is used as a template for direct translation of two polyprotein pp1a and pp1ab which encodes several crucial nonstructural proteins (nsps) including two proteases; chymotrypsin-like protease (3cl pr o) or main protease (m pro ) -nsp5 and papain-like a protease (p pr o) -nsp3, both of which processes the polypeptide pp1a and pp1ab in a sequence-specific manner to produce 16 different nsps [13, 14] . the papain protease processes the polyprotein to generate nsp1-4. at the same time, the m pro operates at as many as 11 cleavage sites by specifically recognizing the sequence leu-gln*ser-ala-gly (* marks the cleavage site) to generate rest of the critical nsps including helicase, methyltransferase, and rna dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) all of which play a critical role in the viral infection cycle by forming a replication-transcription complex (rtc) [15] . therefore, the main protease constitutes a major and attractive drug target to block the production of nonstructural viral components and thereby to hamper the replication event of the virus life cycle. additionally, no human protease with similar cleavage specificity is known to rule out the possibility of cellular toxicity upon the potential inhibition of the main viral protease [16] .in recent years drug repurposing methodology has emerged as a resourceful alternative to fasten the drug development process against rapidly spreading emerging infections such as the one of sars-cov-2 [17] . the approach of drug repurposing has successfully led to the discoveries of potential drug candidates against several diseases such as ebola disease, hepatitis c virus, and zika virus infection [18, 19] . recently several repurposing studies on sars-cov-2 have been performed using clinically approved drugs [20] , among which a very new study comes out on a clinical trial of lopinavir-ritonavir drug for covid-19, which was indicated on top of our drug repurposing study [21] .in the present study, we have performed in silico based drug repurposing method using molecular docking studies on the spectrum of food and drug administration (fda) -approved antiviral drugs against sars-cov-2 m pro . to this end, a recently elucidated x-ray crystal structure of sars-cov-2 m pro (pdb id: 6y2f) which have been shown with an α-ketoamide as a potent inhibitor in the enzyme's active site, was chosen and screened for several fda approved antiviral drugs to simulate the m proα-ketoamide interactions and thereby blocking the active j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f pocket [16] . the crystal structure of sars-cov-2 m pro in the apo form (pdb id: 6y2e) and αketoamide bound form (pdb id: 6y2f) shows that the protein makes a crystallographic dimer composed of two monomers of identical conformations. each protomer furthermore is made up of three domains. the interface of domain i and domain ii form the active site of the protein, which is composed of a cys 145 -his 41 dyad where α-ketoamide derivative 13b is bound (fig. 1a) .the uniquely globular domain iii is linked to domain ii through a linker region and deemed essential for the catalytic activity of these chymotrypsin-like proteas [22] . the α-ketoamide derivative 13b is shown bound in the active site. it is stabilized by several interactions with the active site residues his 41 & cys 145 and adjacent residues in substrate binding cleft such as gly 143 and ser 144 [16] (fig. 1b) .we have selected several existing fda approved drugs, most of which are reported to be used in humans for countering certain viral infections and screened them for binding in the active cleft of m pro . our results have shown that some of the drugs occupied the active site of m pro with even increased binding affinity than that of the bound α-ketoamide 13b. while the rest of the compounds has shown appreciable binding while holding most of the crucial active site determinants. we envisage that further in vitro examination of the inhibitory potential of these drugs on the catalytic activity of the main protease could lead the way to repurpose one or more of the tested fda approved drugs in this study as a treatment therapy for sars-cov-2 induced disease.to understand the evolutionary relationship between the previously known human coronavirus and the novel sars-cov-2, we have performed the phylogenetic analysis. for analysis, all the closely related and complete reference genome sequences of sars-cov-2 were downloaded from the ncbi genbank database. a total of 50 genomes were considered for the study. mega 6.0 was used for multiple sequence alignment and construction of a phylogenetic tree, and 1000 bootstrap replicates performed using the neighbor-joining method [23] .the recently elucidated x-ray crystal structure coordinates of sar-cov-2 m pro was downloaded from rcsb pdb (pdb id: 6y2f), having 1.75å resolution. in this structure, the m pro was cocrystallized with the improved bound α-ketoamide (13b) inhibitor, and multiple intermolecular interactions of the ligand with the active site residues are characterized [16] . to further identify the potent inhibitors for sar-cov-2 m pro among the fda approved antiviral drugs, we have downloaded more than 75 drug compounds from the pubchem chemical database [24] . for molecular docking based drug repurposing, the download 3d structures of compounds and protein were prepared. the docking study was performed by autodock vina [25] , which uses a lamarckian genetic algorithm (ga) in combination with grid-based energy estimation, to check the docking accuracy of software we have performed re-docking to the co-crystal bound ligand.the main aim of this molecular interaction study was to identify the highly interacting drug with sar-cov-2 protein crystal structure and to propose the drug by in-silico repurposing method.all the interaction visualization analysis studies were performed by discoverystudio visualizer (ds), pymol molecular visualization tool, and ligplot + [26, 27] .the molecular dynamics (md) simulations were performed by yasara version 19.12.14.w.64 (yet another scientific artificial reality application) commercial package [28] , throughout 10 nanoseconds with 101 snapshots and the amber14 force field. by md, we computationally see the physical movement of atoms and molecules, which provides the structural level integrity and conformational changes that occur in the protein-ligand docked complex. in the present study, the docked complexes of virtually screened top three drugs lopinavir-ritonavir, tipranavir, and raltegravir with the x-ray crystal structure of sars-cov-2 m pro (pdb id: 6y2f) were analyzed through md simulations. the md simulations parameters were kept as follows, where the temperature is kept 298 k, the pressure at the bar, coulomb electrostatics at the cutoff of 7.86, 0.9% nacl, ph 7, solvent density 0.997, 1-femtosecond (fs) time steps, periodic boundaries in one simulation box [29] . the conformational changes in the structural level integrity of docked complexes were analyzed using root mean square deviation (rmsd) and root mean square fluctuation (rmsf) evaluations [30] .the sequence alignment of the sar-cov-2 genome shows high similarity with the closely related reference genomes of other coronaviruses. the blastn search of the complete genome of sar-cov-2 reveals that the most closely related virus available in genbank is sl-covzxc45 embecovirus. importantly, phylogenetic analysis revealed that there is no divergence in the sar-cov-2 genome sequence of different sar-cov-2 viruses isolated from different countries during the ongoing outbreak (fig. 2) .coronaviruses use a chymotrypsin-like a protease along with papain protease to process and cleaves its long polyprotein precursor into individually functional nsps. multiple sequence analysis of the main protease of sars-cov-2 with that of sars-cov reveals that amino acid sequence is conserved with a sequence identity of 96% (fig. 3) . the active site residues are thoroughly conserved and make a catalytic cys 145 -his 41 dyad. additionally, there are substratebinding subsites positioned in the active site groove of the protease. the specific subsite residues located in the enzyme active site are named as s1', s1, s2, s3, and s4 depending on their relative position to the cleavage site and subsites p1', p1, p2, p3 and p4 in the polyprotein.subsite p1 corresponds to the amino acid just before the cleavage site, and position p1' corresponds to the residue immediately after the cleavage site [31, 32] .in the m pro of sars-cov-2 active site region, the s1' residues are contributed by cys145, gly143 and ser144 which also serve as the oxyanion hole. the s1 residue is his163, while glu166 & gln189 located at the s2 position. bulky gln189 and pro168 make the s4 site [16] (fig. 4a) . the main protease recognizes and binds specific residues at each subsite of the peptide substrate to determine the initiation of proteolysis and production of nsps for the formation of the replication-transcription complex.the molecular docking based virtual screening of fda approved antiviral drugs against the sars-cov-2 m pro revealed the strong interaction with higher docking energy and binding affinities. all the potential drugs docked with the independent confirmation in the active site of protein, where the co-crystal structure ligand (improved α-ketoamide 13b) bound. molecular docking binding affinity of all the docked and analyzed drugs with their binding energy ranking is shown in (table. s1 ). the molecular re-docking was also performed to check the docking accuracy of the software autodock vina, and it was observed that the co-crystal bound ligand, and re-docked ligand shows rmsd value of 0.51 å, suggesting the high fidelity of docking method (fig. 4b ). in the present study, we focused on the top 10 docking results for further analysis as these drug compounds showing higher binding affinity as lopinavir-ritonavir (-10. after the docking studies, the molecular dynamics was performed of screened top three drugs (lopinavir-ritonavir, tipranavir, and raltegravir), to know the binding stability of docked complexes. the simulation was performed for 10ns to study the conformational stability of the complexes.the information retrieved through trajectory was used to investigate the stability of the secondary structure of the complexes by plotting root mean square deviation (rmsd) androot mean square fluctuations (rmsf). fig. 6 showing the rmsd values of bound and unbound ligands in different time interval summarizing the conformational changes of the ligands in 10 nanoseconds, the procedure delivers information about the movement of the ligand in its binding pocket. figure 7 showing the total energy in kj/mol versus time interval of all the complexes atoms with the distribution of energy between -1280648 to -1692992 kj/mol in 10 ns time interval. whereas in fig. 8 , the rmsf per solute amino acid residues calculated from the average rmsf constituting the residues. the fig. s1 is showing the hydrogen bond interaction between the ligands atoms and protein and also representing the number of hydrogen bonds formed between solute and solvent for all three selected complexes.the rapidly spreading disease caused by the novel sars-cov-2 is now called covid-19 [43] .world health organization (who) has declared the outbreak a pandemic, which has been increasing form the second week of march 2020 and has affected nearly all countries around the globe [2] . although the phylogenetic analysis of different isolates of sars-cov-2 samples across the world clearly shows that, the sars-cov-2 is evolutionarily closely related to the genomes of (sars-like coronavirus) bat-sl-cov (the coronavirus present in the bat in china), identified [44] . our study also reveals that it might be possible that sars-cov-2 has been originated from bat-sl-cov-2 with few mutations because they share 89.11% genome identity.till now, there is no potent drug or vaccine that has been reported or approved to treat the sars-cov-2 infected individuals; only symptomatic treatment was given to the sever patients j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f [45] . however, the efforts from the scientific community have been exceptional in advancing research effort towards the development of therapeutic intervention and finding viral drug targets. to that end, crystal structure of a few of the important viral proteins such as spike (s) protein and viral papain protease & chymotrypsin-like protease have been deduced [46] . from the recently published studies for sars-cov-2, it was observed that virus binds with angiotensin-converting enzymes 2 (ace2) receptors in the lower respiratory tracts of infected patients to gain entry into the lungs. the study reveals that sars-cov-2 main protease (m pro ) is the best drug target among coronaviruses [47] .interestingly, one of the most characterized and promising drug targeting against coronavirus infection is the main protease (m pro , also known as 3cl pro ), which has been cocrystallized with a bound ligand 'improved α-ketoamide 13b' in case of sars-cov-2 main protease [16] . this crystal structure reveals that the α-ketoamide 13b is occupying the active site of the protein and making several hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions with the active site residues as well as other substrate-binding residues of the binding pocket. in the present study, we have screened more than 75 antiviral, anticancer, and anti-malarial drugs for the identification of potential drug molecules using drug repurposing virtual screening methods.molecular docking studies have revealed that the maximum of the screened drug compounds interact with sars-cov-2 m pro protein and share the same binding pocket with similar interacting amino acid residues. the sars-cov-2 bound ligand (improved-α-ketoamide) shows strong bond interactions with surrounding amino acids within the region of 4å at different subsites with his164, glu166, gly143, his163, cys145, his41, and phe140 where it forms hydrogen bonds with active site his41 and also accept hydrogen bond from the backbone amides of gly143, cys145, and ser144. this protein-ligand interaction reveals a strong inhibition of virus protease (fig. 5d) [16] . the screening and molecular docking of at least 75 preexisting drugs we have carried out have shown to fit in the active site of protease in independent conformation and appreciable binding energy score (fig. 6a-d) .further, we have analyzed and repurposing the top 10 drugs, which showed higher or similar binding affinity as compared to the co-crystal bound ligand of sars-cov-2. the top 3 drugs that are exhibiting the interaction with same amino acid residues as of the α-ketoamide with the main proteases are lopinavir-ritonavir showing binding affinity of (-10.6 kcal/mol) andtipranavir (-8.7 kcal/mol), whereas raltegravirhas binding affinity of (-8.3 kcal/mol), which is j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f similar to improved-α-ketoamide 13b (-8.3kcal/mol). while the rest of the drug compounds have also shown good binding energy score, as presented in (table1).the drug lopinavir-ritonavir is a combination product contains two medications lopinavir and ritonavir. this drug is mainly used for hiv-aids to control hiv infection by inhibiting the protease and help to decrease the amount of hiv in the body by promoting the function of the body's natural immune system to work better [48] . the enzyme sars-cov-2 m pro along with the papain-like proteases, is essential for processing the polyproteins into various nonstructural proteins by cleaving at specific sites that are translated from the viral rna. the leu 141 (fig.5a and fig 9b) .interestingly, the binding energy score of lopinavir-ritonavir in protein-ligand docking was found to be even better than that of the docked α-ketoamide, and the in silico inhibition constant (ki) was obtained to be 16 nm. in silico inhibition constant (ki), as obtained by docking, is given in (table 2) for the top 10 drugs.drug tipranavir or tipranavir disodium is another nonpeptidic protease inhibitor used in combination with ritonavir to treat hiv infection [49] . in our study, the drug shows interaction with gln192, met165 (both form hydrogen bonding), gln189, asp187, met49, arg188, ser46, cys44, thr25, and his41 in different conformation from that of α-ketoamide inhibitor (fig. 5b and fig 9d) . we hypothesize that tipranavir or its other derivatives with even improved binding affinity in combination with ritonavir could serve as the potential protease inhibitor to counter sras-cov-2 multiplication in cell-based assay.another drug that has shown comparable binding affinity and binding energy with that of the docked α-ketoamide in m pro active site, the raltegraviris, a characterized antiretroviral medication which works by inhibiting the integrase strand transfer and is used in combination j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f with other drugs to relieve the hiv infection [42] . in the present study, the raltegravir drug shows interaction with his164, arg188, gln192, glu166 (all residues were bonded with strong hydrogen bond), met49, met165, phe140, pro168, and leu167. the drug shows four h-bonds with nearest interacting amino acids of the sars-cov-2 m pro enzyme, which indicates good inhibition ( fig. 5c and fig 9c) . this drug could also be used with other combinations like raltegravir and lopinavir for the treatment of covid-19, if found producing desirable inhibitory effect against sars-cov-2 protease in biochemical activity assay or cell-based assays.additionally, other drugs that were screened and docked in the substrate-binding cleft of the m pro , has shown good binding energy score, which is comparably similar to the original compound in the protein crystal structure. many of these drugs such as dolutegravir, letermovir & nelfinavir, are commonly used for treating different infections ranging from hiv to cytomegalovirus by employing the different mechanisms of action [50] [51] [52] . the identified repurposed drug and their interaction with binding amino acids in the m pro active site have been shown in (table 1) however, we believe that all the drugs studied and screened for repurposing against covid-19 in this study should furthermore be tested, and their in vitro inhibitory potential needs to be investigated through robust biochemical proteolytic activity assays and other biophysical & structural studies.in conclusion, this study reveals the potential of repurposed antiviral drugs to bind in the active site of sars-cov-2 main protease in a highly specific binding pattern similar to that of the crystal bound α-ketoamide mpro structure. three of the screened drugs lopinavir-ritonavir, raltegravir, and tipranavir have shown the strongest binding and that md simulation study confirmed the stability and conformational flexibility of these drugs in the enzyme active site.since all the drugs identified in this study are of known pharmacokinetics standards and approved by fda for human use for the treatment of respective illneses, so it may be possible to move straight to clinical trials as per standard and approved by fda for new indication, and therefore can fasten up the process of the therapeutics development against sars-cov-2 infection. the molecular dynamics studies performed in this study for screened top three drugs also proving the binding conformational stability with cov-2 m pro . our phylogenetic analysis of the available genomes of sars-cov-2 isolated from different sources also reveals that the virus is not showing any sign of severing mutation or diversification rapidly. therefore the repurposed drug combinations could be used against sars-cov-2 on the pan-community level.furthermore we suggest that the efficacy of the repurposed drugs in this study needs to be experimentally confirmed by carrying out the biochemical and structural studies for the prevention and treatment of covid-19.authors declare no conflict. amino acids marked underneath with * represent the catalytic residues and residues marked underneath with # represent substrate-binding residues of various subsites. x-ray crystal structure, including co-crystal bound ligand (improvedα-ketoamide).no.the highly contagious and pathogenic novel severe acute respiratory syndrome -coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2), causative agent ongoing covid-19 pandemic, has spread rapidly and posed a health threat of unprecedented magnitude on the global population. the novel sars-cov-2 was first reported in december 2019 to have emerged in the live wildlife market in the wuhan region of hubei province, where it has caused mystic pneumonia-like respiratory illnesses in the human population of the affected area [1] . accordhttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiph.2020.06.016 1876-0341/© 2020 published by elsevier ltd on behalf of king saud bin abdulaziz university for health sciences. this is an open access article under the cc by-nc-nd license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). ing to data presented by the covid-19 situation report from world health organization (who), as of may 15, 2020 , the virus has infected more than 4,347,935 people around the world including a staggering 297,241 deaths, with a cumulative mortality rate of >6.8% and exponentially increased in between march and april [2] . despite the instantaneous and monumental research efforts from the scientific community around the globe at present, no effective antiviral treatment or vaccine is available for covid-19. however, significant efforts have been made to the development of vaccines and therapeutic drugs, which were under small scale clinical trials [3, 4] . presently the sars-cov-2 infected patient's treatments have been limited to the use of prophylactic and symptomatic management like mild symptoms such as dry cough, sore throat, and fever, and various fatal complications including organ failure, septic shock, pulmonary edema, severe pneumonia, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [5] . therefore, there is an urgent need for the discovery of a potential treatment therapy to check and control the sars-cov-2 pandemic. coronaviruses (covs), belong to family coronaviridae of viruses, constitute an important class of pathogens for humans and other vertebrates [6] .before the current sars-cov-2, only six of the covs were known to cause mild to severe illnesses in humans. the novel human coronavirus: hcov-229e and hcov-nl63, fall in genera alphacoronavirus, cause milder upper respiratory disease in adults, and sometimes can also cause severe infection in infants and young children. whereas the beta-coronaviruses like hcov-oc43, hku1, sars-cov (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus; which has triggered an epidemic in china during 2002−03) and mers-cov (middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus; an etiological agent of middle east coronavirus epidemic of 2012) have potential to cause infection in lower respiratory tract along with cough & fever and triggers severe respiratory illness in humans [7] . the causative agent of the current outbreak sars-cov-2 also belongs to beta coronaviruses [8] and is closely related to sars-cov with an overall genomic sequence similarity of >79%. all of these covs belong to the coronaviridae, a family of viruses that possess a positive-sense single-stranded rna genome [9] .the virion of sars-cov-2 is consists of crown-shaped peplomers, 80−160 nm in diameter, and consists of a ∼30 kb long single-stranded rna molecule of positive polarity with 5 cap and 3 poly-a tail [10] .the rna genome is composed of at least six open reading frames (orfs) of which the first orf (orf1a/b) makes up the 5 two-third and encodes two polypeptides pp1a and pp1ab both of which furthermore leads to the production of 16 nonstructural proteins (nsps). other orfs that make up the remaining one-third of the viral genome give rise to the production of four main structural factors of the virion: spike protein (s), envelope protein (e), membrane protein (m) and nucleocapsid protein (n) [11] .the sars-cov-2 virus uses the heterotrimeric spike (s) protein, which consists of s1 and s2 subunit, on its surface to interacts with the ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) cellular receptor, abundantly expressed on many cell types in human tissues [12] . upon internalization into the cell, genomic rna is used as a template for direct translation of two polyprotein pp1a and pp1ab which encodes several crucial nonstructural proteins (nsps) including two proteases; chymotrypsin-like protease (3cl pr o) or main protease (m pro ) -nsp5 and papain-like a protease (p pr o) -nsp3, both of which processes the polypeptide pp1a and pp1ab in a sequencespecific manner to produce 16 different nsps [13, 14] . the papain protease processes the polyprotein to generate nsp1−4. at the same time, the m pro operates at as many as 11 cleavage sites by specifically recognizing the sequence leu-gln*ser-ala-gly (* marks the cleavage site) to generate rest of the critical nsps including helicase, methyltransferase, and rna dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) all of which play a critical role in the viral infection cycle by forming a replication-transcription complex (rtc) [15] . therefore, the main protease constitutes a major and attractive drug target to block the production of nonstructural viral components and thereby to hamper the replication event of the virus life cycle. additionally, no human protease with similar cleavage specificity is known to rule out the possibility of cellular toxicity upon the potential inhibition of the main viral protease [16] .in recent years drug repurposing methodology has emerged as a resourceful alternative to fasten the drug development process against rapidly spreading emerging infections such as the one of sars-cov-2 [17] . the approach of drug repurposing has successfully led to the discoveries of potential drug candidates against several diseases such as ebola disease, hepatitis c virus, and zika virus infection [18, 19] . recently several repurposing studies on sars-cov-2 have been performed using clinically approved drugs [20] , among which a very new study comes out on a clinical trial of lopinavir-ritonavir drug for covid-19, which was indicated on top of our drug repurposing study [21] .in the present study, we have performed in silico based drug repurposing method using molecular docking studies on the spectrum of food and drug administration (fda) -approved antiviral drugs against sars-cov-2 m pro . to this end, a recently elucidated x-ray crystal structure of sars-cov-2 m pro (pdb id: 6y2f) which have been shown with an ␣-ketoamide as a potent inhibitor in the enzyme's active site, was chosen and screened for several fda approved antiviral drugs to simulate the m pro -␣-ketoamide interactions and thereby blocking the active pocket [16] . the crystal structure of sars-cov-2 m pro in the apo form (pdb id: 6y2e) and ␣-ketoamide bound form (pdb id: 6y2f) shows that the protein makes a crystallographic dimer composed of two monomers of identical conformations. each protomer furthermore is made up of three domains. the interface of domain i and domain ii form the active site of the protein, which is composed of a cys 145 -his 41 dyad where ␣-ketoamide derivative 13b is bound (fig. 1a) . the uniquely globular domain iii is linked to domain ii through a linker region and deemed essential for the catalytic activity of these chymotrypsinlike proteas [22] . the ␣-ketoamide derivative 13b is shown bound in the active site. it is stabilized by several interactions with the active site residues his 41 & cys 145 and adjacent residues in substrate binding cleft such as gly 143 and ser 144 [16] (fig. 1b) .we have selected several existing fda approved drugs, most of which are reported to be used in humans for countering certain viral infections and screened them for binding in the active cleft of m pro . our results have shown that some of the drugs occupied the active site of m pro with even increased binding affinity than that of the bound ␣-ketoamide 13b. while the rest of the compounds has shown appreciable binding while holding most of the crucial active site determinants. we envisage that further in vitro examination of the inhibitory potential of these drugs on the catalytic activity of the main protease could lead the way to repurpose one or more of the tested fda approved drugs in this study as a treatment therapy for sars-cov-2 induced disease.to understand the evolutionary relationship between the previously known human coronavirus and the novel sars-cov-2, we have performed the phylogenetic analysis. for analysis, all the closely related and complete reference genome sequences of sars-cov-2 were downloaded from the ncbi genbank database. a total of 50 genomes were considered for the study. mega 6.0 was used for multiple sequence alignment and construction of a phylogenetic tree, and 1000 bootstrap replicates performed using the neighborjoining method [23] .the recently elucidated x-ray crystal structure coordinates of sar-cov-2 m pro was downloaded from rcsb pdb (pdb id: 6y2f), having 1.75 å resolution. in this structure, the m pro was cocrystallized with the improved bound ␣-ketoamide (13b) inhibitor, and multiple intermolecular interactions of the ligand with the active site residues are characterized [16] . to further identify the potent inhibitors for sar-cov-2 m pro among the fda approved antiviral drugs, we have downloaded more than 75 drug compounds from the pubchem chemical database [24] . for molecular docking based drug repurposing, the download 3d structures of compounds and protein were prepared. the docking study was performed by autodock vina [25] , which uses a lamarckian genetic algorithm (ga) in combination with grid-based energy estimation, to check the docking accuracy of software we have performed re-docking to the co-crystal bound ligand. the main aim of this molecular interaction study was to identify the highly interacting drug with sar-cov-2 protein crystal structure and to propose the drug by in-silico repurposing method. all the interaction visualization analysis studies were performed by discoverystudio visualizer (ds), pymol molecular visualization tool, and ligplot + [26, 27] .the molecular dynamics (md) simulations were performed by yasara version 19.12.14.w.64 (yet another scientific artificial reality application) commercial package [28] , throughout 10 nanoseconds with 101 snapshots and the amber14 force field. by md, we computationally see the physical movement of atoms and molecules, which provides the structural level integrity and conformational changes that occur in the protein-ligand docked complex. in the present study, the docked complexes of virtually screened top three drugs lopinavir-ritonavir, tipranavir, and raltegravir with the x-ray crystal structure of sars-cov-2 m pro (pdb id: 6y2f) were analyzed through md simulations. the md simulations parameters were kept as follows, where the temperature is kept 298 k, the pressure at the bar, coulomb electrostatics at the cutoff of 7.86, 0.9% nacl, ph 7, solvent density 0.997, 1femtosecond (fs) time steps, periodic boundaries in one simulation box [29] . the conformational changes in the structural level integrity of docked complexes were analyzed using root mean square deviation (rmsd) and root mean square fluctuation (rmsf) evaluations [30] .genome sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis of sar-cov-2the sequence alignment of the sar-cov-2 genome shows high similarity with the closely related reference genomes of other coronaviruses. the blastn search of the complete genome of sar-cov-2 reveals that the most closely related virus available in genbank is sl-covzxc45 (mg772933.1) (bat sars-like coronavirus) showing 95% query coverage and 89.11% identity. in contrast, another bat sars-cov genome sl-covzxc21 (mg772934.1) showed 94% query coverage and 88.65% sequence identity both isolated from china. majorly phylogenetic tree was clustered into three clades i, ii, and clade iii; clade i consists of 25 sars-cov and bat-sl-cov complete genome and share sequence identity range from 88.18% to 100% when sequence was aligned using blastn tool. whereas clade ii consists of total 12 complete genomes of sars-cov-2 and bat-sl-cov, in which ten genomes are of sars-cov-2 which were isolated from patients in different countries coronaviruses use a chymotrypsin-like a protease along with papain protease to process and cleaves its long polyprotein precursor into individually functional nsps. multiple sequence analysis of the main protease of sars-cov-2 with that of sars-cov reveals that amino acid sequence is conserved with a sequence identity of 96% (fig. 3) . the active site residues are thoroughly conserved and make a catalytic cys 145 -his 41 dyad. additionally, there are substrate-binding subsites positioned in the active site groove of the protease. the specific subsite residues located in the enzyme active site are named as s1 , s1, s2, s3, and s4 depending on their relative position to the cleavage site and subsites p1 , p1, p2, p3 and p4 in the polyprotein. subsite p1 corresponds to the amino acid just before the cleavage site, and position p1 please cite this article in press as: kumar y, et al. in silico prediction of potential inhibitors for the main protease of sars-cov-2 using molecular docking and dynamics simulation based drug-repurposing. j infect public health (2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiph.2020.06.016 corresponds to the residue immediately after the cleavage site [31, 32] .in the m pro of sars-cov-2 active site region, the s1 residues are contributed by cys145, gly143 and ser144 which also serve as the oxyanion hole. the s1 residue is his163, while glu166 & gln189 located at the s2 position. bulky gln189 and pro168 make the s4 site [16] (fig. 4a) . the main protease recognizes and binds specific residues at each subsite of the peptide substrate to determine the initiation of proteolysis and production of nsps for the formation of the replication-transcription complex.the molecular docking based virtual screening of fda approved antiviral drugs against the sars-cov-2 m pro revealed the strong interaction with higher docking energy and binding affinities. all the potential drugs docked with the independent confirmation in the active site of protein, where the co-crystal structure ligand (improved ␣-ketoamide 13b) bound. molecu-lar docking binding affinity of all the docked and analyzed drugs with their binding energy ranking is shown in (table  s1 ). the molecular re-docking was also performed to check the docking accuracy of the software autodock vina, and it was observed that the co-crystal bound ligand, and re-docked ligand shows rmsd value of 0.51 å, suggesting the high fidelity of docking method (fig. 4b ). in the present study, we focused on the top 10 docking results for further analysis as these drug compounds showing higher binding affinity as lopinavir-ritonavir (-10.6 kcal/mol), tipranavir (-8.7 kcal/mol), raltegravir after the docking studies, the molecular dynamics was performed of screened top three drugs (lopinavir-ritonavir, tipranavir, and raltegravir), to know the binding stability of docked complexes. the simulation was performed for 10 ns to study the conformational stability of the complexes.the information retrieved through trajectory was used to investigate the stability of the secondary structure of the complexes by plotting root mean square deviation (rmsd) and root mean square fluctuations (rmsf). fig. 6 showing the rmsd values of bound and unbound ligands in different time interval summarizing the conformational changes of the ligands in 10 nanoseconds, the procedure delivers information about the movement of the ligand in its binding pocket. fig. 7 showing the total energy in kj/mol versus time interval of all the complexes atoms with the distribution of energy between -1280648 to -1692992 kj/mol in 10 ns time interval. whereas in fig. 8 , the rmsf per solute amino acid residues calculated from the average rmsf constituting the residues. the fig.  s1 is showing the hydrogen bond interaction between the ligands atoms and protein and also representing the number of hydrogen bonds formed between solute and solvent for all three selected complexes.the rapidly spreading disease caused by the novel sars-cov-2 is now called covid-19 [43] . world health organization (who) has declared the outbreak a pandemic, which has been increasing form the second week of march 2020 and has affected nearly all countries around the globe [2] . although the phylogenetic analysis of different isolates of sars-cov-2 samples across the world clearly shows that, the sars-cov-2 is evolutionarily closely related to the genomes of (sars-like coronavirus) bat-sl-cov (the coronavirus present in the bat in china), identified [44] . our study also reveals that it might be possible that sars-cov-2 has been origi-please cite this article in press as: kumar y, et al. in silico prediction of potential inhibitors for the main protease of sars-cov-2 using molecular docking and dynamics simulation based drug-repurposing. j infect public health (2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiph.2020.06.016 nated from bat-sl-cov-2 with few mutations because they share 89.11% genome identity.till now, there is no potent drug or vaccine that has been reported or approved to treat the sars-cov-2 infected individuals; only symptomatic treatment was given to the sever patients [45] . however, the efforts from the scientific community have been exceptional in advancing research effort towards the development of therapeutic intervention and finding viral drug targets. to that end, crystal structure of a few of the important viral proteins such as spike (s) protein and viral papain protease & chymotrypsinlike protease have been deduced [46] . from the recently published studies for sars-cov-2, it was observed that virus binds with angiotensin-converting enzymes 2 (ace2) receptors in the lower respiratory tracts of infected patients to gain entry into the lungs.the study reveals that sars-cov-2 main protease (m pro ) is the best drug target among coronaviruses [47] .interestingly, one of the most characterized and promising drug targeting against coronavirus infection is the main protease (m pro , also known as 3cl pro ), which has been co-crystallized with a bound ligand 'improved ␣-ketoamide 13b' in case of sars-cov-2 main protease [16] . this crystal structure reveals that the ␣-ketoamide 13b is occupying the active site of the protein and making several hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions with the active site residues as well as other substrate-binding residues of the binding pocket. in the present study, we have screened more than 75 antiviral, anticancer, and anti-malarial drugs for the identification of potential drug molecules using drug repurposing virtual screening methods. molecular docking studies have revealed that table 1 showing the top10 drug compounds 2-dimensional representation of docking poses interacting with amino acids of target sar-cov-2 m pro x-ray crystal structure, including co-crystal bound ligand (improved␣-ketoamide).ligand with a binding affinity (kcal/mol) schematic of intermolecular interactions the maximum of the screened drug compounds interact with sars-cov-2 m pro protein and share the same binding pocket with similar interacting amino acid residues. the sars-cov-2 bound ligand (improved-␣-ketoamide) shows strong bond interactions with surrounding amino acids within the region of 4 å at different subsites with his164, glu166, gly143, his163, cys145, his41, and phe140 where it forms hydrogen bonds with active site his41 and also accept hydrogen bond from the backbone amides of gly143, cys145, and ser144. this protein-ligand interaction reveals a strong inhibition of virus protease (fig. 5d ) [16] . the screening and molecular docking of at least 75 preexisting drugs we have carried out have shown to fit in the active site of protease in independent conformation and appreciable binding energy score (fig. 6a-d) . further, we have analyzed and repurposing the top 10 drugs, which showed higher or similar binding affinity as compared to the co-crystal bound ligand of sars-cov-2. the top 3 drugs that are exhibiting the interaction with same amino acid residues as of the ␣-ketoamide with the main proteases are lopinavir-ritonavir showing binding affinity of (-10.6 kcal/mol) and tipranavir (-8.7 kcal/mol), whereas raltegravirhas binding affinity of (-8.3 kcal/mol), which is similar to improved-␣-ketoamide 13b (-8.3 kcal/mol). while the rest of the drug compounds have also shown good binding energy score, as presented in (table1).the drug lopinavir-ritonavir is a combination product contains two medications lopinavir and ritonavir. this drug is mainly used for hiv-aids to control hiv infection by inhibiting the protease and help to decrease the amount of hiv in the body by promoting the function of the body's natural immune system to work better [48] . the enzyme sars-cov-2 m pro along with the papain-like proteases, is essential for processing the polyproteins into various nonstructural proteins by cleaving at specific sites that are translated from the viral rna. the interacting amino acids in the m pro enzyme active site were reported to be leu, gln, ser, ala, gly along with the cys-his dyad which marks the cleavage site, similarly our in silico docking study shows that top screened drug lopinavir-ritonavir combination interacts with glu 166 (also form strong hydrogen bonding), gln 189, leu 167, met 165, asp 187, met 49, his 41, cys 145, and leu 141 (fig.5a and fig. 9b ).please cite this article in press as: kumar interestingly, the binding energy score of lopinavir-ritonavir in protein-ligand docking was found to be even better than that of the docked ␣-ketoamide, and the in silico inhibition constant (k i ) was obtained to be 16 nm. in silico inhibition constant (k i ), as obtained by docking, is given in (table 2) for the top 10 drugs.drug tipranavir or tipranavir disodium is another nonpeptidic protease inhibitor used in combination with ritonavir to treat hiv infection [49] . in our study, the drug shows interaction with gln192, met165 (both form hydrogen bonding), gln189, asp187, met49, arg188, ser46, cys44, thr25, and his41 in different conformation from that of ␣-ketoamide inhibitor (figs. 5b and 9d) . we hypoth-please cite this article in press as: kumar y, et al. in silico prediction of potential inhibitors for the main protease of sars-cov-2 using molecular docking and dynamics simulation based drug-repurposing. j infect public health (2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiph.2020.06.016 esize that tipranavir or its other derivatives with even improved binding affinity in combination with ritonavir could serve as the potential protease inhibitor to counter sras-cov-2 multiplication in cell-based assay.another drug that has shown comparable binding affinity and binding energy with that of the docked ␣-ketoamide in m pro active site, the raltegraviris, a characterized antiretroviral medication which works by inhibiting the integrase strand transfer and is used in combination with other drugs to relieve the hiv infection [42] . in the present study, the raltegravir drug shows interaction with his164, arg188, gln192, glu166 (all residues were bonded with strong hydrogen bond), met49, met165, phe140, pro168, and leu167. the drug shows four h-bonds with nearest interacting amino acids of the sars-cov-2 m pro enzyme, which indicates good inhibition (figs. 5c and 9c ). this drug could also be used with other combinations like raltegravir and lopinavir for the treatment of covid-19, if found producing desirable inhibitory effect against sars-cov-2 protease in biochemical activity assay or cell-based assays. additionally, other drugs that were screened and docked in the substrate-binding cleft of the m pro , has shown good binding energy score, which is comparably similar to the original compound in the protein crystal structure. many of these drugs such as dolutegravir, letermovir & nelfinavir, are commonly used for treating different infections ranging from hiv to cytomegalovirus by employing the different mechanisms of action [50] [51] [52] . the identified repurposed drug and their interaction with binding amino acids in the m pro active site have been shown in (table 1) .after screening the different fda approved drugs, the present study enabled us to understand the mode of interaction of approved antiretroviral drugs with new coronavirus sars-cov-2 main protease enzyme. the top three drugs (lopinavir-ritonavir, raltegravir, and tipranavir) were further run for md simulations studies for the period of 10 ns. in the results, we see that all three ligands are intact and bound to its binding site. later the protein backbone rmsd analysis of all the complexes was performed, which reveals that nearly all three complexes were stable after 4 ns and showing rmsd calculations within the range of 1.5-2.458 å after starting from 0.5 å fig. 6 . the total binding energies were showing that drug lopinavir-ritonavir was showing more stable energy values, fig. 7 . in order to know the effect of ligands binding on the sars-cov-2 m pro , we performed the rmsf analysis from the average rmsf of protein constituting residues atoms since all trajectories of all complexes become stable with minor fluctuations between range 1.0-2 å fig. 8 . from the analysis, it was observed that lopinavir-ritonavir shows all hydrogen bonds made with nine acceptors and two donors, whereas a total number of 20 hydrogen bonds are possible fig s1. in raltegravir, 11 acceptors and three donors, h-bonds were formed, whereas a total number of 25 hydrogen bonds are possible, similarly drug tipranavir formed eight acceptors and two donors h-bonds. in contrast, a total number of 18 hydrogen bonds are possible fig s1. this md simulation analysis shows the promising binding stability of the drug compounds with the binding pocket of cov-2 m pro (pdb id: 6y2f). however, we believe that all the drugs studied and screened for repurposing against covid-19 in this study should furthermore be tested, and their in vitro inhibitory potential needs to be investigated through robust biochemical proteolytic activity assays and other biophysical & structural studies.in conclusion, this study reveals the potential of repurposed antiviral drugs to bind in the active site of sars-cov-2 main protease in a highly specific binding pattern similar to that of the crystal bound ␣-ketoamide mpro structure. three of the screened drugs lopinavir-ritonavir, raltegravir, and tipranavir have shown the strongest binding and that md simulation study confirmed the sta-bility and conformational flexibility of these drugs in the enzyme active site. since all the drugs identified in this study are of known pharmacokinetics standards and approved by fda for human use for the treatment of respective illneses, so it may be possible to move straight to clinical trials as per standard and approved by fda for new indication, and therefore can fasten up the process of the therapeutics development against sars-cov-2 infection. the molecular dynamics studies performed in this study for screened top three drugs also proving the binding conformational stability with cov-2 m pro . our phylogenetic analysis of the available genomes of sars-cov-2 isolated from different sources also reveals that the virus is not showing any sign of severing mutation or diversification rapidly. therefore the repurposed drug combinations could be used against sars-cov-2 on the pan-community level. furthermore we suggest that the efficacy of the repurposed drugs in this study needs to be experimentally confirmed by carrying out the biochemical and structural studies for the prevention and treatment of covid-19.of february 29, 2020, 881 samples of suspected cases referred from different states, with a travel history to wuhan, china, and other sars-cov-2-affected countries, were screened.the viral rna was extracted from the ts sample using the magmax rna extraction kit (applied biosystems, usa) as per the manufacturer's instructions. the extracted rna was immediately used for testing the presence of sars-cov-2 using the realtime rt-pcr protocol published by the who 12 for the detection of rdrp (1), rdrp (2), e gene and n gene. rnase p gene was used as the internal control for the analysis. confirmatory laboratory tests were performed as per the who-recommended test protocols 13 . these samples were also sequenced using the ngs approach to retrieve the complete genome of the virus.the total rna of three positive ts specimens from kerala, was extracted from 250-300 µl of the sars-cov-2 real-time rt-pcr positive samples. qiaamp viral rna extraction kit (qiagen, hilden, germany) was used according to the manufacturer's instructions. the extracted rna was further quantified using a qubit rna high-sensitivity kit (invitrogen, usa). rna libraries were prepared as per the earlier-defined protocol and quantified using kapa library quantification kit (kapa biosystems, roche diagnostics corporation, usa) as per the manufacturer's protocol. further, individual libraries were neutralized and loaded on the miniseq platform (illumina, usa). the detailed protocols for the steps undertaken have been published earlier 15, 16 . the data generated from the machine were analyzed using clc genomics workbench version 11.0 (clc, qiagen, germany). reference-based mapping was performed to retrieve the sequence of the sars-cov-2.full-length genome sequences of sars-cov-2 were downloaded from the gisaid database 17 (supplementary table i (available from http://www.ijmr. org.in/articles/2020/151/2/images/indianjmedres_ 2020_151_2_200_281471_sm5.pdf)). multiple sequence alignment was performed using the mega software version 7.0 18 with retrieved sequences from two of the three positive cases and the available gisaid sequences. a phylogenetic tree was generated using the neighbour joining method and the kimura-2parameter as the nucleotide (nt) substitution model with 1000 bootstrap replications as implemented in mega software 18 . per cent nucleotide divergence and amino acid (aa) divergence were calculated using the p-distance method 18 . mutations specific to the indian sars-cov-2 viruses were identified by comparing the coding regions with respect to the sars-cov-2, wuhan, china (wuhan hu-1).three-dimensional (3d) model of the spike protein and epitope prediction: the pre-fusion structure of the indian case 1 sars-cov-2 spike (s) glycoprotein was modelled using the swiss-model server (https://swissmodel.expasy.org/interactive) and the corresponding s protein of wuhan-hu-1 (6vsb.pdb) as the template (99.97% identity). sequential (linear) b-cell epitopes were predicted using bepipred-2.0 server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/bepipred/). the abcpred prediction tool (http://crdd.osdd.net/ raghava/abcpred/) was also used to identify the b-cell epitopes in the indian sars-cov-2 sequence. the epitope prediction probability of >0.8 was set to increase the specificity of the peptide stretch. the overlapping epitopes predicted by bepipred-2.0 online server and the abcpred prediction tool were identified. the antigenicity of the shortlisted peptide sequences was further predicted using the vaxijen online server (http://www.ddg-pharmfac.net/vaxijen/ vaxijen/vaxijen.html) with a default threshold of 0.4.discontinuous epitopes on the modelled structure of the indian case 1 sars-cov-2 spike protein were predicted using the online servers, ellipro (http://tools.iedb.org/ellipro/) and discotope 2.0 (http://tools.iedb.org/discotope/), integrated in the immune epitope database. ellipro predicts epitopes based on the protusion index (pi), wherein the protein shape is approximated as an ellipsoid (ref for ellipro and discotope). an ellipsoid with the pi value of 0.8 indicates that 80 per cent of the residues are within the ellipsoid and 20 per cent are outside. all residues that are outside the 80 per cent ellipsoid will have a score of 0.8. residues with larger scores are associated with greater solvent accessibility. the pi value was set to a score of 0.8. discotope predicts epitopes using 3d structure and half-sphere exposure as a surface measure in a novel spatial neighbourhood definition method. default values were set for sensitivity (0.47) and specificity (0.75) for selecting the amino acids forming discontinuous epitopes. a sensitivity of 0.47 means that 47 per cent of the epitope residues are predicted as part of the epitopes, while a specificity of 0.75 means that 25 per cent of the non-epitope residues are predicted as part of the epitopes. outputs from both the methods were combined, and the final regions were mapped on the modelled 3d-structure as the most probable conformational epitopes. in addition, we also predicted n-linked glycosylation sites in the s protein using netnglyc 1.0 server (http://www.cbs. dtu.dk/services/netnglyc/). the spike proteins were also screened for the presence of potential epitopes presented by major histocompatibility complex (mhc) class i molecules to cytotoxic t lymphocytes (ctls). the online netctl1.2 server (http://www.cbs.dtu. dk/services/netctl/) based on machine learning techniques such as artificial neural network (ann) and support vector machine (svm) was used to predict the t-cell epitopes. the prediction was made for all the human leucocyte antigen (hla) supertypes and the available human alleles. the c terminal cleavage, weight of transport-associated protein (tap) efficiency and threshold for identification were kept as default. vaxijen v2.0 tool was used to predict the antigenicity of the predicted epitopes (http://www.ddg-pharmfac. net/vaxijen/vaxijen/vaxijen.html). the sequences were further screened to be potential epitopes using the ctlpred online server (http://crdd.osdd.net/raghava/ ctlpred/).the ability of the predicted linear b-cell and the t-cell epitopes to mount interferon-gamma (ifn-γ) response was assessed using the ifnepitope (http://crdd.osdd.net/raghava/ifnepitope/index.php).detection of sars-cov-2 in suspected samples: three of the 881 ts/nasal swab (ns) specimens from the suspected cases, tested positive for the sars-cov-2 using the real-time rt-pcr specific to e gene, rdrp (1), rdrp (2) and n gene. the ct value of the e gene ranged from 19.8 to 34.5 for the ts/ns specimens. detailed ct values for the real-time rt-pcrs specific to the above-mentioned genes of the positive specimens are given in table i . blood samples were found to be negative for the sars-cov-2.case 1 travelled from wuhan, china, reached india on january 23, 2020 and further travelled to the final destination of kerala on january 24. this individual developed cough on january 25 and further experienced a sore throat and mild fever and was admitted to the general hospital, thrissur, kerala. the second case travelled from wuhan and had close contact with case 1 during the travel to the final destination in india. case 2 developed similar symptoms along with fever and diarrhoea on january 26, and the collected ts specimens were referred to the icmr-niv on january 28. the second case was hospitalized on january 30, in a medical college, alappuzha, kerala. the clinical sample (ts) was collected on january 31, 2020. case 3 travelled from china to india, developed a runny nose on january 30 and was admitted to the general hospital, kasaragod, kerala, on january 31, 2020. ts specimens were collected on january 31, 2020.ngs of sars-cov-2 from india -phylogenetic analysis and molecular characterization: ngs analysis from the ts specimens retrieved two complete genome sequences from case 1 and case 3. the complete genomic sequence data for case 2 could not be recovered due to the lower kappa concentration of the sample and hence not included in the study for analysis. the fastq files were reference mapped with the available wuhan seafood pneumonia virus (wuhan hu-1) complete sars-cov-2 genome (accession number: nc 045512.2). the total reads which were mapped and the percentage of the genome recovered for the two cases are summarized in table i .analysis of the complete genome sequences of sars-cov-2 from the positive cases in india revealed that the percentage nt and aa differences between case 1 and case 3 were 0.038 and 0.10 per cent, respectively. the sequences of case 1 and case 3 diverged from the wuhan-hu1 sequence by 0.017 per cent nt and 0.041 per cent aa respectively. indian sars-cov-2 clustered with the sarbecovirus subgenus of the betacoronavirus genus and was closest to the batcov ratg13 sequence (96.09% nt) 8 . the phylogenetic comparison showed the clustering of the genome sequences of case 1 and case 3 with the existing sequences of the sars-cov-2 sequences (fig. 1) . the phylogeny revealed emerging heterogeneity within the sars-cov-2 sequences globally. the indian sars-cov-2 viruses were positioned in different clusters.indian sars-cov-2 sequences showed two changes 408 arg→ile and 930 ala→val in the spike protein compared to the wuhan hu-1 sequence. the mutations were further mapped on the spike protein model of the indian sequence ( supplementary fig. 1 (available from http://www.ijmr.org.in/articles/2020/151/2/images/ indianjmedres_2020_151_2_200_281471_sm6.pdf)). deletion of a three-nucleotide stretch, encoding tyrosine residue at position 144, of the spike gene was also observed in the indian sars-cov-2 from case 1 when compared to the other sars-cov-2 sequences.as noted in the earlier sars-cov-2 sequences, both the indian sequences possessed the polybasic cleavage site (rrar) in the spike protein at the junction of s1 and s2, the two subunits of the spike protein 19 .epitope predictions: thirty one linear b-cell epitopes were predicted by bepipred in the indian sars-cov-2, of which three were found to have a length of <6 amino acids and hence not considered. linear epitopes were also predicted using the abcpred prediction tool, which predicted 47 epitopes based on the threshold of 0.8. regions common to both the prediction methods (n=17) were identified manually. the 17 epitopes were screened for their antigenicity using the vaxijen v2.0 tool (http://www.ddg-pharmfac. net/vaxijen/vaxijen/vaxijen.html), and nine of these epitopes were shortlisted. these epitopes were further screened for their ability to elicit an ifn-γ response, which was predicted using the ifnepitope tool. finally, five epitopes, four in the s1 domain and one in the s2 domain, were predicted, which could possibly generate an immune response and suppress the ifn-γ response (table ii) . n-linked glycosylation site prediction revealed that two putative glycosylation sites (with a low value for jury agreement) were present within the epitope stretch 328-344.the discontinuous epitopes in the spike protein of the indian sars-cov-2 were further identified using multiple methods, ellipro and discotope. conformational epitopes based on these methods were mapped on the pre-fusion structure of the modelled indian sars-cov-2 spike protein. the newly released structure of the sars-cov-2 spike protein was used as the template for modelling the indian spike protein. ramachandran plot statistics revealed 83.7 per cent of the residues to be in the core region, 14.4 per cent in the additionally allowed region and 0.5 per cent in the disallowed region. four epitopes were predicted by ellipro based on the pi threshold of 0.8 (supplementary table ii the mapped conformational epitopes are depicted in figure 2 . for the purpose of comparison, the indian s protein sequence was also modelled using the prefusion structure of sars-cov-1 (6acc.pdb; 87.29% identity), and the results for the conformational epitopes predicted are in supplementary t-cell epitope prediction revealed 105 strong binding epitopes capable of binding to different hla types using the netctl1.2 software based on the threshold of 0.4. twelve of these were shortlisted, considering a binding efficiency of >0.5 nm and capable of eliciting ifn-γ response (table iii) .till february 29, 2020, three positive cases of sars-cov-2 were reported from india from 881 suspected cases tested at icmr-niv, pune. all the three cases had a travel history from wuhan, china, during january 2020. although ngs was performed on the specimens for all the three positive cases, the complete genome sequence could be retrieved only from case 1 and case 3. the three cases were recovered after hospitalization and were home quarantined as per the guidelines of the ministry of health and family welfare, government of india 14 . epitopes were predicted using a combination of the bepipred server and the abcpred prediction server. the antigenicity was predicted using the vaxijen v2.0 tool. ifn-γ response was predicted using the infepitope server. # values in bracket show prediction score given by the software threshold of >0.7 nm was used for increased specificity of the prediction. the peptides were reconfirmed using ctlpred server using default parameters. the peptides that were classified as epitopes were further checked for their antigenicity score using the vaxijen v2.0 tool yadav et al:the low viral copy number of the ts specimen from case 2 could be the possible reason for lesser viral reads being retrieved during the ngs run, leading to a fragmented genome. the recent study from china on serial samples (tss, sputum, urine and stool) from two patients followed days 3-12 and days 4-15 post onset 20 . n gene-specific real-time rt-pcr assay showed that the viral loads in ts and sputum samples peaked at around 5-6 days after symptom onset, ranging from around 10 4 -10 7 copies per ml during this time 20 . in another study, the virus was detected in the saliva specimens of 11 of the 12 patients, and serial saliva testing showed declines of viral rna levels 21 .the two indian sars-cov-2 sequences were found to be non-identical (0.04% nt divergence), and the result of phylogenetic analysis indicated that there were two different introductions into the country. a recent study using 52 published genbank sequences showed evidence of substantial genetic heterogeneity and estimated the time to the most recent common ancestor to be december 5, 2019 (95% confidence interval: november 6 -december 13, 2019) 22 . continuous monitoring and analysis of the sequences from the affected countries would be vital to understand the genetic evolution and rates of substitution of the sars-cov-2.the comparison of the amino acid sequences of the non-structural (nsp1-nsp16) and structural polyproteins was undertaken with reference to the wuhan-hu1 strain for molecular characterization. some human betacoronaviruses, including hcov-hku1 (lineage a), have a polybasic cleavage site as well as predicted o-linked glycans near the s1/s2 cleavage site of the spike protein. as published recently, the polybasic cleavage site that has not been previously observed in related lineage b betacoronaviruses and is a unique feature of sars-cov-2 was noted in the indian sars-cov-2. the mutation arg408ile in the spike protein of one of the indian sequences is noted to be in the rbd and ala930val, is located in the s2 domain. however, both are away from the ace2 receptor-binding interface 19, 23 . mutations in the spike protein sequences of sars-cov-2 observed currently are localized over the s1 and s2 domains and, so far have not been found in the ace2-binding interface.from the alignment of the spike protein sequences of sars cov-1 and sars-cov-2 (wuhan-hu1 and india), it can be observed that the three nucleotide-deletion in the case 1 sars-cov-2 from india, is located close to the insert 1 region of the sars cov-1 ( supplementary fig. 3 (available from http://www.ijmr.org.in/articles/2020/151/2/images/ indianjmedres_2020_151_2_200_281471_sm11.pd f )). notably, case 1 and case 2 were in close contact while travelling to india, but due to the absence of the complete genome of case 2, the genetic relatedness and source of infection could not be pinpointed. among the sars-cov structural proteins, the spike protein has been found to elicit neutralizing antibodies 24 . in this study, it was observed that of the five b-cell linear epitopes, which were predicted, four epitopes were present in the s1 domain and one in the s2 domain. prediction of conformational b-cell epitopes revealed that one of these (residue positions 341-505) in the spike protein incorporates two of the predicted linear epitopes (327-342 and 404-419) having good antigenicity along with a favourable ifn-γ response that enables differentiation and proliferation of the b-cells 25 . notably, an equivalent epitope (347-499) is predicted for the model generated using the sars-cov-1 s protein as a template. in both cases, this epitope lies within the rbd 6 . although the epitope has two putative n-linked glycosylation sites within it at positions 330 and 332, the probability of these sites being actually glycosylated is very low. a major immunodominant epitope has been reported from sars-cov between residues 441 and 700 26 . hence, the predicted b-cell conformational epitope identified in the present study may play an important role in initiating a b-cell response. among the five linear epitopes predicted in this study, epitopes 327-342 and 1204-1219 are conserved between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov-1. epitopes 243-258, 404-419 and 413-428 are found to have variations.the spike protein of sars-cov has also been reported to be immunogenic and elicit high ifn-γ-specific t-cell response 26 . the prediction results in this study revealed that nine possible ctl epitopes possessing good antigenicity and inducing ifn-γ response were present in the s protein. a recent report 27 also predicted t-cell epitopes in the s protein based on a similar ann/svm method and antigenicity score. although the ifn-γ response was not considered by these authors, it was noted that two of the predictions were found to be common. among the t-cell epitopes predicted in the present study, four epitopes 89-97 and 256-264 in the s1 domain and 825-833 and 1058-1066 in the s2 domain were found to have good ctl prediction scores with a broad hla allele coverage of a and b supertypes. these hla supertypes being predominant in the indian population, the predicted epitopes may be considered suitable for future experiments towards vaccine design.to conclude, the prompt intervention by the government of india and the health authorities of the state of kerala, ensured that the said cases did not become secondary foci of transmission. further, the timely identification of sars-cov-2 in these suspected cases by the icmr-niv, pune, has helped in the isolation of the patients, containment and enhanced surveillances for the virus and its restricted movement. the availability of the genomic sequences of the identified cases will contribute to the public repositories and help towards the development of diagnostics, vaccines and antivirals. the sequence data would also help in tracking the virus from its origin and evolution with its transmission in time. coronaviruses, a large family of viruses, causing upperrespiratory-tract infections in humans and other higher mammals (bedford et al., 2020) . coronavirus outbreak has been reported three times in the 21st century namely sars in 2002, mers in 2012, and covid-19 in november 2019. the recent outbreak of covid-19 caused by sars-cov-2 has emerged from china. human-human transmission of this highly infectious zoonotic virus has led to exponential growth in the number of infected cases, which resulted in its pandemic outbreak worldwide (fahmi, 2020) . currently, more than 225 countries are affected due to covid-19 with more than 2.5 million people to date which is increasing in thousands per day around the world and approximately 5 to 10% mortality rate (fahmi, 2020) . additionally, the lives of millions of people have been impacted due to mandatory lockdowns, isolations, and quarantines. thus the severe effect of the covid-19 outbreak has imposed major challenges for global health, society and economy (fry, 2020) . currently, there are no specific antiviral drugs or vaccines available for the treatment and management of covid-19, which is further making the situation difficult to handle. at present preventive and supportive therapies are being implemented to prevent complications (salata et al., 2020) . several efforts are going on to target key proteins of sars-cov-2 pathogenesis like the main protease (m pro ), rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), rna binding n terminal domain (ntd) of nucleocapsid protein (n protein), viral ion channel (e protein), 2 0 -o-ribosemethyltransferase and human angiotensinconverting-enzyme 2 receptor (hace-2) gupta et al., 2020; khan et al., 2020; sarma et al., 2020; shang et al., 2020; zhang et al., 2020) . to propose or repurpose drug and/or lead molecules against sars-cov-2, it would be effective to target multiple virus pathogenesis specific proteins within a close network of interaction or having dependent functionality (zhou et al., 2020) .for drug discovery purposes, the m pro of coronaviruses has been studied extensively. they are papain-like proteases involved in the self-maturation and processing of viral replicase enzymes . m pro has 11 putative cleavage sites in 790 kd replicase lab indicating its predominance in the proteolytic processing of large polyprotein lab. m pro from sars-cov-2 showed high sequence identity and structural similarity to that of the sars-cov m pro . it contains two catalytic domains, i (chymotrypsin) and ii (picornavirus 3 c protease-like) each containing six-stranded antiparallel b-barrel containing active diad h41 and c145. since they have a key role in virus replication, these proteases have emerged as important drug targets. furthermore, with their very low similarity with human proteases, inhibitors of m pro are found to be very less cytotoxic (anand et al., 2003; zhang et al., 2020) . preliminary studies have suggested the potential use of protease inhibitor lopinavir/ritonavir, commonly used drugs for human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), for the treatment of covid-19 patients muralidharan et al., 2020) . unfortunately, in the open-label randomized clinical study, these drugs are not found to be that impressive for covid-19 treatment. additionally, several other viral protease inhibitors like hcv protease inhibitor danoprevir, hiv protease inhibitor darunavir are under in vivo and clinical studies for the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection (dong et al., 2020) . to find new or repositioning existing drug molecules, the understanding of sequence and structure of sars-cov-m pro in regards to various other coronavirus strains could be important. their comparative understanding is enigmatic, which could be important to repurpose available antiviral protease inhibitors against sars-cov-2 m pro .coronavirus uses a multiprotein complex to replicate its rna based genomes. cleavage of viral polyproteins (orf1a and orf1b) produces a set of non-structural proteins (nsp). of these, rdrp or nsp12 catalyzes the synthesis and is known to play an important role in the replication and transcription cycle of the virus. rdrp is a primary target for nucleotide analog antiviral inhibitors such as remdesivir, a drug under evaluation for sars-cov2 infection in clinics imbert et al., 2006) . remdesivir, a nucleotide analog, has shown broad-spectrum antiviral activities, and preclinical studies have also shown promising human safety data (amirian & levy, 2020; dong et al., 2020) . recently, a report suggested that the significant inhibition of rdrp of sars-cov-2 by remdesivir, and clinical studies for the same are ongoing to evaluate the efficacy of this molecule in the covid-19 patients (www.clinicaltrials.gov; study no: nct04280705) .apart from the maturation and replication, the entry of this virus by binding its surface spike protein to the hace-2 is also a crucial process that can be targeted (hasan et al., 2020; kuhn et al., 2004; shang et al., 2020) . since this host cell receptor is essential for the virus entry; targeting hace-2 has a promise for preventing sars-cov-2 infection. it has been shown that clinically approved serine protease inhibitor (tmprss2) can also bind to the sars-cov-2 receptor hace-2 and inhibit viral entry (hoffmann et al., 2020) . to date, the chinese clinical trial registry has recorded around 550 trials against sars-cov-2, mostly evaluating existing drug molecules. these trials include the application of antiviral (favipiravir, adalimumab, dihydroartemisininpiperaquine, leflunomide, lopinavir), antimalarial drugs (chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine), high-dose vitamin c, etc (www.chictr. org.cn/index.aspx). from the available data of experimental and clinical studies, it has been found that molecules targeting single protein will be ineffective antiviral lead. thus, to devise an effective strategy, there is a need for molecules that can target multiple key proteins such as rdrp and hace-2 along with the m pro as a major drug target .in silico screening of the drugs is a very vital and useful tool for rapid screening. this enables to shortlist leads and thus meet the urgent demand for repurposing drugs for the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection. therefore, in this study, we have performed a comparative analysis of the major target of sars-cov-2, m pro for its structural characteristics to other viruses from the coronoviridea family. this information was further used for the virtual screening of the custommade library of phytochemicals, active ingredients present in the commonly used ayurvedic anti-tussive medicines in india, and the synthetic anti-viral drugs against m pro . top hit molecules from this screen were then docked against sars-cov-2 rdrp and hace2 to find the multi-target-directed molecules. we believe that this study will provide a new approach and a base for the discovery of multi-targeted antiviral molecules against sars-cov-2 pathogenesis. thus these compounds could be potential candidates for in vitro and in vivo antiviral studies followed by clinical treatment of sars-cov-2.2.1. main protease shows divergence due to sequence variation phylogenetic analysis of proteases (m pro ) helped to understand the structural-functional variation of sars-cov-2 concerning other viruses from the coronaviridae family ( figure  1a ). this analysis suggested that the m pro 's from the coronaviridae family are distributed in five clusters. it has been observed that these proteases are separated in different clades depending on their zoonotic sources. in the clade 1 (orange colour), which appears to be the ancestral clade in the phylogenetic tree have sequences from porcine transmissible gastroenteritis and pandemic diarrhea coronavirus. this clade appears to be evolutionary primitive to avian coronavirus but also showed coevolutionary traits. in the clade 2 (cyan), most of the sequences are from the strains of avian infectious bronchitis virus. it is then followed by clade 3 (blue), which mainly consists of the sequences from different strains of bat coronavirus. it is also found to be the parental clade for the clade 4 (red) and the clade 5 (green), which consist of predominantly mammalian host coronaviruses. it is interesting to see that the clade 4, which comprises viruses from bats and the majority of human infectious coronaviruses like sars, mers and also recent sars-cov-2. our phylogenetic analysis revalidated the bat origin of the sars-cov-2 (andersen et al., 2020) . while the clade 5 has sequences from bovine coronaviruses, it also has subclades that are indicative of a distinct host range. part of the clade 5 is from the bovine coronavirus and the other part is from murine coronavirus. between these two subclades, there is a set of sequences that forms clad 5.2 comprises of human coronaviruses like strain oc43 (p0c6u7) and hku1 (p0c6x3) which have bovine or murine as primary or intermediate host ( figure 1a ). as evident in the multiple sequence alignment (supplementary figure 1) , the m pro sequences from various coronaviruses strains showed very high conservation in the active site. also, sequences of m pro from isolates of sars-cov-2 viral strain showed high identity. however, the sequence variation around the active site can lead to the separation of these proteases in distinct clades depending on their hosts. furthermore, the sequence similarity network (ssn) analysis was carried out to understand the similarities in m pro sequences from viruses of the coronaviridae family. it was noted that till e-value 1e-80, all the sequences were clustered together suggesting an extremely high sequence similarity amongst all the coronaviridae proteases (supplementary figure 2) . at e-value 1e-140, the sequences were segregated in 5 clusters ( figure 1b) . the largest cluster (green) consisted of sequences from bovine coronavirus, murine coronavirus and some human coronavirus such as oc43 and hku1. the second cluster (orange) exclusively consisted of the porcine coronaviruses and related strains. bat coronaviruses were grouped in a single cluster (blue), while cyan cluster housed avian coronaviruses. the red cluster consisted of human coronaviruses including sars, mers, sars-cov-2 along with various other bat coronaviruses. the small cluster of 2 sequences that separated from the red cluster at e-value 1e-125 also belongs to the bat coronaviruses. the clusters of ssn are showing a high correlation with the clades of the phylogenetic tree ( figure 1a ) suggesting high evolutionary divergence amongst the coronaviruses depending on their host reservoir. this high specificity of the variations related to the host might have resulted from the natural selection in the animal hosts before human transmission (andersen et al., 2020) .a comparison of 49 structures of m pro from different coronavirus strains using the dali server showed five clusters similar to the phylogenetic tree ( figure 2a ; supplementary data 1). clusters 1 to 3 contains protease structures from porcine transmissible gastroenteritis and pandemic diarrhea coronavirus. also, they include the m pro structure from human coronavirus strains like nl63 and huk. furthermore, clusters 4 and 5 mostly consist of protease structures from the coronavirus strains causing respiratory infections like sars, mers and sars-cov-2. the structural similarity matrix with hierarchical clustering also corroborates with the phylogenetic tree and structural cladogram showing the classification of m pro in five major clusters ( figure 2b ). these results indicate that sequence variations in the m pro are also reflected in the structural variations resulting in similar clustering at the sequence and structure level.structural superimposition of representative proteases from each cluster of the structure cladogram and the similarity matrix depicted that the backbone of these proteases is figure 1a and b), similar to that observed in phylogenetic analysis, indicating that the sequence variations also depict in the structural analysis of proteases. (c) structural superimposition of selected proteases from coronaviridae family, showed rmsd <1å and the high conservation of the backbone structure (d) superimposition of the active site and binding site residues displayed conservation of active site pocket shape despite few differences in the residues. this indicated that the substrate recognition and binding efficiency or function of the m pro are conserved across the virus family. conserved with rmsd less than 1 å in the majority of cases ( figure 2c ). it suggests that the sequence variation leads to minor structural changes without major changes in the conformation. furthermore, a comparison of the substrate-binding pocket of these selected proteases shows that active site residue conformation is highly conserved ( figure 2d ). there are some variations in the binding pocket residues as shown in the multiple sequence alignment, but these variations are subtle, and overall binding pocket conformation is conserved. structural conservation of backbone and binding pocket of m pro from various coronavirus strains suggest that substrate recognition and inhibitor binding would more or less likely to be similar in them. hegyi and ziebuhr (2002) have shown the conservation in the substrate specificities and proteolytic processing of replicase polyproteins in the main proteases across coronaviruses (hegyi & ziebuhr, 2002) .this similarity highlights the development of universal m pro assays and the design of broad-spectrum inhibitors of m pro from different coronavirus strains. this also suggests that the m pro inhibitor-based drug repositioning would be the rapid and near to accurate approach to screen the drugs against sars-cov-2 infection.besides structural conservation, it is important to understand inter-secondary elements and inter-residue contacts within the protein to unravel the mechanism of these proteases. secondary structure topology indicates that proteins are asymmetrically populated by the beta-sheets at the n-terminus and helix at c-terminus ( figure 3a ). the chord plot between pairs of secondary structural elements (arc of a circle) displays the number of interactions (chord thickness) between the corresponding elements. in m pro , the contacts between the secondary structural elements indicated that the majority of contacts are present in the n-terminus betasheets, which makes the juxtaposed beta barrels connected with the loop that harbors substrate binding site. whereas, c-terminus globular cluster of helix showed comparatively less number of contacts indicating the rigid nature of these helix cluster involved in the protease dimerization ( figure 3b ). inter-residue contact map showed that the population of inter-residue contact is far denser in the first 200 amino acids, which consist of beta barrels having the catalytic role. while c-terminus residues show less we observed that beta-sheets exhibit more contacts than helices (c) inter-residue contact map within the m pro . it shows the presence of more interactions in the first 200 residues i.e. towards n-terminus that mainly forms active sites (d) superimposed topology with colours corresponding to secondary structure elements (e) root means square fluctuations of the residues from its mean position. high fluctuation (1 å<rmsf) is seen in the n-terminus as compared to c-terminal. active site residues (h41, c145) are highlighted and they showed less fluctuation.number of contacts suggesting the involvement of this part of the protein (globular cluster of helices) in a structural role ( figure 3c ). to validate the flexibility of the beta-barrels, the normal mode simulation was performed to map the root means square fluctuations of the residues from its mean position. structural trajectory and the fluctuation map indicate that most of the residues present in the beta barrels have fluctuation above 1 å, while the c-terminus is mostly rigid with very few residues having fluctuation above 1 å ( figure 3d and 3e) . though the n-terminus show high fluctuations, the active sites (h41 and c145) showed very less variation, which is important to maintain the required conformation of these residues in the substrate-binding pocket.the high frequency of inter secondary elements and residue contacts in the n terminus might provide structural flexibility for the proteolytic processing of large replicase polypeptide and they are potential sites to be targeted while designing or screening the inhibitors (c. li et al., 2016) .showed higher affinity for the active site of sars-cov-2 m pro and other targetsscreening of the custom made the library of $7100 molecules comprising of different types such as flavonoids, glucosinolates, anti-tussive, anti-influenza, anti-viral, terpenes, terpenoids, alkaloids and other know and/or predicated anti-sars-cov-2 molecules was done against sars-cov-2 m pro as the main target (supplementary data 2). sequence similarity search of m pro against human protein sequences was performed, which suggests that the viral proteases do not have any homolog in the human, thus targeting m pro will be specific to viral proteases only. docking analysis results demonstrated that several phytochemicals and anti-viral have strong binding in the active site of sars-cov-2 m pro . the selected molecules also displayed a high binding affinity to sars-cov-2 rdrp and hace-2 (supplementary data 3). likewise m pro , other viral targets considered in this study, rdrp, also showed that there is no human homolog present, thus could be a potential viral target with m pro . top molecules with the highest binding energy and with acceptable absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (adme) criteria were further selected for interaction analysis ( figure  4 ). to validate our docking strategy and obtained outcomes we have used a set of known or predicted anti-sars-cov-2 molecules reported from the literature . for further interaction analysis, we have selected the molecules with a high binding score against all the targets. also, we have taken into account of earlier reports that support the antiviral properties of these molecules against different viruses. as one of the symptoms of covid-19 is cough, a library of ayurvedic anti-tussive molecules in indian medicine (82 molecules) are screened against sars-cov-2 m pro . the resulting top 20 molecules were further screened against other targets-rdrp and hace 2 receptors. amongst these molecules, d-viniferin, chrysanthemin, myritilin and myricitrin showed strong binding with sars-cov-2 m pro . the d-viniferin and myricitrin showed high solubility and bioavailability in computational adme analysis; thus, analyzed for intermolecular interaction. with sars-cov-2 m pro , d-viniferin exhibited binding energy of -8.4 kcal/mol with several noncovalent interactions in the active site and substrate-binding site. thr24 and his163 form polar contact with hydroxyl groups of d-viniferin, while active site residue his41 shows pi-pi interaction with the central aromatic scaffold of a ligand. apart from this, met165 is involved in pi-sulfur interaction with ligand and other residues from the substratebinding pocket, which are involved in either attractive van der waal interaction or carbon-hydrogen bond ( figure 5a ). in addition to m pro , d-viniferin appeared to have a strong binding with the sars-cov-2 rdrp and hace2 receptor with a score of -8.3 and -8.4 kcal/mol, respectively. in the case of rdrp, binding pocket residues ala762, trp800, ser814 showed hydrogen bonds with the hydroxyl group of the ligand. while, active site and other key residues namely arg553, asp618, asp623 and asp761 display pi interactions with the aromatic scaffolds of d-viniferin.the high density of these intermolecular non-covalent interactions is an indicator of strong and specific binding of d-viniferin with rdrp active pocket. furthermore, hydroxyl and aromatic groups of d-viniferin also interacts through polar contacts and pi-alkyl interaction with the glu35, leu39, lys68 and ala71 residues of hace-2 ( figure 5b and 6c). the interaction of d-viniferin with m pro , rdrp and hace-2 suggests its high potential as a multi-target directed ligand against sars-cov-2. d-viniferin is a resveratrol dimer, a major stilbene produced by stressed grapevine leaves (aresta et al., 2003) . it is also one of the major stilbenes present along with resveratrol in the red wine (vitrac et al., 2005) . previous studies have also suggested that d-viniferin shows potent antiviral activity against a variety of viruses viz. rotavirus (b. yu et al., 2018) , human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) (pflieger et al., 2013) ; hepatitis c virus (hcv) (lee et al., 2019) .another anti-tussive molecule, myricitrin, found to have a strong binding with the active site residues of the m pro with a binding score of -8.9 kcal/mol. active site residues his41 and cys145 form pi-alkyl and pi-sulfur interactions with the aromatic scaffold of ligand, respectively. tyr54, phe140, gly143, his163 and glu166 are involved in the formation of 6 hydrogen bonds with hydroxyl and carboxyl oxygen of ligand. apart from this, there are other additional interactions like van der waals forces that stabilize the binding of the ligand to the enzyme ( figure 5d ). myricitrin exhibited equally strong interaction with rdrp and hace-2 with a binding score of -7.9 and -7.5 kcal/mol, respectively. for rdrp, the carboxyl group of myricitrin forms two hydrogen bonds with arg553, arg555 and thr556. while the active site residue asp623 is having pi-anion interaction with the aromatic rings of the ligand. similarly, this ligand binds to hace-2 by forming polar interaction with ala348, phe390, arg393 and asn394. this interaction is then further stabilized by pi-stacking of phe40 and pi-anion interactions of asp350, asp382 with aromatic rings of the ligand ( figure 5e and f) .myricitrin is a glycosylated analog of myricetin, present in the myrica esculenta. although in our docking study, myricetin has shown relatively lesser binding affinity when compared to myricitrin, previous studies have shown that it possesses potent antiviral activity. myricetin inhibited vp35 protein with double-stranded rna interaction in ebola virus (daino et al., 2018) . the glycosylated myricetin, i.e. myricitrin has been found to inhibit hiv (ortega et al., 2017) , herpes simplex virus , sars coronavirus yu et al., 2012) .together, our results suggest that d-viniferin and myricitrin could be potent molecules for the mitigation of sars-cov-2. interestingly, top anti-tussive molecules in the present study mainly d-viniferin, chrysanthemin, myritilin and myricitrin are present in the extract of black grapes, which is one of the key ingredients of ayurvedic antitussive medicines, and energy and immune booster, chyawanprash (georgiev et al., 2014) . thus, these medicines could be helpful in the management and mitigation of covid-19. particularly, the herbal formulation and beverages containing vitis vinifera might be helpful in the management of covid-19.the tapping of natural molecule libraries to predict inhibitors of m pro showed that several active biomolecules from different medicinal plants have a strong affinity against sars-cov-2 m pro . the flavonoid group of compounds showed a high binding score with all three targets suggesting this group of phytochemicals most bioactive against sars-cov-2 infection. one of the molecules from this type, taiwanhomoflavone a, isolated from cephalotaxus wilsoniana showed a strong binding affinity with m pro (-9.6 kcal/mol). in silico adme study indicated that this molecule possesses high bioavailability and likeliness to be the lead like compound. interaction analysis depicted that reactive groups of taiwanhomoflavone a form of hydrogen bonds with thr199 and stabilizing forces are provided by electrostatic interaction with leu189 residue of m pro . the bulkiness of this ligand leads to a large area of interaction that may lead to a higher contribution of attractive van der waal's force between ligand and binding site residues ( figure 5g ). furthermore, taiwanhomoflavone a also showed extremely strong binding with the rdrp and hace2 receptor, with a binding score of -9.8 kcal/mol and -7.8 kcal/mol, respectively. the rdrp binding pocket residues lys621 and trp800 showed hydrogen bonds with the carboxyl group of the ligand. while, active site residues namely asp760 and asp761 form pi interactions with the aromatic groups of taiwanhomoflavone a. in the case of hace-2, taiwanhomoflavone a makes polar contact with glu75 and pi interaction with glu35 ( figure 5h and i). taiwanhomoflavone a has been explored for its anticarcinogenic, anti-inflammatory and anti-neoplastic properties (kuo et al., 2002) . it would be interesting to consider this molecule further for anti-viral evaluation in vitro and in vivo.in the terpenoids group, lactucopicrin 15-oxolate, a derivative of lactucin and oxalic acid showed higher interaction. the lactucarium compounds are found in lactuca virosa (wild lettuce) and also in the latex of lactuca species. the lactucopirin 15-oxolate has a binding energy of -8.2 kcal/mol with m pro by the virtue of three hydrogen bonds to ser144, gly143, and cys145 of the active site. it also showed a high binding affinity with rdrp and hace2 receptor with the binding score of -7.6 kcal/mol and -8.3 kcal/mol, respectively ( figure 5j ). with rdrp lactucopirin 15-oxolate makes hydrogen bonds at arg553, arg555, and thr556 residues, and it is stabilized by hydrophobic interactions of asp623 and thr687 ( figure 5k ). in the case of the hace2 receptor, it forms three hydrogen bonds with residues ala99, tyr385, asn394 and pi-stacking interaction with phe40 ( figure 5l ). the lactucopicrin and lactucin are known for their anti-malarial activity (bischoff et al., 2004) . based on the in silico adme studies, the compound is found to be highly soluble, bioavailable, and high gi absorption criteria which can be utilized for further drug development against novel-sars-cov-2. apart from this, biorobin, pedunculagin, afzelin, hysperidin, baicalin and other several molecules from alkaloid, flavonoids, and terpenoid that showed strong interaction with sars-cov-2 targets (table 1; supplementary data  3) . these findings highlight that the traditional medicines and/or nutraceuticals along with synthetic drug molecules could be effective ways to tackle covid-19.drug re-purposing is a strategy to investigate existing drugs for new uses. the advantage of repurposing is that the drugs are preclinically approved, and it helps in the formulation and development of the drug in ease. in this case, we have used the existing anti-influenza and anti-viral drugs to study the treatment strategy for the sars-cov-2. we screened 17 compounds and found a macrocyclic derivative nympholide a, a phytochemical present in the aquatic plant of nymphaeaceae family (elegami et al., 2003) . it showed the highest binding energy with m pro and rdrp with a score of -7.8 and -9.3 kcal/mol, respectively. m pro residues met165, glu166, leu 167 have hydrogen bond interaction with the ligand. in the case of rdrp, residues lys551, arg553, lys798, tyr 619 side chains have strong hydrogen bonding with the ligand and glu811 makes the pi-anion interaction which improves the binding in rdrp compared to protease. the hace2 receptor has fewer interacting residues, as a result, shows a weaker affinity to nympholide a (supplementary figure 3 a-c).in the case of antiviral compounds, saquinavir has the highest binding energy with m pro (-9 kcal/mol). rdrp and hace2 targets have a binding energy of -8.7 and -7.5 kcal/ mol, respectively. saquinavir aromatic scaffold makes pi-sulfur and pi-pi stacking interaction with the met49 and his41 residues of m pro . these interactions help in strong binding to protease active site and further the interaction is stabilized by hydrogen bonding of gly143, ser144, cys145, glu166 of m pro residues (supplementary figure 3 d) . similar to protease, the viral rdrp also have aromatic pi-alkyl and pi-anion interaction with arg624 and arg553 residues. the hydrogen bonding of asp618, lys551, lys 621 residues of rdrp with the hydroxyl group of ligand give similar stability to protease. the hace2 showed pi-pi stacking interaction of phe40, phe390 and one hydrogen bond of asn394 with the ligand (supplementary figure 3e and f). saquinavir has been known to inhibit the hiv-1 protease. in our study, the saquinavir has higher interaction with protease compared to rdrp and hace-2 (stefanidou et al., 2012) . as there are other viral protease inhibitors like danoprevir, ritonavir and lopinavir are being tested in clinical trials for potential treatment against sars-cov-2, it would be interesting to consider saquinavir for further studies . this study provides a comprehensive overview of the structural characteristics of the coronaviridea proteases and their potential inhibitors. phylogenetic and ssn network analysis has illustrated the divergence in the proteases depending on their host reservoir suggesting the role of natural selection of host in conditioning the virus. structural comparison depicted that the high structural similarities in the backbone and substrate binding pocket indicating conservation in the substrate specificities over different strains of coronavirus. asymmetrical structural flexibility in the m pro might be crucial for its activity, thus it can be targeted for inhibition. the structural similarity in the binding pocket assisted the prediction of repositioning of known protease inhibitors as sars-cov-2 m pro . several molecules were identified as of the potent sars-cov-2 m pro inhibitors like delta d-viniferin, myricitrin, chrysanthemin, myritilin, taiwanhomoflavone a, lactucopicrin 15-oxalate, nympholide a, afzelin, biorobin, herperidin and phyllaemblicin b. these molecules also equally showed strong binding with other targets of sars-cov-2, like rdrp and hace-2 ( figure 6 ). interestingly, most of the potential lead natural molecules of our study are antitussive and anti-virals, thus we speculate that the herbal formulation containing these bioactive phytochemicals might be applicable in the management of covid-19. these molecules could be potential lead molecules for multi-targeted drug development against sars-cov-2.the amino acid sequences of main proteases from the coronaviridae family were retrieved from the uniprotkb database (www.uniprot.org) depending on their similarity with covid-19 m pro . the criteria for the selection of the sequences were more than 90% coverage and similarity more than 50%. a total of 57 sequences (supplementary data 4) were selected for the phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood (ml) method using mega6 software (tamura et al., 2013) . jones-taylor-thornton (jtt) model was used for amino acid substitution with a bootstrap value of 1000. the ml tree was developed with a heuristic method with nearest-neighbor-interchange (nni) as a model. tree representation was done using figtree v1.4.4 software (http://tree. bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/). ssn was carried out using ssnpipe (https://github.com/ahvdk/ssnpipe). the protocol was followed as per the online manual (https://github.com/ ahvdk/ssnpipe/wiki/ssnpipe-usage-examples) (halary et al., 2010) . the networks generated were visualized using cytoscape 3.7.2 (manual, 2018) .the crystal structure of sars-cov-2 m pro (pdb id: 6y2e) is compared with the 49 crystal structure of the proteases from various coronaviruses (supplementary data 1) using the dali server with all against all option (holm & rosenstr€ om, 2010) . the dendrogram was built based on similarity z-score and the similarity matrix was built based on structural conservation. representation of the similarity matrix was obtained using multiple experimental viewer (mev) software. furthermore, the hierarchical clustering of the similarity matrix was performed and compared with the dendrogram. anti-viral nymphaea odorata figure 6 . schematic representing multi-target-directed drug ligands against sars-cov-2 infection.representative structure from each cluster was then superimposed and compared with covid m pro using matchmaker in chimera 1.10.2 software. the structural backbone and active site conservation representation was obtained by chimera 1.10.2 software (pettersen et al., 2004) .secondary structure topology and the non-covalent contact in covid m pro was analyzed by the protein contact atlas tool (https://www.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/rajini/index.html) (kayikci et al., 2018) . topology and the chord plot of m pro are obtained as server output. inter-residue contacts were analyzed by the fast coarse-grained protein dynamics simulation using the cabs-flex server (http://biocomp.chem.uw.edu.pl/cabsflex2/) (jamroz et al., 2013) . the output trajectory of the cabs-flex server was used to plot the fluctuation map of m pro .phytochemicals belonging to alkaloids, flavonoids, glucosinolates, phenolics, terpenes and terpenoids were prepared using available structures from pubchem (kim et al., 2018) . similarly, a library of active ingredients from the plants used in ayurvedic antitussive medicine was prepared. this library was further enriched with antiviral molecules available in pubchem, other databases and literature. we have also included several molecules that are predicted as anti-sars-cov-2 molecules in recent reports. all the molecules were checked for stereochemical properties and then converted to ã .pdbqt format using autodock tools (morris et al., 2009 ).this library was used for docking studies.crystal structure of liganded mpro (pdb id: 6y2f) and hace-2 complexed with viral spike protein (pdb id: 2ajf) was downloaded from the rcsb protein databank (shang et al., 2020; zhang et al., 2020) . water and other heteroatoms were deleted from these structures. grid for m pro was set around active site residues h41 and c145 with dimension on 36 â 56 x 40 å using the autogrid program of autodock tools (morris et al., 2009 ). the protein is converted to ã .pdbqt for further docking studies. a similar process was performed on sars-cov-2 rdrp crystal structure (pdb: 7btf) with a grid around the rna binding pocket with a dimension of 34 â 34 x 36 å . furthermore, hace2 was prepared for docking, with a grid dimension of 20 â 38 x 24 å around the viral spike protein recognition residues (k31, e35, d38, m82, k353) (shang et al., 2020) . these target molecules were then further used for virtual screening.4.6. virtual screening using autodock vina and adme studies prepared receptor molecules from the custom-made libraries were set for the virtual screening by autodock vina based lamarckian genetic algorithm (lga) parameter for ligand tethering of the proteins using 10 runs criteria (trott & olson, 2010) . top hits of ligands were selected based on their docking score against all targets namely, m pro , rdrp and hace2. a comparison of the docking score for these targets is represented as a heatmap of the binding score using mev software (http://www.tm4.org/). top ligands were then submitted to the swissadme server for in silico prediction of absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion parameters of these ligands (http://www.swissadme.ch/) (daina et al., 2017) . ligands with high solubility and bioavailability were further taken for the interaction analysis. ligand binding position and interaction analysis were performed using pymol visualization software (the pymol molecular graphics system, version 1.2r3pre, schr€ odinger, llc) and two-dimensional ligand interaction images are made using biovia discovery acid substitutions in its s protein receptor binding domain along with its switching host from civet to human 20 . moreover, two amino acid substitutions in the s protein's c-terminal of hku4, a bat beta-coronavirus, enable its entry to human cells and the same amino acid substitutions are also found in mars-cov 21 . furthermore, heptad repeat regions in c-terminal of mers-cov and related coronaviruses also play important roles in viral adaptive evolution 22 . in summary, those studies introduced above suggested that s protein plays a vital role in mers-cov's cross-species transmissibility. however, the evolutionary mechanism of how mers-cov's s and other proteins facilitated the cross-species transmission of mers-cov remains to be investigated.here, we performed a series of phylogenetic and bioinformatic analyses for mers-covs. we systematically investigated the recombination events in mers-covs, the potential transmission route of mers-covs in five different host species and the evolutionary pressure of each mers-cov's protein during cross-species transmission. our study might offer some insight in explaining the possible mechanism in mers-cov's adaptive evolution.epidemic description and phylogenetic analysis of mers-cov. by far, the largest mers-cov outbreak is in saudi arabia and almost all human cases have a direct or indirect link to arabian peninsula. in this study, we collected 74 human mers-cov whole genome sequences from 9 countries (supplementary table 1 ). the geographic distribution of these samples is shown in supplementary fig. 1a . the majority of them are from the countries in arabian peninsula (78.4%, 58/74) and more than half of them are from saudi arabia (64.9%, 48/74) (supplementary fig. 1a) . the peak season for mers is between april (26.5%) and may (25.0%) (supplementary fig. 1b) .based on the whole-genome alignment of our collected sequences (supplementary table 1 ), we performed the phylogenetic analysis for these sequences with two sras-covs serving as the outgroup. our phylogenetic tree shows that all camel and human mers-covs are clustered together. the bat and hedgehog mers-covs formed a basal paraphyletic group to all camel and human mers-cov clade (fig. 1a) . a single camel mers-cov isolated in egypt (gi: 589588051) forms a single basal clade to human and the other camel mers-covs (fig. 1b) . the human-camel mers-cov cluster can be further divided into two clades-clade a and clade b, as previously reported 16 . clade a contains four human strains isolated in jordan and saudi arabia while 70 human and 17 camel mers-covs are mixed in clade b. there are five groups in clade b and we named them as group i to group v as the previous study 15 . there are 25, 17, 14, 2 and 29 mers-cov sequences in group i to group v, respectively (fig. 1b) .we performed the recombination analysis on the collected full-length mers-cov sequences. we find that there are 28 of them experienced potential recombination events (30.4%, 28/92), including three camel mers-covs and 25 human mers-covs (supplementary table 1 ). we divided 28 potential recombinant sequences into seven different types and named them as type 1 to type 7 ( fig. 1b- table 1 ). type 1 means the recombination happened between group ii and group v, which includes 3 sequences and is about 11% of total recombinant sequences. type 2 means the recombination happened between group iii and group v, which includes 6 sequences (22%). interestingly, the mers-covs newly found in 2015 in south korea and china are type 2 recombinants 15, 23 . type 3 means the recombination happened between group i and group iii, which includes 2 sequences (7%). type 4, 5 and 6 are the recombination happened between different genomic regions of group iv and group v, which include 7, 4 and 4 sequences (25%, 14% and 14%), respectively. type 7 is the recombination happened among three groups (group i, iv and v), which includes 2 sequences (7%). our phylogenetic analysis showed type 1 belongs to phylogenetic group ii while type 2 and 3 belong to phylogenetic group iii, and type 4 to 7 belong to phylogenetic group v. there is no recombination found in phylogenetic group i and group iv (fig. 1b) . we also reconstructed the phylogenetic tree using non-recombinant sequences only and found that its topology is consistent with the tree based on all sequences (supplementary fig. 2) . we also performed the snp (single-nucleotide polymorphisms) analyses for each recombinant types and found the large recombination segments in type 2, 4, 6, 7 are conspicuous but in type 1, 3, 5 are obscure (supplementary fig. 3 ).in order to explore the selection pressure on the mers-cov proteins when it transmitted from animal host to human, we performed the adaptive evolution analyses for all mers-cov protein in absence of recombinant strains. firstly, we set camel and human mers-covs as the foreground branch and bat and hedgehog mers-covs as the background branch to preform branch-site test in codeml of paml program (see fig. 1a ). the strong positive selection is detected in spike (s) glycoprotein between these two branches (p < 0.001), while there is no significant positive selection in the other mers-cov genes ( table 1) . we find nine positive selection sites in mers-cov spike (s) glycoprotein and eight of them are statistically significant (table 1) . six significant positive selection sites are located in the receptor binding domain of s protein (fig. 2a) . we utilized a published crystal structure (pdb id 4l72 in rcsb protein data bank), the receptor binding domain (rbd, aa 367-606, fig. 2b ) of mers-cov spike glycoprotein complexed with the human receptor dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (ddp4), to demonstrate their locations in a 3d environment (fig. 2b) . the receptor binding domain of mers-cov s protein can be further divided into a receptor-binding sub-domain and a core sub-domain. two significant positive selection sites, k511r and g521n, are in the receptor-binding sub-domain and k511r is in direct contact with human receptor ddp4. q419s, g436n, d472s and r479l are in the core sub-domain. moreover, we also detected a positive selection site in s protein's c-terminal, l775s. secondly, we screened the positive selection sites among human-camel mers-covs (table 2 ). five significant (table 3 ). the genome-wide average nucleotide substitution rate of camel and human mers-covs was 4.81 × 10 −4 substitutions per site per year. open reading frame 3 (orf3) has the fastest substitution rate while orf5 has the slowest substitution rate. the orf4b, nucleocapsid (n) glycoprotein, and spike (s) glycoprotein, have a similar substitution rate which is faster than the whole-genome substitution rate.in order to study the temporal and spatial pattern of mers-cov transmission, a maximum clade credibility (mcc) tree was constructed using mers-cov whole genome sequences without recombinant strains (fig. 3c) . the ancestral host state with time reference was estimated for each tree node and marked with different colors. we named six important nodes in mers-cov divergence on mcc tree for node a to f (fig. 3c ). the possible transmission time for each node and its 95% highest posterior density (hpd) are shown in fig. 3b . we found that the origin time of human-camel mers-cov is relatively late (node d). furthermore, the tmrca for clade b is in ~2012 (fig. 3b , node f) and clade a and clade b are divergent in ~2011 (fig. 3b , node e). interestingly, the mcc tree shows that there are six cross-species transmission events with high posterior probabilities in clade b. five of them are human-to-camel transmission events and one of them are camel-to-human transmission events (fig. 3c ). additionally, with the mers-cov of human/camel and bat/hedgehog mers-cov together, we inferred the ancient mers-cov exists for decades of years (fig. 3b,c) . the tmrca of the mers-covs for vespertilio superans, neoromicia capensis or erinaceus europaeus can be traced back to 2006 (node c), 2003 (node b) and 1996 (node a), respectively. before the emergence of human-camel mers-cov, the estimated tmrca for all mers-covs appeared in ~1996 (fig. 2c , node a). we also preformed root-to-tip analysis using the consistent dataset (fig. 3a) , and the result shows that the origin time of tmrca is in ~1995 with high statistical supports (r 2 = 0.874, p value < 0.001). together these results suggest that the ancient mers-cov should have existed for decades in animal host and got the ability to infect human or camel recently.mers-cov belongs to coronavirus, beta-coronavirus, lineage c. since it was discovered in 2012, mers-cov has attracted extensive attention due to its human-to-human infection capability and high mortality rate. recombination events have been confirmed in human mers-cov 23 . the fact that mers-cov can be found in multiple species proposes its cross-species transmissibility [4] [5] [6] [7] 11 . by far, the evolutionary details of how mers-cov transmitted to human are still unknown. based on the most comprehensive collection of mers-cov genome sequences so far, we tried to elucidate the evolution and transmission of mers-cov among different species.mers-cov has been reported in five species including european hedgehog, two species of bats, dromedary camel, and human. we used the ml method to reconstruct the whole-genome phylogenetic tree of mers-covs isolated from these species. the ml tree shows that the hedgehog mers-covs are basal to all the other mers-covs and two bat mers-covs are basal to camel and human mers-covs. this result suggests that the ancestor of camel and human mers-covs may be from other animal host, such as the hedgehog or bat. we also reconstructed the phylogenetic tree of mers-cov using nj method or based on each mers-cov protein. these trees show a consistent topology, which proposes that the phylogenetic relationship estimated in our study is credible (supplementary fig. 5) .we divided clade b into five groups as pervious study to detect the recombination of mers-cov 15 . because the evolutionary distances among mers-covs are close (table 3) , no large segment recombination could be detected among them. thus, according to discontinuous recombination segments, we defined potential recombination events in mers-covs. this method has been used in the previous study to label potential recombination 24 . in our study, we found 28 strains form seven recombinant types, which took more than 30% of all isolated mers-covs in human and camel. among them, we found 26 strains in six recombinant types (type 1 to type 6) between two phylogenetic groups and two strains in one type (type 7) among three phylogenetic groups. for now, the recombination of mers-cov was confirmed in previous study, but no report about the recombination among more than two groups of mers-cov. interestingly, most recombinant types (type 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7) are related to group v and they make up 92.9% of total recombinant strains (26/28). the result suggests that recombination events might happen frequently and the recombinant types involving group v might happen broadly. additionally, multiple recombination events indicate that double infection and super infection likely existed during the transmission history of mers-cov. we failed to detect possible large recombination segments in type table 3 . evolutionary distance, nucleotide substitution rate and coefficient of variation of substitution rate for human and camel mers-cov proteins. 1, 3 and 5. by comparing the snps (single-nucleotide polymorphisms) of reference sequences with recombinant sequences, we reckoned that specific nucleotide mutation might influence the results of recombination analysis. this problem can be solved by discovering more mers-cov sequences or developing more detailed genotype classification for mers-covs in the future. we also performed phylogenetic analyses for potential recombinant region and got similar results (supplementary fig. 3) . interestingly, the east asian mers-cov strains (china and south korea) belong to type 2 recombinant and the previous study show that their tmrca might be a result of potential recombination event 23 , which indicates the recombinant strains have transmitted broadly. moreover, one recombinant mers-cov lineage has led to the large-scale outbreak in both camel and human 26 . it proposes that recombinant mers-covs have experienced cross-species infection. additionally, our study reveals that the number of recombinant strains is large and the potential recombinant types are abundant. together these findings highlight that we should take more attention to recombinant mers-cov transmission.although how the mers-cov transmitted from its natural host to human is still unknown, it is confirmed the mers-cov have been found in many animal hosts, such as bats and hedgehog. to study the evolutionary pressure on each mers-cov's protein during its potential cross-species transmission, we conducted a comprehensive scan for positive selection sites in mers-cov's proteins. recombinant strains were excluded in this analysis. we set camel-human mers-covs as the foreground branch and hedgehog-bat mers-cov as the background branch and estimated the relative evolutionary pressure on the foreground branch compared to the background branch. we only found that mers-cov's s protein underwent strong positive selection and there are nine significant positive selection sites in s protein. it suggests that s protein was under strong evolutionary pressure during the transmission from its natural host to human. among significant positive selection sites, six of them are located in s protein's receptor binding domain (rbd). rbd is crucial for virus to enter host cells and it comprises of one binding region and one core region. based on the rbd's 3d model, we find that two sites are located in the binding region of rbd, which suggests that these amino acid substitutions might change mers-cov's binding capability to host cells and thus facilitate its cross-species transmission. the other four sites are located in the core region of rbd. these amino acid substitutions might change the structure of core region and indirectly influence mers-cov's cross-species capability. in order to eliminate the sample bias between human/camel group and bat/hedgehog group, we also did random sampling for the 68 non-recombinant human and camel sequences. we tried 10, 20 and 50 random sampling, respectively. using random sampled sequences together with bat and hedgehog mers-cov sequences, we performed branch-site analyses and got the same results as our aforementioned (data not show).we also estimated the nucleotide substitution rates of camel-human mers-covs to investigate its evolutionary dynamics after it infected camel and human. our estimated nucleotide substitution rate for mers-cov's whole genome is 4.81 × 10 −4 , which is slower than the previous estimation 9 . one explanation for the phenomenon is that we used a larger dataset than the previous study, which includes all available mers-cov whole genome sequences. our estimated confidence interval of the substitution rate of mers-cov genome is largely overlapped with the result from another study 16 . the estimated nucleotide substitution rates show that four proteins experienced the accelerated evolution.through evolutionary pressure analysis, we found camel-human mers-cov's four proteins underwent positive selection and detected five significant positive selection sites. one of them is located in m proteins. there is evidence that m proteins are powerful interferon antagonist 26 , which proposes that the evolutionary pressure on m proteins are from host's immune system. two out of five significant sites are found in n protein which is fundamental for mers-cov self-assembly. coronavirus n protein is able to bind to different host cell proteins and demonstrated to have various functions, one of which is also counteracting host interferon as shown in sars-cov [27] [28] [29] [30] . it is reasonable to speculate that mers-cov n protein under intensive selection because its functions were similar to those of sars-cov n protein. the results above suggest that the arm race between mers-cov proteins and host's immune system might be the main evolutionary driving force behind mers-cov's adaptive evolution after it began to infect camel and human. mers-cov spike (s) glycoprotein evolves slightly faster than the genome-wide average rate, which indicates that the nucleotide substitution rate of mers-cov s protein still maintains a fast speed even after it crossed the species boundary. the positive selection site we found in mers-cov s protein with site-specific test is identical to the previous study's result 3 . this site is located in heptad repeats 1 which is a key component in membrane fusion architecture and required for mers-cov entering host cells 31 .in absence of recombinant strains, we performed the mcc analysis using mers-cov whole-genome sequences in order to infer the time and source species when mers-cov crossed the species boundary. the topology of the mcc tree is highly congruent with that of the whole-genome phylogenetic tree. we defined six nodes (a-f) to explain transmission. the posterior probability for the ancestral sate of node a, b or c is not very high in our mcc analysis and the 95% highest posterior density (hpd) of the divergence time for these three nodes is quite long. so these results are weak for demonstrating the exact origin time or ancestor state of mers-cov. however, these estimations still provided the evidence that the ancestor mers-cov should have been infected a number of animal hosts, such as bat or hedgehog, for decades of years (supplementary fig. 4) . the x-intercept (tmrca) in root-to-tip is ~1995 with high statistical supports, which is close to the estimated time of tmrca in mcc analysis. this hypothesis is in agreement with the result of serological studies 2,3 . the appearance of the common ancestor of human-camel mers-cov is in 2010 and the appearance of the tmrca of clade a and b is in 2011, which are exactly the same as the previous report 16 . in clade b, we detected five possible human-to-camel transmission events and one camel-to-human transmission event. it suggests that mers-cov frequently transmitted back and forth between human and camel after it acquired the capability of infecting both hosts. actually, there is at least one confirmed case of camel-to-human mers-cov transmission 32 .scientific reports | 6:25049 | doi: 10.1038/srep25049in conclusion, we found that potential recombination events are common in mers-cov's evolutionary history and potential recombinant mers-covs can be divided into seven types. the amino acid sites under positive selection in mers-cov s protein, especially those in its receptor binding domain, might have facilitated its cross-species transmission from animal host to human. we detected the strong positive selection in four proteins of camel-human mers-covs, which indicates that they probably experienced strong adaptive evolutionary pressure from host's immune system. additionally, we also found six possible cross-species transmission cases between human and camel. our study investigated the evolutionary dynamics of mers-cov, which shall provide a basis for mers-cov control and treatment.sequence data. the complete genomic nucleotide sequences of 91 mers-covs and two sars-covs were downloaded from ncbi nucleotide database. among 91 mers-cov genomic sequences, 68 of them are from human, 18 of them are from dromedary came, two of them from two bat species neoromicia capensis and vespertilio superans, and 3 of them are from european hedgehog erinaceus europaeus. two sars-cov genomic sequences are from human and bat rhinolophus ferrumequinum, respectively. we used sequences 453061240 as reference to extract open reading frames from each mers-cov genome in this study.genomic sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis. total 93 collected genomic sequences were aligned using the muscle software with default parameters 33 . clustalw and mafft used to validate the muscle result 34, 35 . alignments were refined manually in bioedit (http://www.mbio.ncsu.edu/bioedit/ bioedit.html). only unambiguously aligned positions were used for subsequent phylogenetic analyses (supplementary files). we used the jmodeltest 3.1 to estimate the best nucleotide substitution model for our alignment 36 , which is gtr+ i+ g. we used the phyml 3.1 to perform the phylogenetic analysis for 93 collected genomic sequences based on their genomic sequence alignment 37 . the branch support values were calculated with shimodaira-hasegawa test integrated in phyml.in clade b, we estimated the consensus sequences for every phylogenetic group using cons tool in emboss explorer (http://bioinfo.nhri.org.tw/cgi-bin/emboss/cons). five consensus sequences were set as reference and every sequence in clade b was used as the query to detect the possible recombination using simplot software 25 . the window is set to 200 bp and the step is set to 20 bp.positive selection analysis. we extracted the coding region of each mers-cov protein using mers-cov 453061240 strain as a reference template. the codeml program implemented in paml 4.7 package was used to detect the positive selection in the codon alignment of each mers-cov protein set 38 . in the branch-site model, the group of human-camel mers-covs was set to be foreground, the group of bat-hedgehog mers-covs was set to be background, and model a with estimated ω value was compared with the null model (model a') with fixed ω value. to reduce the bias from sample size, we performed random sampling on 68 human and camel mers-covs (clade a and b) which are all non-recombinant sequences. we used 10, 20 and 50 as the random sample size with and without replacement. the random sampled sequences together with bat and hedgehog mers-covs were used to generate the datasets for branch-site model analysis as aforementioned method (script see supplementary files). moreover, for each random sample size, we repeatedly drew five times in order to make results robust.we also used the site-specific model to detect positive selection in the human-camel clade. the site-specific model was performed by comparing the models m2a (positive selection) and m8 (beta & ω ) vs. the null modelsin the past, most studies of influenza were performed on a limited number of isolates and genes suited to a particular problem. major goals in science today are to understand emerging diseases in broad geographic, environmental, societal, biological, and genomic contexts. synthesizing diverse information brought together by various researchers is important to find out what can be done to prevent future outbreaks [jon03] . thus comprehensive means to organize and analyze large amounts of diverse information are critical. for example, the relationships of isolates and patterns of genomic change observed in large datasets might not be consistent with hypotheses formed on partial data. moreover when researchers rely on partial datasets, they restrict the range of possible discoveries.phylogenetics is well suited to the complex task of understanding emerging infectious disease. phylogenetic analyses can test many hypotheses by comparing diverse isolates collected from various hosts, environments, and points in time and organizing these data into various evolutionary scenarios. the products of a phylogenetic analysis are a graphical tree of ancestor-descendent relationships and an inferred summary of mutations, recombination events, host shifts, geographic, and temporal spread of the viruses. however, this synthesis comes at a price. the cost of computation of phylogenetic analysis expands combinatorially as the number of isolates considered increases. thus, large datasets like those currently produced are commonly considered intractable. we address this problem with synergistic development of heuristics tree search strategies and parallel computing.phylogenetics is the study of the evolutionary relationships of genes and organisms, thus providing a retrospective analysis of biological change and adaptation over time. phylogenetic trees are represented by acyclic graphs in which the leaves of these graphs represent the observed biological entities (taxa) being compared (e.g., sequences of genes, genomes, and/or anatomy of individuals, isolates or cultivars, species, or any higher level taxonomic unit). the internal nodes of the tree are interpreted as a nested set of hypothetical evolutionary ancestors of the entities under consideration as depicted in fig. 2 .1. once a tree is complete, changes such as mutations and host shift can be traced along branches of the tree that contain important disease causing strains. this retrospective analysis of features provides means of finding mutations that are diagnostic of pathogens, correlating phenotypes and genotypes, and predicting strains that are important for vaccine design.the classification of organisms dates back to aristotle [ari343] . however, it was only a few decades ago that the theoretical foundations of the field of phylogenetics as it is practiced today were established.the modern school of phylogenetics arose from the application of the ideas, termed cladistics, originally proposed by hennig [hen66] . cladistics lead v x w y p q fig. 2.1 . phylogenetic tree of four taxa labeled v, w, x, and y and two hypothetical ancestors labeled p and q biologists to use shared derived similarities (termed synapomorphies) that distinguish various natural groups of organisms. nested sets of natural groups of organisms based on synapomorphies are then used to discover the evolutionary relationships between organisms and reconstruct patterns of modification in the features of organisms. subsequently, these principles have been used to develop optimization techniques to find the most justifiable sets of synapomorphies in large datasets. optimization techniques are necessary with most large and real world datasets as they often contain several, often conflicting, evolutionary signals (treated below). in contrast, advocates of another way of thinking, termed phenetics [sne73] , group organisms based on gross measures of similarity. groups are based on measures evolutionary distance rather than the concept of shared derived characters. in modern practice, similarity methods espousing phenetic concepts are used in searches of nucleotide databases and some multiple alignment methods. clustering algorithms in which least distant groups are clustered first and then distant clusters are connected are termed distance methods, in phylogenetics. distance methods typically produce a single tree and cannot, on their own, trace patterns of change in the features of organisms as they convert raw data to distances. next we discuss how various viewpoints have influenced methods, algorithms, and implementations in phylogenetics.a wide variety of methods have been proposed in order to infer the phylogenetic relationships of organisms. most methods are based on minimizing edit cost (such as a hamming distance) to transform one string of nucleotides or organismal characters into another. phylogenetic methods can be further classified in two different categories: distance-based and character-based. in this paper, we compare and contrast the applications of distance and characterbased methods used in infectious disease research. we illustrate applications of these technique to study the evolutionary relationships of groups of rna viruses and the patterns of mutations and phenotypic changes that can be reconstructed.among the distance-based methods, the most commonly used is neighbor-joining [sai87] . distance based methods require a precomputed multiple alignment of dna or amino acid sequences drawn from homologous genes. the most similar pair of taxa (as represented by sequences) are clustered. the clustered pair is then considered as a single taxon and the next most similar pair of taxa is clustered until only the last taxon is joined and the tree is completed. although the use of distance-based methods is relatively common in analysis of organisms that cause infectious disease, several authors have criticized the performance of this method for phylogenetic reconstruction (see [far96] ). one strategic flaw of the method is that it is computationally greedy. distance methods form the most similar clusters instantaneously without considering locally suboptimal paths that may lead to a better global optimum.other methods of phylogenetic analysis focus on characters, which are typically polymorphisms, recognized in columns of aligned nucleotides or amino acids from sequences of interest or investigator encoded characters of polymorphic phenotypes.character-based methods seek to find the phylogenetic trees that optimize a particular criterion. major optimality criteria include parsimony [far83] and maximum likelihood [fel73, fel81] . bayesian analysis [ran96, li00, hue02] uses a maximum likelihood optimality criterion but incorporates the probability, termed the prior, that a hypothesis is correct in the absence of data.the unifying feature of character-based methods is that they examine many randomly generated trees each representing an evolutionary hypothesis of character transformations and organismal relationships. as a character based analysis progresses, edit costs are calculated for transformations that candidate tree imply and optimal trees are stored for further consideration and refinement. the concept of optimality can be associated with cladistics or maximum likelihood but not distance methods. distance techniques lack a measure of tree quality and means to compare trees.cladistics employs parsimony as an optimality criterion. the core concept of cladistics is that the least number of transformations in the data implies the most defensible hypothesis. in cladistics, various edit costs can be applied to different genomic and phenotypic transformations. in the case of weighted parsimony the goal of tree search is to minimize weighted costs.under the maximum likelihood criterion the probability of the data, given the tree, calculated with a model for nucleotide or amino acid substitution is optimized. the related technique of bayesian phylogenetic inference uses maximum likelihood to evaluate trees. bayesian analysis aims to capture a posterior probability distribution of trees. typically the results of a bayesian analysis are displayed not as an optimal tree but rather as the probability that a set of evolutionary relationships is "true," given the prior probabilities, the substitution model, and data.all character-based methods of molecular phylogenetics [cladistics, maximum likelihood (and related bayesian methods)] rely on explicit assumptions about ancestral character states to polarize transformations of phenotypes and genotypes that can be reconstructed from data. as an example of such assumptions, in character based analyses is the outgroup criterion (treated below). in contrast, distance based methods do not use an outgroup criterion. distance based methods do not use the outgroup criterion.parsimony is a widely used optimality criterion. this criterion is associated with the concept that simpler explanations provide for more supportable hypotheses. in phylogenetics, the most parsimonious tree(s) is that which implies the minimum number of transformations in sequence and/or phenotypic character states among organisms of interest. the biological justification of this use of parsimony is that descent with modification from a common ancestor is a primary pattern of organismal diversification and the record of transformations can be used to reconstruct that pattern. as such, the tree(s) that minimizes the overall number of independent transformations (convergences or reversals in character state) that are needed to explain the observed data are to be preferred [far83] . recombination and horizontal gene transfer as seen among rna viruses are violation of the assumption of ancestor to descendent evolution, not parsimony per se. some novel techniques for discovery and understanding of reassortment and horizontal gene transfer have been developed under the parsimony criterion [wan05, whe05] .the parsimony score for a tree is measured based on the number of transformations implied by the tree, known as the tree length [far70] . the tree length is the sum, over all edges, of the hamming distances between the labels at the endpoints of the edge [ric97] . the labels located at the leaves of the tree are the observed characteristics (either genotypic of phenotypic) of the organisms being analyzed. the internal nodes are labeled in order to minimize the tree length of each tree being evaluated.given a tree and a matrix of features or aligned sequences for each taxon, the tree length is calculated using the fitch algorithm [fit71] . this algorithm works in polynomial time with the amount of data being analyzed (both in the number of characters and taxa). thus for a sequence alignment of thousands of taxa, each of which is labeled with thousands of nucleotides, the tree length of a particular tree can be computed using modern implementations of the fitch algorithm [gol03] in fractions of a second.given a tree and a data matrix of sequences and features, the parsimony method can pinpoint the branches on which certain evolutionary events are inferred to occur between ancestor or descendent. in an infectious disease context, these events can be a shift by a viral lineage from animal to human host. in the case of standard nucleotide sequence analysis, transformation events include substitution mutations (replacement of a given nucleotide by other) and nucleotide insertions and deletion mutations. some analyses invoke more complex parsimony models with weighted recombination and horizontal transfer events, as well as differentially weighting certain classes of mutation such as transversions (pyrimidine-purine shifts), transitions (pyrimidine-pyrimidine or purine-purine shifts), or insertion-deletion events [whe05] .note that in using the fitch algorithm to optimize a phylogenetic tree, both the tree length and the branch in which a particular transformation event is inferred to occur can be calculated in unrooted or rooted trees. the results of these calculations are independent of the root chosen for the tree. for example, in an unrooted tree relating four taxa known from their nucleotide sequences (see fig. 2 .2), the fitch algorithm can be used to identify a specific branch of a tree in which a transformation occurs (e.g., a mutation between nucleotides c and t of the third sequence position occurring in the only internal edge of the tree in fig. 2.3) .however, the polarity of a transformation event is dependent on how the tree is rooted. inferring polarity of change requires an external criterion, termed the outgroup. in character-based methods explicit assumptions of ancestral character states are set up by the investigator via the designation of at least one taxon as the outgroup. a good outgroup is known to be closely related to the taxa of interest (termed the ingroup). however, the outgroup must be clearly not a member of the ingroup. the underlying logic of the outgroup criterion is that the transformation events that occurred at evolutionary origin of the ingroup can be identified by comparison to modern organisms of another clade but with which the ingroup shares a common ancestor. the common ancestor is a hypothetical organism that provides a baseline set of character states from which polarity determinations can be made. thus the outgroup method, like bayesian inference, incorporates some previous knowledge of the relationships of the organisms. if the phylogenetic results show that the ingroup includes some members of the outgroup the previous knowledge must be reevaluated. the outgroup taxon is included in the data matrix of the phylogenetic analysis and the entire data set is analyzed simultaneously. the phylogenetic position and relationships of the outgroup are determined by the optimality criterion. in the case of the parsimony method, the outgroup is treated as any other taxon and is positioned in the tree in the position that minimized tree length. once the phylogenetic affinities outgroup are established, the outgroup can be used to root the tree, and the polarities of the transformations can be established (note the unidirectional arrows in fig. 2.4) . if chosen carefully, the outgroup will not be clustered with any of the ingroup. model based methods can also be used in reconstruction of ancestral character states (e.g., [cha00, thr04] to communicate the choice of outgroup taxon or taxa and clarify the relationships of the taxa, character based trees are often drawn as directed acyclic graphs with the root positioned on the branch between the outgroup and ingroup.in the example diagrammed in fig. 2 .4, a mutation is inferred to occur in the third sequence position from the ancestral state of c to the derived state of t. the presence of a t in the third sequence position is a synapomorphy, a derived character state that can be used to distinguish the members of the group formed by the taxa w and y. in contrast, the presence of a c in the third sequence position in taxa x and v cannot be used to distinguish these taxa since a c is also present in the third position in the outgroup. in this case the third position c is a primitive similarity of x and y or a symplesiomorphy. the other mutations occurring in sequence positions 2, 5, and 6 are found only in one taxon and thus cannot be used to infer relationships. these are termed autapomorphies. sequence position 4 is inferred to have not changed in this example and is thus of no value in discovering groups. in cladistics only the shared derived characteristics, synapomorphies, are used to diagnose a group.although other criteria have been proposed to root phylogenetic trees, the outgroup criterion is the least arbitrary. as a result, outgroup rooting is widely used for character-based phylogenetic analyses [nix94] .problems of the outgroup criterion. as seen, the use of the outgroup taxon provides an informative way test hypotheses on the content of natural groups and to root the phylogenetic tree in a way that allows interpretation of the polarity of change of evolutionary events.however, the choice of an outgroup taxon is key to the success of this method. if the nucleotide sequences of a candidate outgroup are divergent from the sequences of the ingroup taxa, the phylogenetic position of the outgroup might be hard to establish [whe90] . therefore, the choice of the outgroup requires judicious selection and searches for organisms that (1) are safely outside the ingroup but (2) that have comparable data [whe90] .the cases shown in figs. 2.1-2.4 are based on the simplifying assumption that the genes sequenced for the taxa of interest have equal number of residues (i.e., amino acid or nucleotide sequences of the same length).frequently, in empirical studies of related organisms, homologous genes have sequences with different number of residues. sequence length variation occurs in both coding and noncoding loci. the causes can be genetic drift, mutation, recombination, or horizontal transfer events. the phylogenetic analysis of molecular sequences, like that of all other comparative data, is based on schemes of putative homology that are then tested via phylogenetic analysis. unlike some other data types, however, putative homologies in molecular data are not directly observable. sequences from various organisms are often unequal in length. hence, the correspondences among sequence positions are not evident and some sort of procedure is required to determine which regions are homologous. this procedure is typically multiple sequence alignment. alignment inserts gaps to make the putatively corresponding residue line up into columns. these columns (characters) comprise the matrix used to reconstruct cladograms. the matrix is then submitted to phylogenetic analysis in the same manner as other forms of data such as morphological characters scored by an investigator. thus the primary reason in phylogenetics to create an alignment has a strongly operational basis -to make it possible to submit these data to standard phylogeny programs that were designed to handle column vectors of morphological characters. nevertheless, alignment followed by tree search is the standard procedure.two major options are currently available to analyze sequence data in a phylogenetic framework: a twostep analysis or a one-step analysis.phylogenetic analysis of large genomic datasets can present several nested npcomplete problems: multiple alignment, tree-search, and in some cases, gene order and complement differences among organisms. just as in distance methods, in most character-based methods, alignments are precomputed before any phylogenetic analysis. the alignment procedure is usually done through algorithms that produce a matrix from the raw dna sequences of the organisms being analyzed (fig. 2 .5). this data set is then analyzed (second step) in order to find the optimal tree (see sect. 2.1.4).the multiple alignment procedure ranges from easy in many coding loci to very difficult in noncoding loci such as functional rnas and genes containing introns [mor97] . in the case of some protein coding loci the alignment may be a nonissue if there are no significant length differences in sequences. however, various investigators who employ different primer sets and editing styles often produce various length sequences. leading and trailing gaps produced by experimental artifact should not be counted in tree length calculations.results of multiple alignment of functional rnas and genes containing introns can be sensitive to parameter choices [fit83] . important parameters include the addition order of taxa, relative costs of various classes of mutations (transversions, transitions, insertion-deletion), and differential costs applied to opening or extending regions of insertion-deletions. analyses of different alignments of the same raw sequences can lead to different trees irrespective of tree search procedures [mor97] . in such cases investigators must search parameter space [whe95, phi00] or otherwise justify their assumptions during alignment [gra03] just as they are required to justify optimality criteria used during tree search.several researchers have noted that performing phylogenetic analysis into two steps is not consistent with the goals of finding the most parsimonious solutions due to the interdependence of multiple alignment and tree estimation [phi00, jan02] . in fact, popular multiple alignment programs such as clustal [tho94] use a guide tree used to construct the alignment. therefore, methods have been proposed to make a simultaneous estimation of the optimal sequence alignment and the optimal phylogenetic tree [san83] . a modern implementation of the one-step concept in poy [whe05] , termed direct optimization, allows unaligned sequence data to be analyzed without precomputing an alignment. in direct optimization, sequence data are aligned as various trees are built and their optimality is assessed. thus for each tree considered in a search, various sets of homology statements for the sequence data are considered. one advantage of direct optimization is that the outgroup need not be designated by the investigator. poy allows for randomization of the outgroup taxon and thus adds rigor to the search for optimal trees and homology statements. in some implementations of character-based methods where prealignment is necessary the outgroup can be randomized by scripting a series of analyses, e.g., tnt [gol03] . one important difference is that in molecular data a rigorous tree search with on a prealigned dataset with unordered characters should lead to the same tree length irrespective of outgroup choice; whereas in direct optimization the homology statements and hence tree length can be dependent on outgroup choice.several groups are developing algorithms for simultaneous estimation of alignment and phylogenetic trees. methods for a one-step phylogenetic analysis have been developed using maximum likelihood [tkf92, fle05] and parsimony optimality criteria [whe96] , as well as for bayesian analysis [red05] .although the one-step approach has the appeal of using a unified and epistemologically consistent method of alignment and tree estimation, the time and space requirements for computation are considerable. this problem of tree-based alignment is known to be np-complete [wan94] . in this situation, genes that vary in length (as most noncoding and intronic containing genes do) present a huge number of possible hypothetical ancestral sequences even for a single binary tree. during a phylogenetic analysis many trees will be examined and compared. for s taxa and l nucleotides per taxon, the cost of computation per tree ranges from (s−l)l 2 to (s−2)l 3 , depending on the heuristics applied. the memory requirements scale proportional to l 3 . fortunately, procedures such as the optimized diagonal transition algorithms described by ukkonen [ukk85] abate the space and time dependence on l, the number of nucleotides [whe05] .phylogenetic analysis under the parsimony criterion is based on an objective function (tree length). tree length is used to evaluate the optimality of each phylogenetic tree considered. however, finding the optimal phylogenetic tree (among all possible topologies) is an np-hard problem [fg82] , that resembles the steiner tree problem. the combinatorial optimization problem of phylogenetic analysis consists of finding the optimal solution from a very large number of possible trees. the number of possible trees increases dramatically with the number of organisms being analyzed [fel78] . the number of possible (unrooted) phylogenetic trees (t ) for a given set of organisms increases followingwhere s is the number of organisms (leaves) of the phylogenetic tree. therefore, the number of possible phylogenetic trees is extremely large even for trees with moderate number of organisms.as stated above, a phylogenetic analysis consists evaluating topologies in order to find the optimal solution [i.e., the tree(s) with the minimum length]. it is interesting to note that the computing time of an exhaustive evaluation of all possible trees for a fixed number of taxa will increase nearly linearly with the number of characters (e.g. length of dna sequences) because the fitch algorithm [fit71] for evaluating the tree length of a particular topology works in polynomial time.however, the excessively large number of possible phylogenetic trees of 20 or more organisms (see table 2 .1) makes exhaustive evaluation of all phylogenetic trees intractable.note on multiple optimal trees. frequently, in phylogenetic analysis based on an optimality criterion, there are multiple trees that score the same minimum order of magnitude is given for the number of trees with more than 10 organisms for tree length or likelihood. in the set of known optimal trees, the transformations may be differentially distributed and different organismal groups may be implied. therefore, this set of known optimal trees must be considered equally valuable. these cases represent alternative hypotheses (i.e., phylogenetic trees) that are equally supported by the available data and can be summarized through a consensus tree. several kinds of techniques for consensus estimation exist. the strict consensus tree is one of the most frequently used. a strict consensus calculation represents a tree that has all the edges shared by all the known optimal trees. see [swo91] for further information on various consensus trees.two algorithms can be applied to perform exhaustive searches that evaluate (explicitly or implicitly) all possible phylogenetic trees in order to find the optimal tree. the first of these is exhaustive enumeration, which computes the optimality value (e.g., tree length) of every possible phylogenetic tree and select the tree (or trees) with the minimal value. the second method is the branch and bound algorithm [hen82] that implicitly evaluates all possible trees but avoids, in practice, computing all possible trees (see [sea96] ). in current phylogenetic software packages (e.g., [swo02, gol03] ) this algorithm can be applied to data sets of up to 20 (or 25) organisms and guarantees to find the optimal trees (or trees) for a given phylogenetic data matrix.for analysis of data sets with larger number of organisms, the number of trees is prohibitively large for conducting an exhaustive search. in modern biology, interesting data sets consider hundreds to thousands organisms. thus the problem of phylogenetic tree search is compute bound and must be approached through heuristic searches. in these tree searches, a large number of phylogenetic trees are evaluated and the best solution is kept as known estimate of minimum tree length.some early examples of heuristic tree searches include the algorithm to compute wagner trees [far70] . the wagner algorithm creates a phylogenetic tree of three taxa and progressively adds organisms, attaching them to the branch that generates the minimal increase in tree length at that step. this stepwise procedure is conducted until the last organism is added to the tree. although this procedure usually results in a tree that has a suboptimal tree length, in most cases this score is significantly better than that obtained with a random choice among all possible topologies. as various starting points are used for building wagner trees, this aspect of phylogenetic analysis can be considered a type of monte carlo randomization.given one or many wagner trees, the next standard heuristic refinement techniques that would be typically applied in tree search are known as branch swapping or hill-climbing procedures (see [sea96] ). this class of refinement procedures consists of performing minor rearrangements of branches in the starting tree. each wagner tree is modified by pruning a subtree and reattaching it to a different branch of the remaining tree. the tree length of the modified tree is then calculated. if the modified tree has a shorter tree length it is kept in a buffer of new candidate trees. branch swapping is applied to all wagner and candidate trees until the algorithm converges. when no further rearrangements can improve the current topology the branch swapping is finished.the results of the branch-swapping algorithm depend on the quality of the starting point (i.e., wagner tree). in many cases, the tree resulting from the application of branch swapping to a wagner tree is a local optimum that cannot be further improved by swapping. therefore, multiple replicates (100s to 1,000s) of independent wagner trees followed by swapping are typically preformed. at the end of these stages of analysis, the best trees found in all the replicates are kept as a set representing topologies at the known minimum length.replication of wagner builds plus swapping (or random-restart hill climbing) is the most widely used routine implemented in most software packages (e.g., [swo02, gol03] ). one major drawback of wagner builds plus swapping is that this procedure is subject to finding only local optima. finding the globally optimal tree(s) for a dataset of >20 taxa is a np-hard problem [fg82] . however, performing multiple replicates of this procedure can provide a relative degree of confidence if the minimum length tree(s) converge at the same tree length from numerous independent starting points [gol99] .replication of wagner builds plus swapping is usually efficient for data sets smaller than a hundred taxa. because of advances in automated dna sequencing technology, the size of modern comparative data sets far exceed the limits for which these techniques are efficient analytical tools for phylogenetic analysis.large phylogenetic problems are becoming increasingly common across the life sciences due to the prevalence of high throughput nucleotide sequencing technology. large data sets are of interest to biologists because they provide a rich context of phenotypes and genotypes and permit worldwide and longitudinal sampling of genomes. these large phylogenetic problems will become increasingly common in the years ahead. thus, phylogenetic methods suited to large datasets will have important consequences not only for the study of organismal classification and evolution, but also for many aspects of public health (see sect. 2.2). furthermore, in a operational context, strong organismal sampling has been shown to correlate with improved performance of phylogenetic methods [hil96, poe98, ran98, zwi02, hil03].the dauntingly high cost of computation of large-scale phylogenetic analysis stunted this line of research. however, in recent years two main lines of research have provided efficient tools to analyze large phylogenetic datasets: the development of new algorithms and the use of parallel computing.several researchers have combined groups of algorithms into heuristic tree search strategies that have proven to be efficient for phylogenetic analyses of hundreds to thousands of organisms under the parsimony criterion. these heuristic search strategies are based on basic monte carlo and hill climbing techniques with the addition of other classes of algorithms including simulated annealing [gol99] , data perturbation [nix99] , divide-and-conquer [gol99, ros04] , and genetic algorithms [moi99, gol99] . similar search strategies that combine several layers of algorithms have been employed using other optimality criteria such as maximum likelihood [lew98, sal01, lem02, bra02] .the judicious application of various algorithms has provided efficient solutions for the analysis of datasets of several hundreds organisms [gol99] in a single cpu [teh03] . in particular, the successive combination hill-climbing, genetic, and simulated annealing algorithms of tree search have produced a drastic speed up in comparison to other strategies [gol99] . efficient implementations of these algorithms have become recently available in software packages [gol03] .the need of phylogenies depicting the evolutionary relationships of datasets consisting of thousands of taxa has prompted the synergistic implementation of efficient heuristic tree search strategies and parallel computing hardware. an increasing number of researchers are developing software suited for parallel computing using beowulf class clusters [ste00] . beowulf clusters are simply arrays of commodity pcs and switches enabled by scalable, open source operating systems (e.g. linux) and message passing software (e.g. pvm or mpi). although the advantages of parallel computing in phylogenetics and multiple alignment have been clear for some time [whe94] , the means to exploit this potential for research gain have not been broadly and economically available until the beowulf concept was developed by the end of the 1990s.alignment and tree search problems are naturally suitable for parallel computing. phylogenetic researchers quickly realized the opportunity presented by beowulf computing [cer98, jan01] . finding an optimal phylogeny requires the evaluation of the same objective function on a large number of alternative trees. because many trees can be examined concurrently and independently, this has led several authors to implement phylogenetic tree searches in parallel [jon95, sne00, cha01, gol02, bra02, sta02]. these implementations use the parsimony and maximum likelihood optimality criteria as well as bayesian analysis. researchers have also used parallelism to speedup one-step phylogenetic analysis [jan01] and multiple alignment [whe94, li03] .originally, phylogenetics was considered relevant only to taxonomic and evolutionary studies. however, the ability to identify conserved and divergent regions of genomes is becoming critical data for numerous disciplines in biology and medicine. these fields include vascular genomics [rub03] , ecology [sil97] , physiology [car94] , pharmacology [sea03] , epidemiology [ros02] , developmental biology [whi03] , and forensics [bud03] . phylogenetics has even been used in successful criminal prosecution of a doctor who attempted to cause hiv infection in his former girlfriend via blood products taken from a hiv patient under his care [met02] .here we focus on cases in which phylogenetic analyses have helped researchers to understand the evolution and spread of infectious diseases. we provide exemplar cases in which phylogenetic analyses of viral genomes have been crucial to understand complex patterns of transmission among animal and human hosts: severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) [ksi03] and influenza [web92] .emergent infectious diseases often evolve via zoonosis; shifts of an animal pathogen to human host. in fact, most category a pathogens and potential agents of bioterrorism and more than 75% of emergent diseases have zoonotic origins [tay01, fra02] . a typical set of tests for the hypothesis of animal host of a disease might be (1) experimentally exposing the candidate host animals with isolated viruses and ascertaining whether infection and viral shedding occurs [mar04] ; or (2) survey populations of animals with antibodies for exposure to the virus [gua03] . these activities often provide model organisms for vaccine and drug development, data on seroprevalance, and sequence data for viruses isolated from various candidate hosts.phylogenetic analysis of genomes is a complement to laboratory and survey studies with a distinct advantage. with phylogenetics, the researcher is not restricted to testing a single hypothesis for a specific candidate host in each experiment. provided with sequence data for a diverse set of candidate hosts, a researcher performing a single phylogenetic analysis makes a vast number of comparisons, thus evaluating simultaneously many alternative hypotheses. these hypotheses include the evaluation of pathways of transmission among several hosts and the polarity of the transmission events. for example, experimentalists report that small carnivores in chinese markets have been exposed to sars-cov [gua03] and the virus can infect domestic cats [mar04] . on their own these data do not necessarily reconstruct the history of the zoonotic and genomic events that underlie the sars epidemic.furthermore, whether or not interspecies transmission is observed or enhanced under controlled laboratory conditions, phylogenetic research is distinct as it can address whether the genomic record has evidence to support a hypothesis for a particular transmission pathway. for example, if phylogenetic analysis reveals multiple independent events of human to avian transmission of influenza viruses without intermediate hosts such as swine that provides a strong argument to reevaluate the hypothesis that pigs serve as "mixing vessels" for avian and human viruses leading to influenza epidemics [sch90] .in many cases, host shifts occur via recombination between two ancestral pathogen genomes to produce a chimeric descendent. epidemics can occur when, subsequent to recombination, a lineage of pathogens establishes itself in a new population of hosts, vectors, or reservoir species that can amplify and distribute the pathogen [mor95] . a host shift can require key mutations and rearrangement of the pathogen genome to infect cells of new hosts followed by adaptation to novel regulatory machinery. phylogenetics can reconstruct genomic changes at the level of each nucleotide and unravel parental and descendent strains in recombination mediated host shifts [wan05] .influenza is a widespread respiratory disease caused by an rna virus (orthomyxoviridae). the influenza virus has been traditionally divided in three major types: a, b, and c. influenza viruses of type a are known from many strains that infect both mammal and avian hosts, whereas the other two type are primarily known from humans. influenza a is characterized by antigenic subtypes (see sect. 2.3).influenza is interesting from both epidemiological and evolutionary points of view due to the interplay between genetic changes in the viral population and the immune system of hosts [ear02] . there are two basic hypotheses on how influenza a viruses escape the immune response in host population to cause epidemics: (1) antigenic drift, meaning that random point mutations produces novel influenza strains that succeed and persist if they can infect and spread among hosts; (2) antigenic shift, meaning that genes derived from two or more influenza strains reassort thus creating a novel descendent genome with a constellation of genes that can infect and spread among hosts. in both scenarios zoonosis is often involved. in case of antigenic shift the ancestry of only a fraction of the influenza genes may be zoonotic.two major classes of influenza epidemics are recognized in humans: seasonal outbreaks and large-scale epidemics known as pandemics [web92] . seasonal influenza is a significant public health concern causing 36,000 deaths and 200,000 hospitalizations in the united states in an average year [ger05] . elderly and children account for many of these severe cases of seasonal influenza. much of the population has partial immunity to seasonal influenza strains that are typically descendents of strains circulating in previous years. pandemics are often caused by infection, replication, and transmission among the human population with influenza strains of zoonotic origin to which few people have prior immunity. pandemics are rare but can affect the entire human population, irrespective of an individual's predisposition to respiratory diseases. in fact, the 1918 pandemic disproportionately affected young adults [tau06] , suggesting that older adults may have had some immunity.there have been three major influenza a pandemics, 1918 (h1n1), 1957 (h2n2), and 1968 (h3n2). the pandemic of 1918 is estimated to have killed tens to a hundred million people worldwide and 675,000 in the united states [tau01] . the asian flu pandemic of 1957 and the hong kong flu pandemic of 1968 were less severe, but caused tens of thousands of deaths in the united states [hhs04] all of these pandemic strains are thought to have originated in wild birds [web92] . the 1957 and 1968 strains are believed to be the results of antigenic shift. however, recent studies suggest that the h1n1 influenza virus that caused the pandemic of 1918 was entirely of avian origin rather than a humanavian reassortant [tau05] . other researchers have countered that the 1918 h1n1 strains had a more commonly accepted route to infection of human populations by reassortment in mammals [gib06; ant06].pandemics can theoretically occur with any strain of influenza. most influenza infections since 1968 have been attributed to influenza a h3n2 or h1n1 strains. however, there have been several recent reports of novel human infections from avian strains of influenza with subtypes thought to occur rarely in humans. several cases of human infection of viruses of subtype h7 of avian origin have recently occurred in canada [twe04] and the netherlands [koo04] . avian influenza of antigenic subtype h5 and h7 viruses can be found as low or high pathogenic forms depending on the severity of the illness they cause in poultry. thus far, influenza h9 virus has only been identified as strains with low pathogenicity [lin00] .alarmingly, highly pathogenic strains of influenza a with an h5n1 subtype have spread rapidly among various species of birds in china, southeast asia, russia, india, the middle east, africa, eastern, and western europe [who07a] . these h5n1 influenza a strains share common ancestry with the outbreak of h5n1 that lead to a massive chicken cull and six human deaths in hong kong in 1997 [li04] . between 2003 and september 10, 2007, there have been 328 cases and 200 deaths among humans [who07b] . there are several instances of h5n1 infection of felids and swine in asia. there is scant evidence of human-to-human transmission in thailand [ung05] and indonesia [yan 2007 ]. if lethality to human cases of h5n1 drops, the virus might spread rapidly and without being detected.many predict an upcoming avian influenza pandemic of devastating human and economic costs. in the united states alone, it is projected that 15-35% of the population will be affected and the costs could range from 71.6 to 166.5 billion united states (us) dollars [ger05] . although vaccine production can in theory be modified to include h5n1 strains [dut05] , the genomes of interest are moving targets. it remains unknown whether the descendents of the contemporary h5n1 virus will achieve efficient human-to-human transmission and if this will occur via incremental mutations or a more punctuated reassortment mediated change. thus phylogenetics is a key technology to track the evolution of h5n1 and compare those changes to genomic and zoonotic events that underlie pandemics.the viruses of influenza type a are classified as various subtypes that represent differences in the antigenic reaction of two key glycoproteins: hemagglutinin (ha) and neuraminidase (na). these proteins reside on the surface of the virion. these proteins play key roles in recognition and infection of susceptible hosts (ha) and viral replication (na). these surface proteins are primary antigens recognized by the host immune system [web92] .the subtypes of influenza a are labeled according to the reaction of standard monoclonal antibodies to these ha and na proteins provided by the us centers for disease control to laboratories participating in the world health organization's (who) surveillance program [hhsb] .although this number will soon expand, there are currently 16 different antigenic subtypes recognized for ha (labeled from h1 to h16) and 9 different antigenic subtypes of na (from n1 to n9). thus, a subtype of influenza virus type a is labeled with the number associated with ha and na proteins (e.g., the most common subtype found in humans h3n2).since 1948, influenza viruses have been the focus of a coordinated surveillance program organized by the who [who05] . the hemagglutinin gene (ha) is the major target of the influenza surveillance. this program helps track predominant strains to inform the development of new vaccines. influenza viruses are sampled worldwide through the national influenza centers located in 54 countries [who05] . many of the viral isolates sampled by these programs are sequenced for the hemagglutinin gene, although there has been an increasing interest in sampling complete influenza genomes [ghe05, obe06] .an extensive record of hemagglutinin sequences of the influenza viruses type a isolated since 1902 are publicly available. these data provide a unique set of challenges and opportunities for phylogenetics. the geographically wide and temporally long sampling of viral isolates provides an unprecedented opportunity to study evolutionary patterns underlying the spread and host range of an infectious disease. however, as described earlier, large datasets present an enormous search space of possible evolutionary scenarios to be evaluated.the availability of nucleotide sequences of influenza viruses has triggered numerous research groups to attempt reconstruction of the phylogenetic history of these viruses (e.g., [bus99, yua02, fer03, bus04] ). these groups draw on data from currently circulating strains as well as from historically important strains gathered from archival tissue samples. examples of archival tissues that have provided date of interest to the 1918 epidemic include lung biopsies of deceased soldiers, victims frozen in alaskan permafrost [tau97] , and waterfowl collected for the smithsonian in 1916-1917 [fan02] .phylogenetic analysis of seasonal influenza sequence data has been used to classify nucleotide substitution mutations. in many codons of the ha gene mutations that produce a change in protein sequence are more frequent than those that do not [bu99] . this finding indicates that selective pressures imposed by the immune system of the hosts can drive the evolution of some codons of ha. thus an evolutionary perspective can illuminate functional studies of infectious disease [ear02] .as noted, phylogenetics have been widely used to understand history of influenza epidemics, host shifts, as well as evolutionary interactions with the hosts immune system (see sect. 2.3.1). however, most phylogenetic analyses of influenza thus far have used only fractions of the dataset of influenza nucleotide sequences in the public domain. the sequences in the public domain are largely ha, but recently whole genomes have been produced. the institute for genomic research (tigr) is rapidly sequencing and releasing into the public domain thousands of influenza genomes under the microbial sequencing center (msc) program sponsored by the national institute of allergy and infectious disease (niaid) [ghe05] . st. jude children's research hospital in memphis has contributed a significant increase in the number of avian influenza genomes sequences [obe06] .most existing phylogenetic analyses of influenza have focused on the phylogenetic relationships of particular subgroups of influenza type a, such as the h5n1 subtype (e.g., [li04] ) or the h3n2 subtype (e.g., [bus99] ). these analysis have provided useful information but have depicted a disjoint picture of the evolution of the major lineages of influenza. in contrast, other studies have attempted broader subtype scope; however, they included a single viral isolate as an exemplar of each subtype [suz02] . this study failed to include an extensive sampling of strains. poor strain sampling can have a negative impact on the performance of phylogenetic methods (see sect. 2.1.5) and does not test whether the subtypes are natural groups (i.e. monophyletic). a very recent study has used whole genomes of 136 isolates drawn from a variety of avian influenza subtypes [obe06] .here we show results of a comprehensive phylogenetic analysis based on hemagglutinin dna sequences of 2,359 viral isolates. these sequences include representatives of the 16 different subtypes of the hemagglutinin protein of influenza type a, recorded worldwide by the world health organization surveillance program. the analyzed viruses were isolated as early as 1902, from tissues of patients who died during the 1918 spanish flu epidemic, to recently sequenced isolates from the 2004 seasonal flu and h5n1 outbreak. the analyzed dna sequences also implies a broad range of host organisms, including multiple species of wild and domestic birds, humans, swine, horses, felids, and whales.an inclusive phylogenetic analysis with a large number of taxa require the use of efficient tree search strategies (see sect. 2.1.5) and the use of multiple computers dedicated to the phylogenetic analysis. the cost of computation is tied primarily to the number of strains, not nucleotides. thus the inclusion of whole genomes does not contribute significantly to the compute bound nature of phylogenetic analysis. however, the inclusion of whole genome data does increase memory demands.this 2,359 isolate dataset was analyzed with a parallelization of the tree search strategy implemented in a recently developed software for parsimony analysis [gol03] . the results of this analysis are used here to illustrate two new uses, longitudinal analyses of patterns of zoonotic transmission and assessment of surveillance quality.our results on the relationships of ha subtypes shown in fig. (2.6) has similarities with the results of suzuki and nei [suz02] , including the clades ((h8 h12) h9), ((h15 h7) h10), ((h4 h14) h3), and (((h2 h5) h1) h6). however, the position of h13 and h11 differ in our trees due to our inclusion of h16. moreover, the relationship of these clades to one another differs in our assessments. our tree has a staircase shape with ((h8 h12) h9) basal most, whereas suzuki and nei's [suz02] tree has a symmetrical shape with no clear basal group.influenza a viruses from wild aquatic birds have been identified as the source of influenza viruses isolated from birds of the order galliformes (e.g., turkeys, grouse, quails, pheasants, domestic chickens, and their ancestral stock the jungle fowl) [web92] . direct human infection by avian strains of influenza a is considered rare [lip04] . after the discovery of receptors for both avian fig. 2.6 . phylogeny of hemagglutinin (ha) sequences representing 2,358 isolates of influenza a, with a single sequence of influenza b as outgroup. to summarize the source tree we have condensed each subtype clade into a single branch. the numbers of isolates included in the full tree are presented as the numerals above each branch. the numerals below each branch represent jackknife support values (0 worst to 100 best). sequence and character data was drawn from genbank (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and the influenza sequence database (www.flu.lanl.gov) and mammalian strains of influenza in the trachea of pigs, it has been hypothesized that domestic swine act as intermediate hosts in which human and avian viruses can recombine [sch90] . this mechanistic hypothesis of viral transmission is widespread. however, as discussed above, a number of events of suspected direct transmission of avian influenza viruses to humans have been reported [lip04, ung05] .hypotheses on the relative frequency of host shifts can be made on a phylogenetic tree through the optimization [fit71] of a character with states representing various hosts of the viral isolates under consideration (see sect. 2.2.1). we performed this analysis on our tree of 2,359 ha sequences and found that most of the internal nodes close to the root are optimized as having an avian origin (fig. 2.7) . thus the results of this analysis are consistent with the hypothesis of an avian origin of all influenza type a viruses [web92] . these results also show that most major lineages of influenza a that infect domestic birds originated in aquatic birds. this is compatible with the hypothesis that wild aquatic birds as the natural reservoir of influenza viruses of type a [web92] .however, the pattern of host shifts resulting from our study of 2,359 ha sequences seems to be much more complex than previously thought [gam90, lip04] . for instance, in many cases, after the spread of influenza type a viruses into domestic bird and mammal populations (including humans), some derived lineages are later spread again to aquatic birds. furthermore, the results indicate that direct shifts from avian to human hosts have occurred 18-27 times independently in different lineages (without observed intermediate hosts). it must be noted that the possibility of an intermediate host in avian-to-human transmission events cannot be completely rejected. it is possible that an intermediate host existed in nature but it was not sampled by the surveillance program and therefore not included in the analysis. however, based on the available evidence, it seems that host shifts from birds to humans have been frequent in the evolutionary history of influenza type a. moreover, avian-to-human shifts are more common than swine to human shifts in the history of influenza.multiple direct avian-to-human shifts appear to occur in the case of the putative pandemic strains of influenza a (subtype h5n1) that have spread across eurasia since 1997 [who05] . in addition to being highly pathogenic, these h5n1 strains have independently infected other hosts such as felids and pigs in several instances.phylogenetics is practiced by most as a historical science; however, several researchers noted that aspects of the tree shape may be used in predicting future genetic lineages of influenza against which it is important to design vaccines [gre04] . notable among these assertions are the studies in the shape of influenza a phylogeny as viewed through the hemagglutinin (ha) gene fig. 2.7 . two character optimizations on the for hemagglutinin (ha) sequences representing 2,358 isolates of influenza a, with an influenza b outgroup at the root. the top tree has an optimization of the character "ha antigenic subtype". the lower tree depicts optimization of the character "host". character data was drawn from genbank (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and the influenza sequence database (www.flu.lanl.gov). optimizations and tree graphics were made with mesquite (www.mesquiteproject.org). for better visualization contact the authors for files in scalable pdf format [bus99, fer02] . the ha gene codes for a surface glycoprotein of the virion responsible for binding to sialic acid on host cell surface receptors. at a genomic level, lineages of influenza are constantly changing due to mutation that occurs at high rates in rna viruses. extinction of evolutionary lineages of viruses to which hosts have become immune or when susceptible hosts are in short supply is common [gre04] . this process of constant replacement of influenza lineages produces a characteristic coniferous shape to a phylogeny reconstructed from ha sequences [bus99] . the "conifer" metaphor refers to the hypothesis that influenza ha is constantly changing but there is limited diversity at any time [fer02] . thus an influenza ha tree appears to be formed by addition of strains to the apex of the tree's trunk that contains the contemporary "infectious" viruses rather than more basal presumably "extinct" lineages to which hosts are immune. other groups of researchers have used the assumption that there is limited influenza a diversity at any one time to downplay the utility of phylogenetic approaches [plo02] . as an alternative to phylogenetics, which they consider difficult, these groups make predictions based on size of various clusters of related isolates, termed "swarms" [plo02] . several groups, whether using trees or swarms, have identified putatively dominant strains of influenza to predict the genetic makeup of future viral populations [plo02] [bus99] .if these assumptions were never violated, the diversity of a previous year's flu season could be assessed, forthcoming strains predicted, and thus used to inform vaccine design. in practice, the cdc uses a mixture of viral strains comprised of h1n1 and h3n2 of influenza a and an influenza b virus. [pal06] . notably the h5n1 strain (or any of the other avian strains with potential to infect humans) is currently not considered in the vaccine that is seasonally administered to civilians in the united states.the ability to predict influenza viral strains that will affect human and animal populations is important. however, prediction methods and experimental designs that are relevant to those methods are in their infancy. current surveillance programs are focused on detection of antigenically novel strains. as such, surveillance programs are not designed as ecological experiments to quantitatively measure strain-specific incidence and cluster size. furthermore, the current sample of influenza diversity may be biased by partial genomic sequencing, differences in effort within various geographic and political boundaries, focus on certain subtypes of interest, and differential efforts over time due to variable public concern. recent papers using whole genome data have indicated that the conifer like growth assumption of habased phylogenies that has been central to predictive models of h3n2 seasonal influenza [bus99, fer02] may be violated. full genome analysis of h3n2 has shown that there are multiple co-circulating lineages; some of which may be overlooked by vaccine designs [hol05, ghe05] . similarly, our large scaleanalysis of 2,359 ha sequences depicts that many subtypes and lineages within subtypes of influenza are circulating and being exchanged among human and animal populations at any one time fig. 2. 7.in addition to providing hypotheses on the relationships of a group of organisms, phylogenetic trees imply a temporal order of the successive internal nodes (i.e., the time at which a single evolutionary lineage splits producing two independent descendent lineages). minimal estimates on the date at which these evolutionary splits occur can be obtained through the analysis of the time at which the descendant organisms (leaves) are known to occur. these estimates can be computed with the implementation of an irreversible sankoff character in which the cost of transformation between two character states represents the amount of time elapsed between the time of appearance of two terminal taxa [pn01] .influenza a viral sequences are named with the host, locale, and year in which each isolate was sampled by the surveillance program. several methods exist to measure the correlation between the temporal dates of sampled organisms and the relative order they show in the phylogenetic tree. here we adapt the manhattan stratigraphic metric (msm*) to influenza surveillance. the msm* was originally developed to assess the quality of the fossil record [pn01] (table 2. 2). however, the msm* is simply a quantitative measure of how well the available data reflects the diversification pattern of the taxa present in the optimal phylogenetic trees and is thus of general utility.an extensive sampling of sequences, such as the one gathered for the study of 2,359 isolates, is critical to comparatively assess quality of surveillance in various regions, among various strains, and over periods of time. our results show that this correlation between branching pattern and dates of viral isolation is good in that it significantly differs from a random expectation. this is true over the entire tree as well as when some individual lineages are measured. however, the relative quality of surveillance differs markedly between lineages. one example of differential surveillance quality occurs in two closely related groups of avian influenza of h5 hemagglutinin subtype. one group in this example contains the highly pathogenic h5n1 strains that currently circulate in eurasia, the middle east, and africa. this large clade has been the focus of intense surveillance since the discovery of widespread infection among wild and domestic birds and some avian-to-human transmission [yua02, ung05] . the h5n1 viral isolates form a sister clade to h5n2 known from domestic and wild bird in the americas (h5n2). the number of available hemagglutinin sequences of h5n2 comprise less than one fifth of the number of ha sequences for h5n1. this in itself represents a measure of the surveillance intensity devoted to these two groups of avian influenza. however, even if the number of sequences is normalized at 100 sequences to perform the msm test, the surveillance quality of the h5n1 clade is far superior to the h5n2 clade.we can also use visualization techniques to assess surveillance quality. typically branches of a phylogenetic tree are scaled used to depict the number of mutations or other character changes assigned to each branch. however, we have adapted this use of branch scaling to reflect the number of years that have passed between sampling of related isolates rather than mutations or characters. compare fig. 2 .8 which has short branch lengths reflecting good surveillance quality with fig. 2 .9 which has long branch lengths implying poor surveillance quality.cases in which there is poor correlation between the date of sampling of a given isolate and its inferred date of origin would indicate that the surveillance program is failing to closely monitor the persistence of diverse lineages of influenza (2.9). no matter the type of phylogenetic perspective they may espouse, most virologists produce the same basic data by surveying putative host animals and patients with antibodies, then isolating and sequencing partial or whole genomes of various viruses detected in hosts. molecular phylogenetic analyses of the nucleotide or inferred amino acid sequence data from various viral isolates can then be used to reconstruct the history of the transmission events the virus among hosts. the fundamental belief associated with this research program is that the branching pattern of the phylogeny will reveal a temporal series of transformations when character of interest such as the host is optimized on the viral phylogeny.most virology researchers rely on distance methods. the most popular distance method among virologists is neighbor-joining (nj) [sai87] . distance methods require a precomputed multiple alignment of dna or amino acid sequences drawn from homologous genes of the viral strains of interest. then in nj, the most grossly similar pair of isolates (as represented by sequences) are clustered. the clustered pair is then considered as a single taxon and the next most similar pair of taxa is to cluster until only two taxa remain and are joined. in distance methods no outgroups are proposed and no assumptions of ancestral character states are considered. as a result, polarity of transformations can only be inferred as from dissimilar to similar. distance methods output a single unrooted, star-shaped graph.nevertheless preparing figures, some investigators who use distance methods choose to impart directionality by selecting an edge of the graph to serve as a root of the tree. the choice of root is crucial in depicting the polarity of host shifts and depicting clades. the rooting step has been executed variably by researchers comparing sequence data from covs isolated from humans with sequence data covs isolated from small carnivores. in the case of guan et al. fig. 1a) , rooted on a clade comprised of two sars-cov isolates, one from human and the other from a carnivor ( [son05] their fig. 1b) , and in a regression analysis a date for a common ancestor of sars-cov isolated from humans is calculated using a human basal group ([son05] their fig. 3) .in papers comparing sequence data from sars-like cov recently isolated from bats to that from humans and small carnivores lau et al., [lau05] do not root their trees (their fig. 2) and li et al., [li05] and force the root position on their drawing such that one of the bat sequences is ancestral (their fig. s4 of the supplemental material). thus, although all these studies employ distance methods, the researchers use various, often facultative means to infer the animal origins of sars-cov.other methods of phylogenetic analysis focus on characters, states, edit costs for changes among states, outgroup assumptions, and polarity of change among states -rather than gross similarity in the case of distance methods. characters can be polymorphisms recognized in columns of aligned nucleotides or amino acids from sequences of interest or phenotypic states such as host, date of isolation, or antigenic subtype. another feature of most character based methods that differs from nj is that character based methods examine many randomly generated trees (each representing an evolutionary hypothesis of character transformations and organismal relationships). thus the concepts of optimality and hypothesis testing are tightly associated with cladistic and maximum likelihood inference. optimal trees represent more defensible hypotheses. moreover, character based methods of molecular phylogenetics rely on explicit choices of outgroup to make assumptions about ancestral character states and thus polarize transformations of phenotypes and genotypes that can be reconstructed from data. in order to make an explicit assumption of ancestral character states the investigator designates at least one taxon as the outgroup. the outgroup method originated in cladistics [wat81] and has become central to the phylogenetic inference [nix94] . if chosen carefully, the outgroup estimates baseline character states in sequence and phenotypes such that transformations (such as host shifts) can be reliably inferred. to illustrate the choice of outgroup taxon or taxa and clarify the relationships of the organisms, character based trees are often rooted from the outgroup and ingroup.just as in distance methods, in most character-based methods, sequence data is aligned before the phylogenetic analysis. novel implementations, termed direct optimization, allow unaligned sequence data to be analyzed without precomputing an alignment, wheeler [whe96] . in direct optimization, sequence data are aligned as various trees are built and their optimality is assessed (using maximum likelihood and cladistic optimality criteria as specified by the investigator). thus for each tree a specific alignment that is optimal for that tree is constructed. one additional advantage of direct optimization is that the outgroup need not be designated by the investigator but rather randomized during the search for optimal trees and alignments. in some implementations of character based methods where prealignment is necessary, the outgroup can be randomized by scripting a series of analyses. outgroup randomization enables analyses of taxa where previous knowledge of ingroup/outgroup relationships is lacking or is among the hypotheses the investigator wants to test via tree search.large-scale phylogenetic analyses are particularly useful to study global problems of infectious disease. however, phylogenetic analysis of large number of organisms and whole genomes is an extremely challenging computational problem. recent advances in heuristic tree search algorithms, alignment methods, and parallel computing strategies have been successful. these advances have pushed upward the limits of taxon sampling considered tractable.large data sets analysis is interesting not only because it presents interesting computational challenges, moreover large dataset analysis is leading to new knowledge about natural phenomena. for example, in the recent past, researchers working on small datasets argued that influenza had limited diversity at any one time and that this should allow us to predict which strains are important for vaccine design. on the contrary, with large datasets, we find that there are multiple co-circulating lineages at any one time. thus, large datasets and means to analyze them are important for future vaccine design.character-based approaches to phylogenetics provide a wide variety of tools that can be used to better understand the evolutionary processes underlying the spread of infectious diseases. we have discussed here only some of the wide array of applications that phylogenetics and outgroup criteria can have on genomic studies of infectious disease. we look forward to the continued synergistic development of technological and scientific means to better understand infectious and zoonotic disease.an unknown etiology of acute respiratory disease in late december 2019 was linked to a huanan seafood wholesale market in wuhan, china, where over 100 wet animals were on sale before the outbreak. 1 ,  2 ,  3  world health organization (who) initially named this strain, novel coronavirus 2019 (2019‐ncov) on 12 january 2020 and officially named the disease as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid‐19) on 11 february 2020. 4  covid‐19 symptoms are fever, cough, sore throat, fatigue, malaise, breathlessness and it may progress to pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), and multiorgan dysfunction. 5  up to 23 june 2020, covid‐19 spread has been the highest in america, followed by europe, eastern mediterranean, south‐east asia, africa, and western pacific and these figures are being updated daily and are expected to increase further. 6  consumption of wild animals or direct contact with intermediate host animals was suspected to be an initial mode of transmission. however, source transmission routes of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus‐2 (sars‐cov‐2) remain obscure. 7 ,  8  the mystery of intermediate host finding will provide support to prevent further spread, to develop the targeted vaccine and antiviral drugs. the recent studies documents rhinolophus affinis, bat‐cov (ratg13) and manis javanica, pangolin‐cov were proximal to sars‐cov‐2. 9 ,  10 ,  11  here, we aimed to update the origin of sars‐cov‐2 by systematic phylogenetic classification and spike glycoprotein (s protein) amino acid sequences.full‐length protein sequences of s protein were downloaded from the ncbi genbank database, including eleven wild type sars‐cov‐2 (accession number: qiq22760, qhs34546, qhr84449, qhz00379, qic53204, qho62877, qhd43416.1, qia98554, qik50417, qik50438, and qiq08790), sars‐cov (accession number: aap13441.1), mers‐cov (accession number: afs88936.1), bat‐sars‐like‐cov (sl‐cov) (accession number: avp78042 and avp7831), bat (rhinolophus affinis) cov‐ratg13 (accession number: qhr63300.2), malayan pangolin (manis javanica) derived cov (accession number: qia48641, qia48614, qiq54048, qia48632, and qia48623.1) and representative viruses of the coronavirinae subfamily (α‐cov, β‐cov, γ‐cov, and δ‐cov). 12  for phylogenetic analysis, the full length s protein sequences of 11 countries sars‐cov‐2 were compared with sars‐cov, mers‐cov, bat‐cov (ratg13), pangolin‐cov, bat‐sl‐cov and previously published representative viruses of the coronavirinae subfamily sequences by blast‐explorer program that uses the neighbor‐joining method with 1000 bootstrap replicates. 13  the resulting dendrograms were used to verify previously proposed genera assignments and identify areas for clarification. alignment of rbd and o‐linked glycan residues sequences between sars‐cov‐2 strains, ratg13, pangolin‐cov, bat‐sl‐cov, and sars‐cov, were analyzed by mega‐10. 14  efforts to identify the reservoir of human cov led to the discovery of diverse cov, which are genetically close related. for the first time, we have constructed an “s” protein sequence‐based phylogenetic tree with all the known coronavirinae subfamily viruses for the betterment of understanding of current sars‐cov‐2 clustering and classified them into genera α, β, γ, and δ cov. to cross‐check the proximal to sars‐cov‐2; we had chosen wild type human cov spike protein sequence to compare with all species of cov along with recently documented closest cov (ratg13 and pangolin‐cov) (figure 1). the protein sequences were nearly identical across the s protein of eleven isolates, with sequence identity above 99.70%, indicative of a very recent emergence into the human population and justification here why we selected those 11 isolates than mutated and variant strains being updated globally. the phylogenetic analysis result showed that eleven sars‐cov‐2 isolates were closely clustered to inner joint neighbor ratg13 (97.41%), pangolins carried cov (92.22% identity) and bat‐sl‐cov (80.36% identity). all these together form a new clade 2 in lineage b of β cov and 2003 emerged sars‐cov (urbani) forms clade 1.the cov s protein is an envelope glycoprotein that plays the most important role in viral attachment, fusion, and entry into host cells, and serves as a major target for the development of neutralizing antibodies, inhibitors of viral entry, and vaccines. sars‐cov‐2s protein (1273aa) contains two functional domains, such as receptor binding domain (rbd) (223aa sequence 319‐541 aa) and glycoprotein domain (609aa sequence 662‐1270 aa). 15  in this study, sars‐cov‐2, ratg13, pangolin‐cov, and bat‐sl‐cov sequence were analyzed for protein function from the conserved domain database in ncbi 16  (figure s1). first isolate of sars‐cov‐2 (qhd43416), ratg13, and five pangolin cov were grouped under the cd21480 protein family, 17  whereas bat‐sl‐cov (234aa; 326‐560) and sars‐cov grouped in c109656 and pfam09408, respectively. 18  interestingly, the sars‐cov‐2 rbd sequence from 319 to 541 possesses 100% identity in all 11 isolates except one mutation in indian strain at 408 residue arginine (r) is replaced by isoleucine (i). 90.13% (201/223) identical amino acid sequences were seen between sars‐cov‐2 and ratg13, while 86.10% (192/223), 66.83% (149/223), 73.09% (163/223) seen in sars‐cov‐2 vs pangolin‐cov, sars‐like‐cov, sars‐cov, respectively. this investigation showed that ratg13 and pangolin‐derived cov closely related to sars‐cov‐2 than sl‐cov and sars‐cov (figure s2).ace2 receptor and rbd residues play important roles in sars‐cov‐2 entry. six rbd amino acids (l455, f486, q493, s494, n501, and y505) are critical for binding to ace2 receptors and for determining the host range of sars‐cov‐2. 11 ,  19  five and four of these six residues differ between sars‐cov‐ 2 vs ratg13 and pangolin‐cov, respectively. whereas a pangolin‐cov (project id: prjna573298) had 100% (6/6) residues similar to sars‐cov‐2, suggesting there are differences among pangolin‐cov and 50% (3/6) similarity were seen between ratg13 and pangolin‐cov [figure 2a]. another notable feature of sars‐cov‐2 is a prra insertion compared to ratg13 and only prr to pangolin‐cov in a polybasic cleavage site. this polybasic cleavage site in s2 glycoprotein (681to 684) has a role in determining viral infectivity and host range. the functional consequence of the polybasic cleavage site in sars‐cov‐2 is unknown, and it will be important to determine its impact on transmissibility and pathogenesis in animal models. besides, o‐linked glycans to s673, t678, and s686, which side the cleavage site of sars‐cov‐2 and compared to ratg13 and pangolin‐cov. only serine (ser) in pangolin and both threonine (thr) and serine (ser) o‐linked glycans were seen in ratg13. between the o‐linked glycans, pangolin had varied aa sequences compared to ratg13 (figure 2b) and the structural difference of ace2 contact residues and o‐linked glycan among sars‐cov are shown in table 1.cov are enveloped have a nonsegmented, positive‐sense rna genome ranging from 26 to 32‐kilo bases in length 20  and divided into four genera, including α/β/δ/γ. evolutionary analyses have shown that bats, civet, camel, murine, canine, bovine, equine, and rodents are the gene sources of most α‐cov and β‐cov, whileavian species, whale and porcine are the gene sources of most δ‐cov and γ‐cov. 21 ,  22  before december 2019, 6 cov were described to be pathogenic to humans. 23  in this study, for the first time we have constructed the phylogenetic tree with all the species of the cov and current outbreak of sars‐cov‐2, seventh human cov infection belong to β‐cov (lineage b).the earliest genomic characterization of sars‐cov‐2 strains in wuhan had 88% to 89% nucleotide identity with bat‐sl‐cov (bat‐sl‐covzc45 and bat‐sl‐covzxc21), 79% to 89% nucleotide identity with human sars‐cov and more distant from mers‐cov (50%). 1 ,  22 ,  24 ,  25  although the sars‐cov‐2 epidemic was linked to the wuhan seafood market, huang et al 26  reported a total of 41 patients, and 14 cases are not related to the seafood market and no trace of bats has been found, so exact place of origin need to be studied in detail. 26  subsequently, zhou et al 9  from wuhan institute of virology (zheng li shi lab) showed that sars‐cov‐2 was highly similar throughout the genome to ratg13 with an overall genome sequence identity of 96.2% and 93.1% nucleotide identity to s protein. also, the author did not mention when it has been sequenced and rna dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) data not shown to compare sars‐cov‐2. 9  ratg13 was isolated from the bat (rhinolophus affinis) on 24 july 2013 by zheng li shi group and the reason unclear why they did not submit the sequence before instead on 27 january 2020, although it is proximal to bat‐sl‐cov (accession number: avp78042.1, avp78031.1, and acu31051.1) (figure s3). sars‐cov (rs806/2006) (accession number: acu31051.1) already has proven for intraspecies diversity and its implications for the origin of sars coronaviruses in humans. 27  hence, the detailed investigation needed for ratg13 isolate and origin. scientists report genetic sequences of viruses isolated from pangolins are 99% similar to that of the covid‐19 strains. 7 ,  8 ,  10 ,  28  lam et al identified two sub‐lineages of sars‐cov‐2‐related cov in malayan pangolin, one that exhibits strong similarity to sars‐cov‐2 in the rbd. 29  zhang et al assembled a draft genome of the sars‐cov‐2 using the metagenomic samples from the lung of manis javanica, showing an overall coverage of 73% of covid‐19 strains with 91% sequence identity. 30  however, li et al 31  concluded that the human sars‐cov‐2 virus, did not come directly from pangolins based on a unique peptide (prra) insertion seen in the human sars‐cov‐2 virus and not in pangolins carried cov. 32  also, a study demonstrated sarscov‐2 is not a purposefully manipulated virus, based on high‐affinity binding to human ace2, polybasic cleavage site and the three adjacent predicted o‐linked glycans are unique to sars‐cov‐2 and were not previously seen in lineage b β‐cov. 11  hence, we compared ratg13 and pangolin‐cov with sars‐cov‐2 for an update and betterment of understanding.rbd of s protein in sars‐cov‐2 binds strongly to human, pangolin, and bat angiotensin‐converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptors. 19 ,  33 ,  34  studies have confirmed that s protein in the sars‐cov‐2 uses the ace2, found in the lower respiratory tract of humans, 1 ,  9  and other certain species (pangolin, civet, swine, cow, buffalo, goat, cat, sheep, and pigeon) as cellular entry receptor. 35 ,  36  liu et al 37  indicated that, other than pangolins and snakes, turtles may act as the potential intermediate hosts transmitting sars‐cov‐2 to humans based on the key amino acid interaction between rbd and ace2. choudhury et al 38  showed sars‐cov‐2 is close to bat‐cov, strongly binds with ace2 receptor protein from both human and bat origin and tlr4 is most likely to be involved in recognizing molecular patterns from sars‐cov‐2 to induce inflammatory responses. li et al 39  demonstrated that sars‐cov‐2's entire rbm was introduced through recombination with cov from pangolins, possibly a critical step in the evolution of sars‐cov‐2's ability to infect humans. a study data support the natural origin of sars‐cov‐2, likely derived from bats, possibly transferred to pangolins, before spreading to man and it not artificial cov, including the chimeric sl‐shc014‐ma15. 40  the study proposes a unique cleavage motif promoting sars‐cov‐2 infection in humans may be under strong selective pressure, given that replication in permissive vero‐e6 cells leads to the loss of this adaptive function. 41  overall, we demonstrate the key residues of rbd (455, 486, 493, 494, 501, and 505) and polybasic cleavage sites varies significantly; need to be studied in detail for a better understanding of cross‐species transmission. pubmed search results showed only three bat (rhinolophus affinis) and five pangolin cov sequences were available and more cov isolation need to verify the origin of ratg13.although ratg13 and pangolin‐derived cov is very proximal to sars‐cov‐2, the key receptor binding and o‐linked glycan residues vary significantly, except a malayan pangolin (prjna573298) isolate has 100% identity. the polybasic cleavage site (prra insertion) was absent in ratg13 and pangolin (prjna573298), whereas it is only prr in other pangolin isolates with unique amino acid changes within. thus, animal study, isolation of cov from pangolin (manis javanica) and bat (rhinolophus affinis) is necessary to help in the understanding of sars‐cov‐2 origin and intermediate transmission.the authors declare that there are no conflict of interests.jm contributed to the conceptualization, study design, critical review of the content and approved the final version of the manuscript. sa contributed to study design, data analysis, and approved the final version of the manuscript. km contributed to data analysis and approved the final version of the manuscript. ggr contributed to data analysis and approved the final version of the manuscript.in december 2019, a novel human coronavirus, sars-cov-2, was detected in the city of wuhan, china, and then the virus caused a severe pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 in china and worldwide, critically threatening the public health [1, 2] . the pandemic has caused 80,813 confirmed infections with 3073 fatal cases in china by march 7th, 2020, surpassing any former coronavirus epidemics. even worse, this virus emerges a worldwide spread currently and covid-19 cases increased more rapidly than china in many countries around the world, including south korean, iran, japan, italy, germany, france and united states. the interquartile deviation of the infection incubation period of sars-cov-2 is 2e7 days, but the maximum can be as long as 24 days according to the current reports, which is longer than other human coronaviruses and exacerbates the epidemic. the typical clinical symptoms of covid-19 include fever, dry cough, dyspnea, headache, and pneumonia. finally, covid-19 may result in progressive respiratory failure due to alveolar damage and even death [3e5] .sars-cov-2 is an enveloped non-segmented positive sense rna viruses classified into the sarbecovirus subgenus of the genus betacoronavirus in the subfamily orthocoronavirinae, together with other severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronaviruses (sarsr-covs), such as sars-cov [6] . occasional interspecies transmission of virus is believed to be a major cause of coronavirus epidemic. sars-cov-2 has a high genetic relationship with a bat coronavirus (batcov ratg13) with a 96% genomic nucleotide sequence identity. the close phylogenetic relationship to bat ratg13 provides evidence for a bat origin of sars-cov-2 [6] . however, direct transmission of the virus from bats to humans is unlikely due to the lack of direct contact between bats and humans. hence, there are probably intermediate hosts transmitting sars-cov-2 to humans. this speculation is supported by the reports about the intermediate hosts of other human coronaviruses. for instance, sars-cov, the coronavirus causing sars epidemic in 2003, was also originated from bats [7, 8] , but it transmitted to human via a variety of intermediate hosts including masked palm civet cats and raccoon dogs [9, 10] . since native reservoir hosts of viruses usually live far away from human community, intermediate hosts play critical roles in transmitting viruses to human and causing epidemics. a common way to determine the intermediate hosts is to collect all animals in the original epidemic area and detect the virus in them one by one, which is quite time-and labour-consuming and also is easy to be biased by passive contamination of the samples.receptor recognition is an important factor determining host range and cross-species infection of viruses. angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) has been proved to be the cellular receptor of sars-cov-2 [6] . ace2 was initially identified as an exopeptidase expressed in vascular endothelial cells in the heart and the kidney that catalyses the conversion of angiotensins [11, 12] . later, ace2 was well known for its function as the virus receptor of sars-cov [13] . utilization of ace2 as the receptor by sars-cov-2 is an important rationale to classify sars-cov-2 to the same subgenus as sars-cov. ace2 is expressed in most vertebrates, but not all aces can be utilized by sars-cov-2 as the receptor. currently studies demonstrated that sars-cov-2 is able to use chinese horseshoe bats, civet, swine but not mouse ace2 as its entry receptor [6] . obviously, the utilizing capability of ace2 by sars-cov-2 can be used for quick screening to narrow down the range of the intermediate hosts for sars-cov-2. we intended to predict the utilizing capability by sars-cov-2 of different ace2s via amino acid (aa) sequence comparison. unfortunately, the aa identities between human ace2 and ace2s of chinese horseshoe bats, civet, swine and mouse, are 80.75%, 83.48%, 81.37%, 82.11%, respectively. mouse ace2 which cannot be used by sars-cov-2 show higher similarity to human ace2 than those of chinese horseshoe bats and swine which can be used by sars-cov-2, indicating that whole aa sequence identities is not a good marker for predicting utilizing capability by sars-cov-2.in this study, we combined the phylogenetic analysis and critical site comparison of ace2 to predict the intermediate hosts of sars-cov-2. first, we collected the aa sequences of ace2s of 253 species and built a phylogenetic tree to cluster the ace2s based on their evolutionary distance. in the tree, the ace2s of species close to chinese horseshoe bats, civet or swine but far from mouse were more likely to be utilized by sars-cov-2. second, we aligned the aa sequences of ace2s of chinese horseshoe bats, civet, swine and mouse to identify the sites critical for sars-cov-2 utilization; then we ranked the ace2s of other species according to their aa substitution on these sites. the top hits were selected to be the candidates potentially utilized by sars-cov-2. combining the results obtained by the two methods and considering the living animals, we predicted pangolin, cat, cow, buffalo, goat, sheep and pigeon as the potential intermediate hosts for sars-cov-2, together with civet or swine. these results may help the screening for the intermediate hosts of sars-cov-2, contributing to the study of the viral transmission and disease control.the aa sequences of ace2s of homo sapiens (human), rhinolophus sinicus (chinese horseshoe bat), paguma larvata (civet), sus scrofa (swine) and mus musculus (mouse) were downloaded from uniprot knowledgebase; the rest of 248 vertebrate species were downloaded from genbank (file s1). multiple sequence alignment was performed for the whole aa sequences of aces using mafft with a local alignment strategy fft-ns-2. the phylogenetic tree was constructed by mega7 using the neighbour-joining (nj) method with 1000 bootstrap replicates and visualized using figtree.the critical aa sites for the utilization by sars-cov-2 were selected by picking the unique aa residues in mouse ace2 which distinct from human ace2 and the sites reported to be critical for the receptor binding of sars-cov in the previous study [14] . the initial mark for every ace2 was 100 and the substitution on each critical sites resulted in a reduction of its mark of 50 (for substitutions reported to abolish the receptor binding of sars-cov) or 10 (for other substitutions). the utilizing capability by sars-cov-2 of the ace2s were ranked by the final scores and ace2s with scores >50 were considered to be potentially utilized by sars-cov-2.to evaluate the homology of ace2s in different species, we built a phylogenetic tree haboring ace2s of 253 vertebrate species (fig. s1 ). the tree was branched to two major groups. the first group included the classes of mammalia, aves and reprilia, and the second group included the classes of amphibian, chondrichthyes and teleostomi. this tree indicated that besides mammalia, ace2s of aves and reprilia were more likely to be utilized by sars-cov-2 than other vertebrates. as shown in fig. 1 , among mammals, human ace2 was clustered with bat, civet and swine ace2s but not mouse ace2, matching the previous report about the utilizing capability by sars-cov-2 of these ace2s. intriguingly, cat, pangolin, cow and goat ace2s were also clustered with human ace2. considering the widespread of stray cats, wildlife markets and stock farms, it was not strange that these animals could serve as potential intermediate hosts of sars-cov-2. indeed, it was reported in the local news that sars-cov-2 was detected in pangolins, though further verification is required.we further tried to predict the receptor utilizing capability by sars-cov-2 via looking into the critical single aa polymorphism in different ace2s. we screened the aa sites critical for sars-cov-2 utilization by two approaches. first, it has been proved that human, chinese horseshoe bats, civet and swine ace2s can be utilized by sars-cov-2 but mouse ace2 cannot [6] . we aligned the aa sequence of these five ace2s (file s2). eleven aa residues distinct in mouse ace2 but conserved in other ace2s were identified, which were t20, y83, s218, a246, k353, p426, t593, n636, a714, r716 and a774. however, according to the complex structure of human ace2 and the receptor binding domain (rbd) in sars-cov-2 s protein (pdb id: 6vw1), only three of the eleven sites are located near the interface and potentially mediate the binding, which were t20, y83 and k353 ( fig. 2a) . second, sars-cov-2 shares an identity of 74.6% with sars-cov in the aa sequences of their rbds, and thus the aa residues critical for the receptor binding of sars-cov may be also critical for sars-cov-2. according to the previous study, such critical sites include k31, y41, k68, y83, k353, d355, r357 and m383 [14] . among these sites, k31d, y41a, y83f, k353 h/a/d, d355a and r357a abolish or strongly inhibit sars-cov binding, while the substitutions on k68 and m383 slightly inhibit sars-cov binding [14, 15] . combining the two screening, we got nine critical aa sites as shown in fig. 2b . based on these sites, we established a marking system to evaluate the utilizing capability by sars-cov-2 of different ace2s. in the system, the initial score for every ace2 was 100 and substitution on the critical sites would result in reduction of 50 marks (for k31d, y41a, y83f, k353 h/a/d, d355a and r357a) or 10 marks (for other substitutions). k31t and y41h would not reduce the scores since these two substitutions exist in civet and chinese horseshoe bat ace2s, respectively (fig. 2b) . a final score less than 0 was adjusted to 0. as the result, a final score equal to or less than 50 means that the ace2 contains either at least one substitution that will abolish the receptor binding or at least five other substitutions that will make it quite different from human ace2. therefore, the ace2s with final scores higher than 50 were considered to be potentially utilized by sars-cov-2, while those with scores less or equal to 50 were unlikely to be utilized by sars-cov-2. the final scores for all ace2s we analysed were listed in table s1 . as shown in table 1 , excluding the animals unlikely contacted by people, pangolin, cat, cow, buffalo, goat and sheep ace2 were ranked as the top mammals that could be potentially used by sars-cov-2, while murine ace2s, such as mouse and rat ace2s, got the lowest scores. as for birds, pigeon ace2 reached the highest score of 70 (table 1) . though birds are not natural reserviors for currently know species of betacoronavirus, the classification of coronaviruses is based on the genome feature not the host range, and thus we could not exclude the possibility that new betacoronavirus may infect birds. considering pigeons are food in many places around the world, more attention should be paid on the non-mammalian hosts of sars-cov-2. ace2 of protobothrops mucrosquamatus (pallas pit viper), a common snake, got a score of 20, indicating that reprilia ace2s were unlikely to be utilized by sars-cov-2. to verify the robustness of our ranking system, we labelled the utilizing capability of different ace2s on the phylogenetic tree, and found that the ace2s confirmed or potential to be utilized by sars-cov-2 (labelled with circles) were obviously clustered from those unlikely to be utilized by sars-cov-2 (labelled with triangles) (fig. 1) . the well matching with the phylogenetic tree elevated the liability of this marking system.in summary, we combined phylogenetic analysis and critical site marking to predict the utilizing capability of ace2s from different animal species by sars-cov-2. the results from these two analysis matched each other quite well, indicating relative reliability of our prediction. we have shown that, besides currently confirmed ace2s utilized by sars-cov-2, pangolin, cat, cow, buffalo, goat, sheep and pigeon ace2s might be utilized by sars-cov-2, indicating potential interspecies transmission of the virus from bats to these animals and among these animals. considering the widespread existing of these animals, some of them might serve as intermediate hosts for sars-cov-2, which called for the attention in disease control. however, these are still preliminary results predicted by sequence analysis which cannot accurately reflect the infection in the animals, and more laboratory and epidemiological investigation are required to uncover the true intermediate hosts of sars-cov-2.the authors declare no competing interests.the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , which started in late 2019 in wuhan (china) [1, 2] and was declared pandemic by the world health organization, is fueling the publication of an increasing number of studies aimed at exploiting the information provided by the viral genome of sars-cov-2 virus to identify its proximal origin, characterize the mode and timing of its evolution, as well as to define descriptive and predictive models of geographical spread and evaluate the related clinical impact [3, 4, 5] . as a matter of fact, the mutations that rapidly accumulate in the viral genome [6] can be used as natural barcodes to track the evolution of the virus and, accordingly, unravel the viral infection network [7, 8] .at the time of this writing, numerous independent laboratories around the world are isolating and sequencing sars-cov-2 samples and depositing them on public databases, e.g., gisaid [9] , whose data are accessible via the nextstrain portal [10] . such data can be employed to estimate models from genomic epidemiology and may serve, for instance, to estimate the proportion of undetected infected people by uncovering cryptic transmissions, as well as to predict likely trends in the number of infected, hospitalized, dead and recovered people [11, 12] .most studies typically employ standard phylogenomics approaches that, roughly, compare consensus sequences representing the dominant virus lineage within each infected host and rely on some measure of genetic distance among samples [13, 14] . however, while such analyses are undoubtedly effective in unraveling the main patterns of evolution of the viral genome, at least two issues can be raised.first, most methods are missing key information on intra-host minor variants, which can be retrieved from wholegenome deep sequencing raw data [15] . in our opinion, this information might be essential to produce high-resolution models of the sars-cov-2 evolution and, accordingly, of the likely transmission chain.second, most approaches do not explicitly model the processes of accumulation of clonal variants in the population and do not account for uncertainty in the data due to, e.g., sequencing artifacts [16] . for these reasons, they can produce unreliable results when processing data collected on a short timescale and with significant sampling limitations, as it has occurred for most countries during the epidemics [17, 18] . we here introduce a novel framework to overcome these issues.the analysis of intra-host genomic diversity enhances the characterization of viral evolution. due to the high replication and mutation rates of rna viruses, populations of distinct viral sublineages (also known as viral quasispecies [19] ) can often coexist within the same host, as shown by studies on numerous diseases [20, 21, 22, 15, 8, 23] .in particular, most intra-host minor variants have no functional effect, follow a neutral evolutionary dynamics and often involve mutational hotspots [24] . certain variants, instead, can be positively selected as a result of the strong immunologic pressure within human hosts [25] . furthermore, the mechanisms of transmission of minor variants in the population are still elusive and depend on the combination of sublineage clonality, virulence and contact dynamics, which results in the presence of bottlenecks, founder effects and stochastic fluctuations [26, 22] . the complex architecture of viral sublineages observed in infected individuals is the result of this complex and undeciphered interplay. in particular, it was recently shown that an unexpected high number of intra-hosts variants is observed in sars-cov-2 genomes, a proportion of which are detected in distinct hosts [27, 28] .in this regard, the analysis of variant frequency profiles retrieved from raw sequencing data allows to overcome the limitations of approaches based on consensus sequences, which, on the one hand, do not consider intra-host minor variants and, on the other hand, might erroneously call certain minor variants as clonal, according to arbitrary frequency thresholds. moreover, such analysis allows to examine three important phenomena (see fig. 1a and suppl. fig. 1 ).(1) patterns of co-occurrence of minor variants in hosts infected by the same viral lineage (i.e., displaying the same clonal variants) might indicate the possible presence of a transmission path, in which at least a portion of viral sublineages has been transferred from an individual to another during the infection. accordingly, one can hypothesize that hosts sharing a significant proportion of identical minor variants might be at smaller evolutionary distance than hosts sharing clonal variants only (see fig. 1a ).(2) homoplasies, i.e., minor variants observed in hosts infected by different viral lineages (i.e., displaying distinct clonal variants), might have emerged after the infection, because either positively selected in a parallel/convergent evolution scenario, or neutral, but falling in error-prone regions of the genome (see suppl. fig. 1a) .(3) variants that are detected with low frequency in certain individuals and as clonal in others might indicate the existence of selection shifts and/or of founder effects involving specific sublineages during infection events. distance s1 s2 s3 s5 s6 s7 s8 s9 s10 s11 s12 s13 s14 s4 s15 c l2l3 l1 in particular, all hosts share the same clonal mutation (u/c, green), but two of them (#2 and #3) are characterized by a distinct minor mutation (a/u, red), which randomly emerged in host #2 and was transferred to host #3 during the infection. standard sequencing experiments return an identical consensus rna sequence for all samples, by employing a threshold on variant frequency (vf) and by selecting mutations characterizing the dominant lineage. (b) by analyzing identical sequences and not considering any constraint on variant accumulation, standard phylogenetic algorithms cannot disentangle any ordering or evolutionary relation among hosts infected by the same viral lineage and can return uncertain ordering among lineages. furthermore, false positives can confound the analysis. (c) verso is a new framework for the characterization of viral evolution, which processes vf profiles from raw sequencing data. in step #1 verso returns a phylogenomic lineage tree on binarized profiles of clonal variants (vf > 90%), by relying on a probabilistic framework and assuming variant accumulation (see methods). the output tree model describes viral genotypes or lineages, associated with clusters of samples, whereas edges represent mutation accumulating from reference genome. in step #2 verso computes a refined genomic distance among hosts on vf profiles, which is employed with clustering and dimensionality reduction techniques to project and visualize samples on a 2d space, representing the sublineage composition and the distance among hosts, also allowing to identify possible intra-lineage transmission paths. homoplasies can be investigated to pinpoint positively selected variants or mutational hotspots. two related questions arise: can the characterization of intra-host genomic diversity (i) improve the resolution of transmission chain maps, and (ii) be used to identify positively and negatively selected variants and variants undergoing transition to clonality?lessons from cancer evolution to reduce the impact of noise and sampling limitations. the process of diffusion of variants in the population is driven by the complex interplay between genomic evolution of the virus within hosts and transmission among hosts. even if the discussion on the topology of viral evolution is ongoing [29] , it is reasonable to assume that clonal mutations (i.e., with a variant frequency close to 100%) are likely transferred from a host to another during an infection event, while, as specified above, the extent of transmission of intra-host minor variants is still uncertain. we notice also that, while multiple infections of the same host from distinct viral lineages might in principle affect variant clonality, their occurrence is extremely rare.however, some of the most widely-used phylogenomic methods, such as mrbayes [30] , beast [31] and augur [10] (used for the analyses in nextstrain), rely on distance-based or parsimony algorithms and do not include any explicit constraint on the process of variants accumulation. furthermore, most techniques do not typically account for noisy observations, which can derive, e.g., from sequencing issues or from biological variability.even though, in optimal sampling conditions and in a timescale adequate to cover the whole evolutionary history of a virus, such methods are expected to produce reliable results, current circumstances have highlighted extremely partial and inhomogeneous samplings, both in geographical and temporal terms, in several countries worldwide [18] . in such cases, the simple genetic distance among hosts might not reflect the temporal ordering among mutational events and, accordingly, may induce erroneous inferences on the infection chain (see fig. 1b and suppl. fig. 1b-c) . notice also that some of the aforementioned approaches integrate genomic and clinical data, such as collection dates, to better estimate temporal orderings among samples [31] . unfortunately, however, collection dates may be scarcely correlated with the date of contagion or with the onset of the disease. this aspect is intensified in covid-19 for which the incubation period is typically long (symptoms onset occurs within 11.5 days for 97.5% of infected persons, ci, 8.2 to 15.6 days [32] ) and for which the ratio of asymptomatic infected individuals is extremely high [33] . all these aspects may impact the reliability of downstream contact-tracing algorithms [34] .in order to reduce the impact of noise and sampling limitations on the accuracy of predictions, it may be effective to employ methods that account for accumulation processes and uncertainty in the data. in this regard, many computational methods have been developed for the analysis of somatic cancer evolution and intra-tumor heterogeneity from sequencing data and may be relevant alternatives in the context of viral evolution, due to the many analogies and to the similar data types [35, 36, 37, 38] . some early work on the topic [39] , in particular, proved that methods accounting for mutation accumulation outperform standard distance-based phylogenetic models when a complex polyclonal architecture and conditions of limited samplings are observed, as it is expected in viral evolution and transmission scenarios.a further question arises: can methods accounting for mutation accumulation and uncertainty in the data be used to reduce the impact of sampling limitations and produce more reliable phylogenomic models?to answer the questions above, in the following we first introduce the verso (viral evolution reconstruction) framework for viral evolution and sublineage characterization (see fig. 1c ), which is further detailed in the methods section. we then present the detailed analysis of 162 sars-cov-2 samples from multiple studies, for which, at the time of writing, raw illumina sequencing data are available in public databases, also discussing the definition and release of the likely sars-cov-2 ancestral genome. in detail, we provide both the phylogenomic lineage tree and the sublineage characterization of samples, which allows to identify likely transmission paths also among individuals infected by the same viral lineage. we then provide an in-depth analysis of the mutational landscape of both clonal and minor variants, also identifying variants undergoing transition to clonality, as well as a number of mutations shared across distinct lineages and which might be positively selected. in particular, we identify mutation g.29039a>u, which is responsible for the nucleocapsid variant p.lys256* and might be of particular interest because it abrogates the vast majority of the b and t bona fide antigenic epitopes of the target protein. we finally show the phylogenomic lineage tree reconstructed by our method on a large cohort comprising 12419 gisaid consensus sequences.verso: a new framework for the characterization of viral evolution and transmission. we introduce verso (viral evolution reconstruction), a new framework for the inference of high-resolution models of viral evolution from raw sequencing data of viral genomes (see fig. 1c ). our framework introduces several major novelties.(a) verso employs a probabilistic approach that models the process of accumulation of clonal variants following infection events and explicitly accounts for uncertainty in the data, due to technical noise and biological variability. accordingly, it delivers robust phylogenomic models of viral evolution, also in conditions of severe sampling limitations [17] . such models can be then employed in downstream analyses, for instance by improving the estimation of molecular clocks and, accordingly, the predictive accuracy of epidemiological models, which typically rely on limited and inhomogeneous data [11, 18] .(b) verso exploits the information on intra-host variant frequencies to characterize the (sub)lineage composition of samples and to define a highly refined genomic distance among hosts.more in detail, by employing methods for dimensionality reduction and clustering originally employed in single-cell analyses [40] , verso first allows to reconstruct and visualize likely infection chains among hosts harboring the same viral lineage, while this is prevented to methods that process consensus sequences. moreover, verso improves the quantification of the genomic diversity in a given host or in a given group of samples, based on sublineage composition and heterogeneity, also allowing to identify variants undergoing selection shifts or being possibly affected by founder effects during transmission. finally, our framework allows to investigate homoplasies, i.e., variants detected in independent viral lineages [29] and which may result from functional convergent evolution, as well as to isolate specific regions of the viral genome under purifying selection (see suppl. fig. 1a ). this information might be then used to drive the design of opportune treatments/vaccines, for instance by blacklisting positively selected genomic regions and prioritizing target loci exposed to purifying selection.reference genome. since different reference genomes have been employed in the analysis of sars-cov-2, we here selected as candidate references two high-quality genome sequences from human samples: sequence epi_isl_405839 (downloaded from gisaid, ref. #1 in the following), used, e.g., in [43] and sequence epi_isl_402125, ref. #2 in the following, employed in several studies on sars-cov-2, e.g., [3] . the sequence comparison highlighted the presence of 5 snps, at locations:in order to disambiguate the conflicting snps, we here employed the bat-cov-ratg13 genome [1] (sequence epi_isl_402131) and the pangolin-cov genome [4] (sequence epi_isl_410721), which both display haplotype ucucu at locations 8782, 9561, 15607, 28144 and 29095. accordingly, we generated the reference genome sars-cov-2-anc, which most likely represents the ancestral sars-cov-2 genome, preceding both ref. table 1 , whereas in suppl. fig. 2 the geo-temporal localization of samples via microreact [44] is displayed).even though, as expected, the vf profiles of minor variants are noisy, a complex sublineage architecture is observed in several individuals. moreover, patterns of co-occurrence of minor variants across samples support the hypothesis of transmission of at least a portion of sublineages from a host to another, as well as the presence of homoplasies.the phylogenomic lineage tree was reconstructed by applying step #1 of verso to the 19 variants detected as clonal (vf > 90%) in at least 2% of the samples. the model describes the presence of 11 viral genotypes or lineages l1-11, which display the same set of clonal mutations and are associated to different clusters of samples ( fig. 2a ; see methods).notably, data are extremely consistent with the perfect phylogeny assumptions (only 1 clonal variant in 1 sample shows a possible violation; see methods).we then applied step #2 of verso to the complete vf profiles of the samples associated with the lineages with the largest size (≥ 10 samples), and projected the sublineage composition and the genomic distance among samples on the umap low-dimensional space (see methods). such maps describe the likely transmission paths among hosts characterized by the same viral lineage, and which would not be identifiable by processing consensus sequences only (see fig. 2b ).more in detail, variant g.29095u>c (mapped on orf n, synonymous) is the earliest evolutionary event from reference genome sars-cov-2-anc and is present in all 162 samples of the dataset. the related viral lineage l1, which displays no further mutations, identifies a cluster including 3 chinese and 1 american samples.two principal clades originate from lineage l1 and correspond to previously identified sars-cov-2 types in [14, 41] .in particular, both lineage l1 and the left clade of our model (lineage l2) are characterized by the absence of snvs g.8782u>c and g.28144c>u and correspond to type a [14] (also type s [41] ), which was hypothesized to be a early sars-cov-2 type. lineage l2 is characterized by three private snvs: g.17747c>u (orf1ab, p.5828p>l), g.17858a>g (orf1ab, p.5865y>c) and g.18060c>u (orf1ab, synonymous), and includes 41 samples from usa. the right major clade -which includes lineages l3-11 -is characterized by the presence of both snvs g.8782u>c (orf1ab, synonymous) and g.28144c>u (orf1ab, p.84s>l) and corresponds to type b [14] (also type l [41] ). l3 includes all remaining chinese samples, among which also sample srr10971381 (epi_isl_402125), which was employed as reference genome in several studies [3] , plus several samples from other countries (usa, cambodia, germany and nepal). lineage l4 includes samples from usa, canada and israel, whereas lineages l5-11 are associated with american samples only.consistently with our model, the b (l) type appear to be more abundant in the population (10453/12229 ≈ 85% of the samples on gisaid database [9] ; update may, 7th, 2020) and was diffused especially in the early stages of the epidemic in wuhan [41] . we also note that, considering the actual shortage of clinical data on sars-cov-2 + patients associated to genomic sequences, there are insufficient elements to support any epidemiological claim on virulence and pathogenicity of the distinct sars-cov-2 types, even if very recent evidences would suggest the existence of a low correlation [45] .the analysis of the sublineage composition of the lineages characterized by the largest sample size, i.e., l2, l3, l7 and l9 (fig. 2b) , allows to uncover distinct intra-lineage clusters, which identify samples with similar vf profiles on all variants, as well as the possible links among clusters, as determined by the k-nearest neighbors graph (see methods). this result would suggest that the inherently complex sublineage architecture of samples, as well as possible infection paths, may be obfuscated in a consensus sequences analysis or in an analysis that only considers clonal variants.for instance, with respect to lineage l3, a cluster including 6 very early samples from china is identified, with links connecting to a distinct cluster with subsequent samples from china, germany and cambodia. as a further example, one can notice that within lineage l7 two distinct clusters (clusters 0 and 3) include single samples with a significantly antecedent collection date, namely samples srr11621844 and srr11621931, and which one might suppose to be early spreaders for that cluster. this high-resolution representation of the sublineage composition of individuals and of the likely within-lineage transmission paths is a major novelty introduced by verso and might pave the way for improved genomic-based contact tracing algorithms.standard methods for phylogenomic inference appear to struggle in the analysis of this dataset. in suppl. fig. 3 we show the phylogenetic model returned by nextstrain-augur on 133 (of 162) samples of dataset #1 for which high-quality consensus sequences are currently available in gisaid database, whereas in suppl. fig. 4 we display a heatmap showing the distance among samples returned by the method, as compared with that returned by verso.since there is no ground-truth to be used as benchmark in the evaluation of the phylogenetic tree inference, we here compared the capability of the methods in grouping samples in homogeneous and stable clusters. in particular, we employed an heuristic based on the amount of the variance explained by each principal component, as computed on the distance matrix returned by nextstrain-augur, to determine the optimal number of clusters, which in this case is 8, and compared the results with the clustering executed via verso.interestingly, the normalized mutual information among the two partitionings shows a value of 0.59, proving that the two approaches produce significantly different results. in addition, the average silhouette coefficient for nextstrain-augur clustering is 0.41 whereas for verso is 0.73, thus demonstrating a significantly higher stability for the latter method.all in all, these results would suggest that verso is able to partition samples in highly stable clusters, as opposed to standard distance-based methods such as nextstrain-augur, which provide more uncertain assignments to samples, often violating the accumulation hypothesis. this might likely derive from the sampling limitations of currently available datasets and show that, in such cases, methods that explicitly account for mutation accumulation might be more appropriate to reconstruct reliable models of viral evolution and transmission.mutational landscape of clonal and minor variants. the comparison of the number of clonal (vf > 90%) and minor variants detected in each host (fig. 3a ) reveals a bimodal distribution of clonal variants (1st mode = 4, 2nd mode = 10, median 9, max 15), apparently related to the two major clades of the phylogenomic lineage tree (see above), whereas minor variants display a more dispersed long-tailed distribution (median 3, max 44). from the plot, it is also clear that individuals characterized by the same viral lineage may display a significantly different number of minor variants, with distinct distributions observed across lineages.importantly, the comparison of the distribution of the number of variants obtained by grouping the samples with respect to collection week ( fig. 3b -c) allows to highlight a statistically significant increasing trend for clonal variants (mann-kendall test for trend on median number of clonal variants p = 0.008). this result would strongly support both the hypotheses of accumulation of clonal variants in the population and that of a concurrent increase of overall genomic diversity of sars-cov-2 [46, 27] , whereas the relevance of this phenomenon on minor variants is more uncertain.we then focused on the properties of the snvs detected in the cohort. surprisingly, the distribution of the median vf for each detected variants (fig. 3d) nonsynonimous, whereas the large majority of remaining variants are synonimous (the mapping on sars-cov-2 orf of variants detected in > 2% of the samples is shown in fig. 2a) .these results would suggest that, in most cases, randomly emerging sars-cov-2 minor variants tend to remain at a low frequency in the population, whereas, in some circumstances, certain variants can undergo frequency increases and even become clonal, due to uncovered mixed transmission events or to selection shifts, as it was observed in [8] for the case of h3n2 and h1n1/2009 influenzas. this result is further confirmed by analyzing the data included in gisaid database [9] . in fact, 115 (of 489) always minor variants detected in our dataset are found as clonal in at least one sample included in gisaid database [9] (update may, 7th, 2020).interestingly, several variants classified as always minor are found in a relatively high number of distinct lineages identified by the phylogenomic analysis (see above), and might indicate the presence of either mutational hotspots or homoplasies. in this respect, the heatmap in fig. 3f returns the distribution of snvs in vf bins, grouped according to the number of lineages in which they are found.on the one hand, one might suppose that variants that are detected in single lineages (left region of the scatterplot) either are randomly emerged private mutations or the result of intra-cluster infection events (see above). on the other hand, snvs found in multiple lineages (right region of the scatterplot) may either be positively selected, in a parallel/convergent evolution scenario, or recurrent neutral mutations due, e.g., to mutational hotspots.as expected, lineage-specific variants are the most abundant and also display a larger dispersion and higher values of median vf; variants detected in multiple lineages, instead, display significantly lower vf values, and can be found in a maximum of 10/11 lineages. a variant in particular, g.29039a>u (n, p.256k>*, nonsense) is found in significant abundance in 26/162 samples and in 7/11 lineages (median vf ≈ 0.099, max vf ≈ 0.25) and was further investigated, as it might suggest the presence of functional convergence. this mutation is present, at subclonal level, in 26/162 samples of our study cohort, with a median intra-host variant frequency of 0.099 and is also confirmed in dataset prjna6079. the locus of the g.29039a>u mutation is particularly complex, with the mutated nucleotide being the center of symmetry of a perfect 19bp palindromic hairpin sequence. notably, in many samples the presence of a large number of supplementary reads suggests that this hairpin region may be also a hotspot for more complex rearrangements, likely occurring through rdrp mediated template switching (suppl. fig. 5) . the functional effect of these rearrangements is the generation of a stop codon in the linker region, similarly to what observed for g.29039a>u. studies done on sars-cov nucleocapsid (n) protein allowed to identify two non-interacting structural domains, one n-terminal, known as the rna-binding domain (rbd) and one c-terminal, known as the dimerization domain (dd) [47] . rbd and dd domains are separated by a disordered region playing a putative role as a flexible linker. the rbd directly interacts with the viral single-stranded rna, generating the ribonucleoprotein core, while the c-terminal dd domain is responsible for protein dimerization, although its functional role is yet unknown. a comparison between the n protein of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 reveals a percent identity and similarity of 90.5% and 94.1%, respectively (suppl. fig. 6) , indicating that the two n proteins share a very similar structural organization. recently, a set of putative sars-cov-2 b-and t-immunogenic peptides were identified by homology to those experimentally defined in sars-cov [48, 49] . interestingly, the majority of the immunogenic epitopes of the nucleocapsid protein (13 out of 18) are located in the c-terminus of the protein, in the linker region and dd domain and right after lysine 256 (see fig. 4 ; suppl. table 2 ).in this context the identification of a subloclonal nonsense variant such as the p.256k>* occurring before the c-terminus of the sars-cov-2 nucleocapsid is particularly intriguing because it suggests that the mutation may have been selected in order to mask one of the most immunogenic viral regions [48, 49] under the selective pressure of the host immune response. indeed, several studies demonstrated that antibodies raised against the n protein upon sars-cov infection are abundantly expressed [50] , albeit short-lived [51] . in contrast, t cell-mediated immune responses can provide long-term protection after sars-cov infection [52, 53, 51] . in line with these data, sequence homology and bioinformatic approaches indicate that the nucleocapsid, together with the spike protein, are among the most promising targets for dna vaccine development [54] . not surprisingly, vaccines for both proteins have been already developed for sars [55] . in this context, the identification of a subclonal nonsense variant, occurring in patients' samples and suppressing the expression of the immunogenic nucleocapsid dd domain, may suggest a potentially limited effectiveness of veccines targeting this region for at least two reasons: i) because resistant subclones, such as the g.29039a>u variant, are already present in the wild, probably owing to the natural selective pressure exerted by the host immune system and ii) because the dd domain could be non-essential for the survival and infectiousness of the virus, as opposite to the rbd and therefore it could be easily lost upon exposure to the selective pressure raised by the vaccine.we finally specify that currently available data do not allow to assess the vf distribution of g.29039a>u in the population, because for the large majority of samples in public databases only consensus sequences are available. to this extent, we stress that once a larger amount of raw sequencing data on sars-cov-2 would be available, one will be able to quantitatively assess the possible increase of frequency of minor variants in the population, as this might be used to evaluate the presence of selection-driven shifts.verso phylogenomic lineage tree of 12419 gisaid samples (dataset #2). we finally applied verso to the 12419 high-quality samples available on gisaid database on may 7th, 2020, by aligning consensus sequences to sars-cov-2-anc reference genome with augur pipeline, and calling clonal variants in unambiguous locations (ambiguous locations are set as na; details on dataset #2 are provided in methods section). the phylogenomic lineage tree returned by verso is displayed in fig. 5a and reveals the presence of 17 viral lineages, and the corresponding clusters of samples (see suppl. fig. 7 for the complete mutational profile of all samples). as raw sequencing data are not available in gisaid database, step #2 of the verso pipeline could not be performed.remarkably, this model is consistent with the analysis made on 162 samples of dataset #1 and discussed above (fig.  1) , despite minor differences due to the only partially overlapping composition of the cohorts. specifically, all lineages present in both models display the same variants accumulation ordering. moreover, as previously shown, the two major clades that characterize both models correspond to a(s) and b(l) sars-cov-2 major types [14, 41] . noteworthy, a specific lineage is inferred as hidden (i.e., with no attached samples) in the analysis of dataset #1, whereas it includes a significant number of samples in the analysis of dataset #2 (lineage l14 in fig. 5 , with g.25563g>t as characterizing variant). this proves that verso is effective in handling sampling limitation issues. of false positives equal to 7.3% and which significantly deviates from the average value of the dataset (= 0.73%).one could speculate that such snv may be involved in a violation of the perfect phylogenetic constraints due to, e.g., convergent evolution.by looking at the geo-temporal localization of samples obtained via microreact [44] (fig. 5b-c) , one can see that the different lineages are distributed across the world in distinct complex patterns, suggesting that most countries have suffered from multiple infections, especially in the early phases of the outbreak, as confirmed also in [14] . the country showing most cases is usa, which currently includes 3899 samples, distributed in all 17 lineages, but with lineage l2 and l16 accounting together for 65% of the samples. 381 samples from china are included in the dataset and are distributed in 7 distinct lineages, with l1 and l3 the most abundant (33% and 55% of the samples respectively). these two lineages represent the early samples differentiating types a(s) and b(l) and are consistently most observed in china, with lineage l3 being the more abundant.we finally note that the average silhouette coefficient as computed on sample clusters (see above) is 0.98 for verso and 0.35 for the model returned by nexstrain-augur on the same dataset, confirming also in this case the significantly greater robustness of clustering assignments of our approach. we have shown that, by considering both clonal and intra-host minor variants and by explicitly accounting for the mutation accumulation process, it is possible to highly improve the resolution of the phylogenomic analysis of the sars-cov-2 evolution and reduce the impact of sampling limitations. this may represent a paradigm shift in the analysis of viral genomes and should be quickly implemented in combination to data-driven epidemiological models, to deliver a high-precision platform for pathogen detection and surveillance [12, 56] .this might be particularly relevant for countries which suffered outbreaks of exceptional proportions, such as usa, brazil, spain and italy, and for which the limitations and inhomogeneity of diagnostic tests have proved insufficient to define reliable descriptive/predictive models of disease evolution and spread. for instance, it was hypothesized that the rapid diffusion of covid-19 might be likely due to the extremely high number of untested asymptomatic hosts [33] . a better estimation of undetected infected hosts can be derived from high-resolution phylogenomic analyses of tested individuals, also in conditions of severe sampling limitations.we have also shown that the analysis of intra-host minor variants can produce experimental hypotheses with translational relevance and which might drive the design of treatment or vaccines. for instance, variant g.29039a>u was found to suppress the vast majority of the b and t epitopes of the highly immunogenic nucleocapsid protein, while leaving its entire rna binding domain intact. it is therefore tempting to speculate that this subclonal event may be the result of the selection pressure exerted by the host immune system against the virus and may raise an alert on the development of vaccines specifically targeting the highly immunogenic c-terminal region of the nucleocapsid protein.we finally recall that we release as suppl. file 1 the sequence sars-cov-2-anc, which likely represents the ancestral sars-cov-2 genome after spillover and which might allow to improve the resolution and accuracy of phylogenomic analyses, thus enhancing the understanding of sars-cov-2 evolution.methods verso computational framework. verso is a new framework for the reconstruction of viral evolution models from raw sequencing data of viral genomes. verso includes a two-step procedure, which takes advantage of the many achievements of research in cancer evolution and in sequencing data analysis.step #1. in the first step, verso employs an evolved version of the algorithm introduced in [57] for the reconstruction of models of cancer evolution from single-cell mutational profiles, in order to identify the phylogenomic lineage tree of viral evolution. our probabilistic framework solves a boolean matrix factorization problem with perfect phylogenetic constraints, thus assuming a consistent process of accumulation of clonal variants in the population, and accounts for uncertainty in the data by employing a maximum likelihood approach (via mcmc search) that allows for the presence of false positives, false negatives and missing data points (see the si for further details).in particular, the method takes as input a binary mutational profile matrix, as defined on clonal mutations only: an entry in a given sample is equal to 1 (present) if the vf is larger than a certain threshold (in our case, equal to 90%), it is equal to 0 if lower than a distinct threshold (in this case, equal to 5%), and is considered as missing (na) in the other cases, thus modeling possible uncertainty in sequencing data. we recall that the accumulation hypothesis holds only when considering clonal mutations, which are most likely transmitted from a host to another during the infection, whereas this might not be the case with variants with lower frequency, due to bottlenecks, founder effects and stochasticity (see below).the inference returns a set of maximum likelihood phylogenetic trees (minimum 1) depicting the variants as sampled during the mcmc search. accordingly, such trees provide a set of maximum likelihood attachments of samples to variants, which in turn can be used to estimate a similarity measure between samples, namely by counting how many times pairs of samples are attached to the same variant. verso then performs hierarchical clustering of samples on such similarity measure, by selecting the optimal number of clusters via standard heuristics (see parameter settings). we notice that, in case only 1 unique maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree is found during the inference, the unique maximum likelihood attachment of samples to variants can directly be used for clustering.in the verso output model, each node correspond to a viral genotype (or lineage), whereas edges model parental relations, which stand for major evolutionary events, and are characterized by one or more accumulating variants. each viral lineage is associated to a cluster of samples, via the procedure described above. as shown in [57] in a different experimental context, our algorithmic framework ensures robustness and scalability also in case of high rates of errors and missing data, due for instance to sampling limitations. finally, verso allows to visualize the geo-temporal localization of clusters via microreact [44] .we note that violations to perfect phylogeny constraints are possible, due, e.g., to the emergence of manifold mutations at single locations or to multiple infections of the same host, yet they are unlikely when considering clonal variants only. in any case, verso allows to identify clonal variants that display significant deviations from the expected error rates of the dataset, thus indicating likely violations of the accumulation hypothesis. in particular, given the maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree and the related attachments of samples to variants, verso can estimate the variants theoretically expected in each sample and subsuming the accumulation hypothesis. hence, by comparing the theoretical observations with input data, verso can estimate the rate of false positives, i.e., variants that are observed in the data but are not predicted by verso, and false negatives, i.e., variants that are not observed, but predicted. variants that show a particularly high level of estimated error rates represent possible violations of perfect phylogeny constraints, e.g., due to convergent evolution.since, by construction, no ordering is possible among individual infected by the same viral lineage when considering clonal variants only, verso aims at overcoming this limitation with step #2.step #2. in the second step, verso takes into account the variant frequency profiles of intra-host variants, by exploiting widely-used methods for the analysis of single-cell transcriptomic data and included in the scanpy suite [40] . we remark that, while it is sound to binarize clonal variant profiles to reconstruct a phylogenetic lineage tree, the variant frequency profile has to be considered when analyzing intra-host variants, for several reasons.first, variant frequency profiles describe the sublineage composition of any given host, and this information would be lost during binarization.second, minor variant profiles might be noisy, due to the relatively low abundance and to the technical limitations of sequencing experiments. accordingly, such data may possibly include artifacts, which can be partially mitigated during the quality-check phase and by including in the analysis only highly-confident variants. however, binarization with arbitrary thresholds might increase the false positive rate, compromising the accuracy of any downstream analysis.third, as specified above, the extent of transmission of minor variants among individuals is still partially obscure. due to the low frequency, for instance, minor variants may be affected by stochastic fluctuations, bottlenecks and founder effects, according to which a certain sublineage might significantly change its variant frequency, not be transmitted or become clonal in the infected host [26] .the latter issue also suggests that the hypothesis of accumulation of minor variants during infection may not hold and should be relaxed. for this reason, verso defines a pairwise genomic distance, as computed on the variant frequency profiles, to be used in downstream analyses. the intuition is that samples displaying similar patterns of co-occurrence of minor variants might have a similar sublineage architecture, thus being at a small evolutionary distance. accordingly, this might indicate a direct or indirect infection event. in particular, in this work we employed the bray-curtis dissimilarity, which is defined as follows: given the ordered vf vectors of two samples, i.e. v i = {v f i 1 , . . . , v f i r , } and v j = {v f j 1 , . . . , v f j r , }, the pairwise bray-curtis dissimilarity d(i, j) is given by:since this measure weights the pairwise vf dissimilarity on each variant with respect to the sum of the vf of all variants detected in both samples, it can be effectively used to compare the sublineage composition of samples, as proposed for instance in [42] . however, verso allows to employ different distance metrics, such as correlation or euclidean distance.as a design choice, in verso the genomic distance is computed among all samples associated to any given viral lineage, as inferred in step #1. the rationale is that, in a statistical inference framework modeling a complex interplay involving heterogeneous dynamical processes, it is crucial to stratify samples into homogeneous groups, to reduce the impact of possible confounding effects [58] .in the context of viral evolution and transmission, noisy observations affecting low-frequency variants, e.g., due to sequencing limitations, as well as homoplasies, such as mutational hotspots or convergent mutations observed across lineages, might distort the relative distance among samples, when considering unpartitioned cohorts. conversely, the identification of a phylogenomic lineage tree, which describes the process of accumulation of clonal variants, allows to stratify samples in robust groups that are consistent with major evolutionary events, therefore improving the reliability of downstream analyses. accordingly, due to the distinct properties of clonal and minor variants during transmission, it is reasonable to assume that the event in which certain minor variants and no clonal variants are transmitted from a host to another during the infection is extremely unlikely.the genomic distance is then employed in a standard scanpy [40] workflow for dimensionality reduction and clustering, and which includes three steps: (i) the computation of the k-nearest neighbour graph (k-nng), which can be executed on the original variant frequency matrix, or after applying principal component analysis (pca), to possibly reduce the effect of noisy observations (when the number of samples and variants is sufficiently high); (ii) the clustering of samples via either louvain or leiden algorithms for community detection [59] ; (iii) the projection of samples on a low-dimensional space via standard tsne [60] or umap [61] plots.as output, verso delivers both the partitioning of samples in homogeneous clusters and the visualization in a low-dimensional space, also allowing to label samples according to other covariates, such as, e.g., collection date or geographical location. in the map in fig. 2b , for instance, the sublineage composition of each sample and the genomic distance among samples are projected on the first two umap components, whereas samples that are connected by k-nng edges display similar patterns of co-occurrence of variants. accordingly, the map show clusters of samples likely affected by infection events, in which (a portion of) sublineages might have been transmitted from a host to another. this represent a major novelty introduced by verso and also allows to visualize for the first time the space of sublineages (also known as quasispecies [22] ).datasets description. dataset #1. we analyzed a cohort of 162 samples from distinct individuals obtained from 11 ncbi bioprojects, which, at the time of writing, are the only publicly available datasets including raw illumina sequencing data. in detail, we selected the following projects: (1) prjna601736, 2 individuals geographically located in wuhan (china) for which we considered rna-seq from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (balf); (2) prjna603194, 1 individual from wuhan (china) with rna-seq from [2] ; (3) prjna605983, 2 individuals from china with illumina hiseq rna-seq data; (4) prjna607948, 1 individual from wisconsin (usa); (5) prjna608651, 1 individual from nepal with rna-seq isolate from oro-pharyngeal swab of [43] ; (6) prjna610428, 143 individuals geographically located in the state of washington (usa); (7) prjna615319, 1 individual geographically located in germany; (8) prjna616446, 7 individuals from china; (9) prjna623895, 1 individual from cambodia; (10) prjna624792, 2 individuals from canada and (11) prjna626526, 1 individual from israel. furthermore, we considered 3 additional samples from ncbi bioproject prjna607948, all obtained from the same individual from wisconsin already included in the dataset, representing 3 independent passage isolates, which were used to validate the discovered minor variant g.29039a>u.dataset #2. we considered the whole set of complete, high-coverage and human-derived consensus sequences available on gisaid on may 7th, 2020. the dataset includes a total of 12419 samples. we then used bwa mem (version 0.7.17) to map reads to sars-cov-2-anc reference genome (suppl. file 1; see results). we generated sorted bam files from bwa mem results using samtools (version 1.10) and removed duplicates with picard (version 2.22.2). variant calling was performed generating mpileup files using samtools and then running varscan (min-var-freq parameter set to 0.01) [62] . variants were mapped on sars-cov-2 coding sequences (cdss) via a custom r script, also by highlighting synonymous/nonsynonymous states and amino acid substitutions for the related open reading frame (orf) product. in particular, we translated reference and mutated cdss with the seqinr r package to obtain the relative amino acid sequences, which we compared to assess the effect of each nucleotide variation in terms of amino acid substitution.finally notice that, one should be extremely careful when considering low-frequency variants, which might possibly result from sequencing artifacts, even in case of high-coverage experiments. for this reason, we here employed further significance filters on variants. in particular, we kept only the mutations: (1) showing a varscan significance p-value < 0.05 (fisher's exact test on the read counts supporting reference and variant alleles) and more than 8 reads of support in at least 70% of the samples, (2) displaying a variant frequency vf > 5%. as a result, we selected a list of 684 highly-confident snvs to be included in the analysis.dataset #2. with respect to dataset #2, we aligned the 12419 consensus sequences present on gisaid on may 7th, 2020 to sars-cov-2-anc reference genome via augur pipeline. 7001 distinct variants were detected in at least 1 sample. we called as clonal the variants detected in unambiguous locations, whereas ambiguous locations were set to na. we then removed regions highly affected by sequencing artifacts by selecting the 6713 variants showing less than 10% of ambiguous calls. finally, we selected the list of variants to be considered as input to verso by selecting the 27 mutations observed in at least 2% of samples.a table including for each sample, the run id, the bioproject id, the biosample id, the instrument type, the sample name, the gisaid id and origin country is returned for dataset #1 as suppl. table 3 , whereas name, accession date, region and host type are provided for each sample of dataset #2 as suppl. table 4 .parameter settings. the phylogenomic analysis via verso was performed on dataset #1 and #2 by considering only clonal variants (vf > 90% for dataset #1) detected in at least 2% of the samples of the cohort. a grid search comprising 64 different error rates was employed. for dataset #1, hierarchical clustering was performed on the similarity matrix returned by verso (see methods). for dataset #2, instead, as verso returned only 1 unique maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree, hierarchical clustering was performed directly on the maximum likelihood attachment of samples to variants; in this latter case, we first removed samples with ambiguous attachment (229 out of 12419 samples) and then we performed pca analysis (with a maximum of 27 pcs) on the attachment matrix and used the results as inputs for hierarchical clustering. the optimal number of clusters was determined with an heuristic based on the amount of the variance explained by each principal component. the 21st century is witnessing a 3rd outbreak of zoonosis [1] associated with a novel coronavirus, 'sars-cov-2' in this case. similar to its predecessors, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) [2, 3] , infection with sars-cov-2 (officially named covid-19 by the world health organization on february 11, 2020) can manifest as bronchitis, pneumonia, or a severe respiratory illness.non-structural proteins are encoded within the intact virion. the structural proteins include the spike (s) protein, nucleocapsid (n) protein, envelope (e) protein, and membrane (m) protein. the two main polyproteins (pp1ab and pp1a) encoded by orf1ab are cleaved into 15/16 different non-structural proteins [6, 7] . together, they form the replicase complex, which is essential for polyprotein processing, and efficient virus replication. mers-cov encodes accessory proteins including orf 3, orf 4a, orf4b, and orf 5 [6, 7] , similar to many other coronaviruses. the exact roles and precise locations of the accessory proteins of mers-cov are not quite clear. however, it has been suggested that these proteins influence viral replication, pathogenesis, and disease outcomes, as observed in sars-cov and other coronaviruses [8] .the entry of mers-cov into human cells is facilitated by a heavily glycosylated type i transmembrane protein (s) that binds to the dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4) protein, a receptor on host cells [9] . there is a strong consensus that dromedary camels (camelus dromedarius) are the primary source of the transmission of mers-cov to humans [10] . whether camels serve as mixing vessels for the emergence of variant mers-cov strains warrants further investigation [11] . a low mutation rate has been demonstrated in mers strains isolated from humans, which is attributed to the low level of immunological pressure exerted on this coronavirus in humans [12] . a high frequency of mutations and recombinant events is observed in mers-cov strains isolated from camels [13] . sporadic cases of mers-cov are in continuous circulation in saudi arabia, and the currently available epidemiological data cannot explain the changing epidemiology of the virus.in this study, we obtained complete genome sequences of mers-cov from eight individuals from the riyadh region in saudi arabia. we carried out molecular epidemiology analysis to investigate their epidemiological connection with one another and with past strains. an in-depth genetic analysis was performed to construct an interface linking genomic variations and disease severity.the patients included in this study (n = 8) presented with severe upper and lower respiratory tract infections and were admitted to the intensive care unit (icu) of the king abdulaziz medical city, ministry of national guard -health affairs (mng-ha), riyadh. sputum, nasopharyngeal swab, endotracheal aspirate, or bronchial lavage samples were obtained. the supernatants were carefully separated from the clinical samples by centrifugation at 2000 rpm for 10 min and stored at −80 • c until processing.viral rna was extracted from 1 ml of the stored samples using a qiaamp viral rna mini kit (qiagen, valencia ca, usa). the samples were processed in multiple aliquot at 200 l/turn and passed through a single column to obtain a high concentration of rna. the rna was eluted in 60 l of water and stored at −80 • c until further processing. the rna concentration was adjusted to a minimum of 100 ng/l in a qubit 3.0 instrument using the qubit rna br assay kit (thermo fisher scientific, usa). the rna extracted from each sample was reverse transcribed into cdna using the superscript vilo iv cdna kit (thermo fisher, usa) and stored at −80 • c. screening for mers-cov was performed using the coronavirus mers-cov rt-pcr kit (tib molbion/roche, germany), targeting the upstream region of the envelope gene (upe) and open reading frame 1a (orf1a). the amplicons were subjected to complete genome sequencing using ion torrent ampliseq technology sequencing.viral cdna was subjected to ampliseq library preparation according to the manufacturer's protocol using mers ampliseq panels (thermo fisher scientific, usa) with a mean insert size of 200 bps. these panels were designed on the basis of data from 233 reference strains retrieved from ncbi databases. a total of 33,108 amplicons with an average length of 200 bp were included in the two primer pools. each library was assigned a distinct barcode using the ion xpress barcode adapters 1-16 kit and purified using agencourt ampure xp beads (beckman coulter, brea, ca, usa).each purified library was efficiently quantified in a stepone-plus real-time pcr system using the taqman library quantification kit (thermo fisher scientific, usa) according to the manufacturer's protocol and normalized to 25 pm. template-positive ion sphere particles were obtained by pooling all 10 normalized libraries and clonally amplified in a onetouch 2 system using the ion pgm hiq ot2 200 kit (thermo fisher scientific, usa.). template-positive isps were loaded onto ion 318 chips and sequenced in an ion pgm instrument using the ion pgm hiq sequencing kit (thermo fisher scientific, usa).fourteen bidirectional primer pairs were designed (supplement table 1 ) for mers-cov genome gaps using primer express software v3.0 (applied biosystems, foster city, ca, usa). gap-filling pcr was performed, and the amplicons were sequenced by sanger sequencing in a 3730xl genetic analyser using the bigdye terminator v 3.1 cycle sequencing kit (thermo fisher scientific, usa) following the manufacturer's protocol.the next-generation sequencing (ngs) and sanger sequencing data were preprocessed (base calling, base quality recalibration, alignment, and consensus sequence assembly) using torrent suite server v 5.6 and ion torrent software. the nucleotide genome sequences obtained in this study were deposited in genbank under the accession numbers mh013216, mn120513, mn120514, mh306207, mh359139, mh371127, mh432120 and mh454272.the complete genome sequences of mers-covs obtained from the clinical isolates (n = 8) were aligned with the mers-cov sequences (both partial and complete) available in genbank using the multiple sequence comparison by log-expectation (mus-cle) program included in the mega v7 software package (www. megasoftware.net). homologous basic local alignment search tool (blast) searches were carried out for each strain to determine the most closely related sequences.to generate a composite phylogenetic tree, we randomly removed sequences to create a dataset proportional to these newly isolated sequences, keeping in mind that the homologous sequences remain in the final alignment. the final alignment contained 113 sequences from the complete genome phylogeny, including 79 from human cases and 34 of animal origin. the bestfit substitution model was selected using jmodeltest [14] and employed in the maximum-likelihood analysis.the maximum likelihood (ml) phylogenetic tree for the nearcomplete genomes (>30,000 nt in length) was inferred using the ml procedure in the raxml version 8.2.10 package [15] , employing the gtr + g nucleotide substitution model and 100 bootstrap replicates. phylogenetic analyses of rf1a, orf1ab and s gene segments were performed to determine whether any of these sequences exhibited recombination within different lineages.the nucleotide and amino acid sequences of each protein 8 mers-cov isolates were aligned with the corresponding human mers-cov and camel mers-cov protein sequences via multiple alignment in molecular evolutionary genetics analysis (mega) software. amino acid changes were calculated using bioedit (www. bioedit.com) with reference to saudi isolate jx869059 (emc/2012).to detect possible recombination, a bootscan analysis was performed using simplot version 3.5.1. individual sequences from this study were aligned with reference mers-cov sequences representing different clades. the analysis was conducted using a sliding window of 200 nucleotides, a 20-bp step size and 100 bootstrap replicates through gap-stripped alignments and neighbour-joining analysis. possible sites of recombination suggested by the boot scan analysis were confirmed through multiple sequence alignments. table 1 presents the baseline and clinical characteristics of the 8 studied patients infected with mers-cov. the mean age of the patients was 57 years, and they included 6 males and 2 females. most of the patients had a history of hypertension, and 4 of the 8 had diabetes. all these patients were admitted to the intensive care unit (icu) of kamc, mng-ha, and 4 of the patients died.the evolutionary relationships of these newly sequenced saudi mers-cov isolates were assessed in combination with the globally isolated sequences available in the genbank database (figs. 1,2) . seven of these isolates were assembled with lineage b3, while one strain belonged to the lineage b4 sequences in the complete genome phylogenetic analysis (fig. 1) . all the studied isolates were closely related to previous strains from riyadh isolated during 2015−2017. two of the 2019 strains and one 2017 strain specifically exhibited longer branch lengths due to a large number of substitutions. the only lineage b4 strain (mh013216) appeared in the complete genome tree together with a recombinant strain from jeddah isolated from a camel. in the subgenomic phylogenetic analysis, all b3 strains remained in the same clade ( fig. 2a, 2b, 2c) , whereas the b4 strains resembled the b2 strains more closely in the orf1a gene phylogeny (fig. 2a) . further analysis using the simplot program [16] confirmed that mh013216 is a complex recombinant strain with contributions from multiple lineages of mers-cov (fig. 3) . the close similarity of mh013216 with b4 sequences was mainly located between nucleotides 16,500 and 24,000. in orf1, however, the strain sequence matched parts of a2, b1, b2, and b3. the assembly of the strain within b2 occurred because of similar nucleotides at certain sites within lineages and an exclusive b2-like arrangement between nucleotides 12,000 and 12,500 (fig. 3) .we compared the deduced amino acid sequences of the studied isolates with the reference jx869059 (emc/2012) and searched for amino acid substitutions in mers-cov proteins that are probably associated with disease severity or transmissibility in humans. we were astounded to note a variety of unique mutations not detailed previously in mers-cov.the majority of these mutations were found in orf1ab (41 unique mutations), followed by the n protein (10 mutations), the s protein (9 mutations) and orf4b (5 mutations) (supplement table  2a and supplement table 2b ). in the orf1ab replicase, mutations were quite evident in nsp3 (n = 17) (putative papain-like protease (plpro)), nsp12 (n = 9) (putative rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp)), nsp13 (n = 6) (putative helicase (hel)) and nsp14 (n = 6) (putative exonuclease (exon)). random mutations were also found in nsp4 and nsp6 (putative hydrophobic regions), nsp16 (putative s-adenosylmethionine-dependent 2 -o-ribose methyltransferase), and nsp1 and nsp2 (proteins of unknown function).characteristic nsp3 (plpro) amino acid substitutions were observed at positions g981s, p1099r, and k1255r in 5/8 isolates and v1375i and m2119i in 4/8 isolates. similarly, an nsp13 (hel) substitution at position v5551a and annsp14 (exon) substitution at position v6030 f were present in 5/8 isolates (supplement table  2a ).the s protein of mers-cov is a heavily glycosylated type 1 transmembrane protein found on the surface of the virus, forming spikes consisting of receptor-binding subunit s1 and membrane fusion subunit s2 [7] . the noteworthy substitutions in the receptorbinding domain (rbd) of the s1 subunit were t424i, in 2/8 isolates, and s459 t, in 1/8 isolates. another substitution, w553r, was found in the overlapping rbd/rbm (receptor binding motif) region in 2/8 isolates. the s2 subunit substitutions included s950 t in the fusion peptide, q1009 l in hepatad repeat region 1 (hr1), and c1313s in the transmembrane (tm) region (supplement table  2b ).n proteins are essential for the packaging of viral rna into viable virus-like particles. the characteristic substitutions included v178a in the n-terminal domain (ntd), present in 6/8 isolates, and a300 v in the c-terminal domain (ctd), present in all studied isolates ( table 2) . other ctd amino acid substitutions observed were l293 f, present in 2/8 isolates, and v263a, r292 p, and w293c present in one isolate each. the substitutions in the linker region (lkr) of the n protein include g198s, which was present in 2/8 isolates, and d242e, which was present in one isolate. the n arm of the n protein included s11 f, which was present in 2/8 isolates, and p7l and g28 v, which were present in one isolate each. the c-tail of the n protein also contained a single amino acid substitution, s391i (supplement table 2b ).similar to other lineage c betacoronaviruses, mers-cov encodes five unique accessory proteins, designated 3, 4a, 4b, 5 and 8b [7] . we found a two-amino acid substitutions in orf3, encoding a protein of unknown function, which was g85d/p86 f, in 3/8 isolates, and the single-amino acid substitutions v62 f, in 2/8 isolates, and t87 n, in one isolate. the orf4a, 4b and m proteins have recently been found to antagonize type i inf production.four of the studied isolates exhibited the orf4a substitution e102q. the substitutions observed in orf4b were h73 n and a218s, in 2/8 isolates, and v51i, i147 l, and h243q, in 1 isolate each. two of the isolates exhibited an amino acid substitution in the m protein (t127i), while one isolate exhibited a mutation in orf5 (i98 m) (supplement table 2b ). sporadic cases of mers-cov continue to occur in middle eastern regions, including saudi arabia. in this study, we conducted sequencing to determine the genome sequences of 8 mers-cov isolates. we performed evolutionary and genomic analyses to address several (among many unanswered) questions related to persistent mers-cov infection.we found a number of genomic variations in the crucial regions of mers-cov, including the replication/transcription complex (rtc), the nucleocapsid protein n, the surface protein s, and orf4a and orf44b, involved in the host-mediated immune response. we identified a genomic recombinant isolate exhibiting characteristic substitutions representing almost all the group a and b mers-cov strains. phylogenetic analysis resulted in the assembly of 7/8 sequences into 3 subclusters within lineage 3 of group b mers-cov. the longer branch lengths of these strains from the common node of their closest relatives in the phylogenetic tree were notable. new isolates were detected within a period of 6, 9, or 12 months after the detection of their closest relatives. one possible explanation for the longer branch length observed is the large number of substitutions found in these isolates, and another that we missed or could not detect were their close relatives during that period. homology searches did not reveal any specific relatedness table 2 non-synonymous genomic variations observed in study isolates as compared to global sequences excluding the lineage-specific genomic variations.s orf (n)  m  n   mh013216  p97 l, t424i, c1313s  s733r/e736 k, f1609 l, p1883s, l3785 f, m4574i, v5557a, v51i ı  -w293c, a300v**  mh454272  w553r, r700 l, s950t t649i, p777s, a1045 v, v1202i, e1835a, m2119i, p2742s,  g3117e/ of mers-cov variants with sars-cov or mers-cov-2, in agreement with recently reported studies [1, 21] . the recombination frequency in coronaviruses is quite high, and recombination is known to occur due to the exchange of functional motifs or even entire genes [17] . some previous reports have also suggested the occurrence of recombination in association with host switching in many coronaviruses [18] [19] [20] . the mh013216 strain showed complex genomic recombination, including a major portion of the genome resembling strains of lineage 4; however, it harboured lineage-specific residues of both groups a and b of mers-cov. this strain was assembled within lineage 2 of the group b mers-cov strains in the subgenomic phylogenetic analysis of orf1a.the mers-cov 30 kb genome encodes structural proteins, accessory proteins, and two orfs (orf1a and orf1b), from which two large polyproteins are translated and subsequently processed by the viral proteinase into nonstructural proteins (nsp) that together form rtcs [7] . the synthesis of genomic rna (grna) and subgenomic messenger rnas (sgmrna) occurs at rtcs [8] , involving interaction with the n protein [22, 23] . amino acid substitutions in the nsp proteins as well as the n protein are therefore crucial in the cov life cycle. in fact, yeast two-hybrid (y2h) assays of mouse hepatitis virus (mhv) and sars-cov revealed that nsp3 is the main rtc component that interacts with the n protein [24, 25] . the direct interaction of the n protein with rtcs is considered critical, as impairment of this interaction greatly reduces cov replication and progeny production [24] .we found amino acid substitutions in the nsp3, helicase (nsp13, an important enzyme for viral tropism and virulence), rdrp (nsp12), and exoribonuclease (nsp14) proteins. how these proteins (either individually or together) interact with the n protein in viral replication, sgmrna production, and translation warrants functional studies. most of the adaptive events in mers-cov in humans and camels [26] are now thought to occur through nsp3 via its deubiquitination and de-esterification activity to inhibit the ifn response [27] .irrespective of the cov strain involved, accessory orfs have been implicated in the context of infection, specifically in the antagonization of the host response [28, 29] . mers-cov orf4a suppresses ifn production by binding to dsrna [28] , and the 4b gene product is reportedly associated with the evasion of host cell ifn defence mechanisms [30, 31] . amino acid substitutions in these proteins may impact the host immune response to the disease and, ultimately, its pathogenesis. the variant strains may have acquired high pathogenicity, but intense surveillance studies will be required to elucidate how this will be reflected in viral spreading and persistence in the future.similar to other coronaviruses, the mers-cov spike protein (s) is highly exposed to the virus surface and is the first line of contact in virus infection and the host immune response. amino acid substitutions in the rbd/rbm region that play any role in virus binding to host dpp4 need to be investigated. the heptad repeat region (hr1) has recently been reported to be a major selection target among mers-covs for their interspecies jump and spread to humans. one of the studied isolates presented the hr1 substitution q1009l, and a nearby amino acid substitution, t1015 n, has been implicated in an increased mers-cov infection efficiency in vitro [32] .although camels are thought to be the primary zoonotic reservoir responsible for human transmission, there is some evidence that bats might be the ancestral reservoir host for mers-cov [17] . direct contact with dromedary camels or camel products has been reported in only 55 % of primary mers-cov cases, and the contact history in the remaining cases is unknown [33] . this study has some limitations, as we do not have samples from camels or other domestic and wild animals to confirm the possible contact history of the disease in our patients.we identified novel point mutations and mutation complexes, indicating a changing epidemiology of mers-cov, potentially raising the alarm regarding new viral outbreaks and associated morbidity and mortality. the search for intermediate hosts in mers-cov evolution is necessary, as are functional studies to determine the pathogenic potential of such substitutions, which may aid in the screening of patients at higher risk.in conclusion, the results of this study lead to the recommendation that the complete genome sequencing of all new cases of mers-cov to monitor virus evolution. a clear understanding of the recombination events involved in mers-cov evolution would aid in developing effective tools for controlling new human coronavirus infections worldwide.bats (order chiroptera) are one of the most diverse and widely distributed group of mammals, comprising more than 1300 species across 21 families [1] , and play a key role in terrestrial ecosystems [2] . in the last few decades, they have been associated with several emergent zoonotic agents and recognized as potential reservoir of zoonotic viruses belonging to different families, such as hendra, nipah, ebola, lyssa, and sars coronavirus [3] . bats represent ideal hosts and reservoirs of viruses, due to their high diversity and ecological characteristics that potentially facilitate virus transmission, such as the roosting together behavior and their ability to fly over distance [4, 5] . therefore, it is essential to identify and characterize the currently unrecognized viruses circulating in bat populations.coronaviruses (cov, family coronaviridae) are enveloped viruses with large single-stranded rna genomes ranging between 27 and 32 kb [6, 7] . based on genome-scale phylogenies, they are classified into four genera: alphacoronavirus (α-cov) and betacoronavirus (β-cov), pathogenic for mammals, gammacoronavirus (γ-cov) and deltacoronavirus (δ-cov), primarily (but not exclusively) circulating in birds [8, 9] . most covs are disease-causing agents, associated with a range of respiratory, gastrointestinal, hepatic and neurological diseases both in humans and animals. they are also potentially transmitted among species, causing epidemics after host transition [10] [11] [12] . due to mutation and recombination events, new strains constantly originate and spread [4, 13] .different bat species have been identified as natural reservoirs of most mammalian α-cov and β-cov, including the severe acute respiratory syndrome sars-cov, and the edited by zhen f. fu.middle east respiratory syndrome mers-cov [14, 15] , which recently caused outbreaks in the human population [4] . sars-related cov was first identified in rhinolophus bats from china [16] , and subsequently many mammalian covs were detected in chinese bats [17, 18] and globally [19] . further investigations identified α-cov and β-cov in several european countries from bats of various species [20] [21] [22] .in italy, few studies have been conducted on bat cov ecology: viral detection and prevalence was investigated in greater horseshoe bats [23] , alpha-and betacoronaviruses were identified in different species, such as kuhl's pipistrelle, lesser horseshoe bats and serotine bats [10, 24] , and recently two mers related beta cov detected in italian kuhl's pipistrelle and savi's bat were fully sequenced [25] . a total of 21 bat species are currently recognized as living on the island of sardinia (italy), lying geographically at the interface between europe and africa, and recently indicated as a major mediterranean hotspot for bat biodiversity [26] . nothing is known about cov presence and distribution among bat populations on the island, and this is the first study aiming to fill this gap. herein we report the molecular identification and typing of a sars-like coronavirus detected in three species of sardinian bats belonging to rhinolophus, plecotus and tadarida genera, during a viral survey conducted on non-invasive bat samples collected from different localities on the island. we also inferred the phylogenetic characteristics of the identified β-cov, and its evolutionary relationships with other bat covs identified in europe and globally.a total of 46 bats, belonging to 15 different species, were captured using mist nets or hand nets in 8 different localities distributed in northern and central sardinia: grotta sa rocca ulari (borutta), galleria casteldoria (santa maria coghinas), diga santa chiara (ula-tirso), monte corallinu (dorgali), tilìpera (bonorva), mularza noa (bolotana), belvì, and grotta verde (alghero), listed in table 1 . sampling locations included caves, buildings, tunnels, woods, abandoned bridges, and other type of natural roosts. captures were performed by expert and trained biologists within a regular census program of sardinian bat populations, between november 2015 and november 2016. bats were placed individually into cotton bags before investigation. species, sex, age category, and forearm length were determined; oral and cutaneous swabs were collected using sterile micro-swabs (aptaca), and then bats were released at their capture site. faecal samples were readily collected from cotton bags or during bat handling and suspended in 1 ml rna later rna stabilization solution (qiagen) and then stored at − 20 °c before processing.dna was extracted from oral and skin swabs tips using the qiamp dna mini kit (qiagen), following the table 1 list of bat samples analyzed: host species, sampling locations, and type of samples dna extracted from bat oral swabs was tested for the presence of herpesvirus using a universal nested pcr [27] . dna extracted from skin swabs was screened for poxvirus and papillomavirus presence, by pcr based on pan-pox primers [28] and on primers targeting a conserved region of ppv l1 gene [29] . rt-pcr was performed to detect coronavirus in bat faecal samples, by using two pairs of primers targeting a conserved fragment of rna-dependent rna polymerase gene (rdrp): 11fw and 13rv [23] , and corona 1 forward and corona 2 reverse [10, 17, 30] , targeting 170 bp and 440 bp respectively. in a typical pcr, 2 µl of cdna was amplified in a 50 µl reaction mixture containing 0.2 mm of each dntps, 0.2 µm each of forward and reverse primers, 1x taqbuffer and gotaq (promega, italy) dna polymerase. the cycling conditions were as follows: 5 min at 95 °c followed by 40 cycles of 1 min at 95 °c, 1 min at 50 °c, and 1 min at 72 °c, followed by a final extension time of 5 min at 72 °c. from the first amplified sequence of approximately 170 bp, in order to further amplify the rdrp gene, 4 sets of primers were newly designed, after aligning the sequence detected in this study with the most similar sequences obtained by blast analysis, and choosing conserved regions to design consensus walking primers. the first 170 bp amplicon was extended by designing and using downstream primers within the fragment and upstream primers based on alignments of phylogenetically related cov from genbank. table 2 lists the primers designed in this study (batcv1f/r, batcv2f/r, batcv3f/r, and batcv4f/r). pcr products were purified using dna clean & concentrator purification kit (zymo research, ca, usa), and directly sequenced in both forward and reverse directions by bmr genomics sequencing service (padova, italy). forward and reverse sequences were edited and aligned with muscle multiple sequence alignment tool (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/tools /msa/), alignments were edited with bioedit software [31] . sequences were checked against the genbank database using nucleotide blast (http://blast .ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast .cgi).phylogenetic trees were estimated using the maximum likelihood (ml) and maximum parsimony (mp) methods implemented in mega 6 [32] , after testing the best fitting evolutionary model to the data. bootstrap support values and reliability of internal branches were calculated from 1000 replicate trees. models with the lowest bic scores (bayesian information criterion) are considered to describe the substitution pattern the best. non-uniformity of evolutionary rates among sites was modeled by using a discrete gamma distribution (+g) with 5 rate categories and by assuming that a certain fraction of sites are evolutionary invariable (+i). after generating a gap-free nucleotide alignment of 1090 bp containing the novel virus as well as of coronavirus rdrp reference strains, the most likely nucleotide substitution model selected to analyze these data was tn93+g (tamura-nei, gamma distributed), while analyzing an alignment of a higher number of cov rdrp sequences of 396 bp, the model t92+g was selected (tamura 3-parameter, gamma distributed). the cov sequence obtained in this study was submitted to the genbank database under accession number mg978754. coronavirus rna was detected in three out of 27 faecal samples: 11%, close to previously reported frequency [10] , less than that observed in other studies [17, 30] , unlike results obtained in central-southern italy [33] . positive samples were collected in different locations of northern and central sardinia from three different bat species: the greater horseshoe bat (rhinolophus ferrumequinum), the brown long-eared bat (plecotus auritus), and the european free-tailed bat (tadarida teniotis). [14] , with 100% query coverage and 96% identity. the obtained sequence also showed high nucleotide similarity (89%) with bat sars cov rs672/2006 (fj588686) identified in a chinese rufous horseshoe bat (rhinolophus sinicus) [34] , and with bat sars-like coronavirus rsshco14 (kc881005) from the same bat species [35] . a first phylogenetic analysis was performed based on 1090 bp amplified fragment of the rdrp gene including the cov identified in sardinian bats and other 16 sequences representatives of cov genetic variability. the phylogram (tn93+g, fig. 1 ) clearly showed that sardinian bat cov belong to the β-cov genus, and clustered together with the bulgarian bat cov identified in a rhinolophus blasii (gu190215). to have a deeper look into clade structuring within genera and further characterize the phylogenetic relationships of the detected cov, especially with other european bat coronaviruses, another phylogenetic analysis was performed based on 396 bp of the rdrp gene, and including a total of 30 sequences. figure 2 shows the (t92+g) tree obtained, clearly assigning the sardinian bat cov to clade 2b within the β-cov genus. the branching also showed that the detected sequence was closely related to a betacoronavirus previously identified in a greater horseshoe bat (rhinolophus ferrumequinum) in italy (btcov/rhi_fer/it17/ita/2009, genbank number kc633199), as well as other bat covs detected in rhinolophus spp. from slovenia (gq409747) [36] , and again from italy (i.e., kf500954) [10] . all other clade groupings were consistent with previous studies [14] .at least 21 bat species are currently recognized as living on the island of sardinia, italy [37] . some species are common and adaptable, inhabiting both wild and urban habitats, while others are rare and restricted to limited areas of the island. recently an island endemic species was characterized (plecotus sardus) and an endemic lineage of plecotus auritus was also identified [38] . the existence of endemic bat taxa on sardinia highlights the island importance in the conservation of the european bat community. some sardinian bat populations appear genetically differentiated and isolated from any continental gene pool and should therefore be considered as an evolutionarily significant unit (esu) [39] . this is the first report of coronavirus detection in faeces from bat species in sardinia. a sars-like betacoronavirus was detected in three species (table 3) : the greater horseshoe bat (rhinolophus ferrumequinum), common cave species distributed all over the island; the brown long-eared bat (plecotus auritus), rare species inhabiting few localities (especially mountain woods) in central sardinia; and the european free-tailed bat (tadarida teniotis), common species usually colonizing rocky slopes and mediterranean bushes as well as buildings and bridges in urban areas.the detected virus (sarbatcov1) belonged to clade 2b, including most of the sars-like covs found in bats, as well as human sars coronavirus (figs. 1, 2) . sarbatcov1 appeared related to another betacoronavirus previously identified in the italian greater horseshoe bat (btcov/rhi_fer/ fig. 2 , the two clades within β-coronaviruses are strongly supported in the phylogram, and clade 2c clustered many other bat covs identified in europe (italy and spain) from different species. these findings confirm a correlation between sars-like covs and bats belonging to rhinolophus spp., consistently with previous studies [14, 40] , although the same rdrp sequence, in this study, was also detected in two other species belonging to the genera plecotus and tadarida. as previously discussed, phylogenetic analyses providing insights into viral transmission among bat species have revealed a general clustering by geographic location rather than by bat species [4] . however, our results also show that similar coronaviruses (with nucleotide identity up to 96%) are found in bats distributed in geographically distant regions, such as the island of sardinia, mainland italy and bulgaria.since the identification of sarsr-rh-batcov in bats of the rhinolophus genus [16] , an intense effort was dedicated to investigate covs in bats, and many sars-like viruses were detected and characterized in various species worldwide [4, 19] . recent studies also provided evidence that bats may be the original ancestor hosts for sars and mers viruses, which recently caused pandemic and heavy consequences in humans [41] [42] [43] . therefore, it is paramount to investigate and characterize covs distribution and diversity in bat species, before their potential emergence in humans.full-length genome analysis of the detected cov should be attempted to thoroughly understand phylogenetic relationships between sarbatcov1 and betacoronaviruses previously described in european bats. further studies including larger number of samples as well as continued surveillance on viruses circulating in sardinian species are also needed to understand the role played by bats in the maintenance and transmission of beta covs. monitoring and research on potential zoonoses are essential, and the prevalence and distribution of covs in sardinian bats should be further investigated in urban and rural environment. however, without specific evidence, bats should not be considered as a major concern for public health, especially given the key ecosystem services they perform [44] . bats play essential ecological roles in mosquito and pest control, as pollinators, and are keystone species in natural ecosystems. on top of this, bat species are often protected by national and international laws, as their conservation status may be vulnerable or threatened, and sardinia was recently indicated as a major mediterranean hotspot for bat biodiversity [26] . novel bat coronavirus novel bat coronavirus novel bat coronavirus closely related to sars closely related to sars closely related to sars closely related to sars----cov cov cov cov----2 2 2 2 1 contains contains contains contains natural insertions at the s1/s2 cleavage site of natural insertions at the s1/s2 cleavage site of natural insertions at the s1/s2 cleavage site of natural insertions at the s1/s2 cleavage site of the unprecedented pandemic of pneumonia caused by a novel coronavirus, 34 sars-cov-2, in china and beyond has had major public health impacts on a global scale 35 [1, 2] . although bats are regarded as the most likely natural hosts for sars-cov-2 [3], the 36 origins of the virus remain unclear. here, we report a novel bat-derived coronavirus, 37 denoted rmyn02, identified from a metagenomics analysis of samples from 227 bats 38 collected from yunnan province in china between may and october, 2019. notably, 39 rmyn02 shares 93.3% nucleotide identity with sars-cov-2 at the scale of the complete 40 virus genome and 97.2% identity in the 1ab gene, in which it is the closest relative of 41 sars-cov-2 reported to date. in contrast, rmyn02 showed low sequence identity 42 (61.3%) to sars-cov-2 in the receptor binding domain (rbd) and might not bind to 43 angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). critically, and in a similar manner to 44 8 using simplot [10] also revealed that rmyn02 was more similar to sars-cov-2 than 137 ratg13 in most genome regions ( figure 1a ). again, in the rbd, the 138 pangolin/mp789/2019 virus shared the highest sequence identity to sars-cov-2 ( figure  139 1b). 140 141 results from both homology modelling [2] , in vitro assays [3] and resolved 142 three-dimensional structure of the s protein [11] have revealed that like sars-cov, 143 sars-cov-2 could also use ace2 as a cell receptor. we analyzed the rbd of rmyn02, 144 ratg13, and the two pangolin beta-covs using homology modelling ( the s protein of covs is functionally cleaved into two subunits, s1 and s2 [15] in a similar 171 manner to the haemagglutinin (ha) protein of avian influenza viruses (aivs). the insertion 172 of polybasic amino acids at the cleavage site in the has of some aiv subtypes is 173 associated with enhanced pathogenicity [16, 17] . notably, sars-cov-2 is characterized 174 by a four-amino-acid-insertion at the junction of s1 and s2, not observed in other lineage 175 b beta-covs [18]. this insertion, which represents a poly-basic (furin) cleavage site, is 176 unique to sars-cov-2 and is present in all sars-cov-2 sequenced so far. the insertion 177 of three residues, paa, at the junction of s1 and s2 in rmyn02 ( figure 2h , and figure  178 s2a for results from sanger sequencing) is therefore of major importance. although the 179 inserted residues (and hence nucleotides) are not the same as those in rmyn02, and 180 10 hence are indicative of an independent insertion event, that they are presented in wildlife 181 (bats) strongly suggests that they are of natural origin and have likely acquired by 182 recombination. as such, these data are strongly suggestive of a natural zoonotic origin of 183 sars-cov-2. 184we next performed a phylogenetic analysis of rmyn02, ratg13, sars-cov-2 and the 185 pangolin beta-covs. consistent with a previous research [6], the pangolin beta-covs 186 formed two well-supported sub-lineages, representing animal seized by anti-smuggling 187 authorities in guangxi (pangolin-cov/gx) and guangdong (pangolin-cov/gd) provinces 188 ( figure 3a and figure s4a ). however, whether pangolins are natural reservoirs for these 189 viruses, or they acquired these viruses independently from bats or other wildlife, requires 190 further sampling [6] . more notable was that rmyn02 was the closest relative of 191 sars-cov-2 in most of the virus genome, although these two viruses were still separated 192 from each other by a relatively long branch length ( figure 3a and figure s4a ). in the 193 spike gene tree, sars-cov-2 clustered with ratg13 and was distant from rmyn02, 194 suggesting that the latter virus has experienced recombination in this gene ( figure 3b and 195 figure s4b ). in phylogeny of the rbd, sars-cov-2 was most closely related to 196 pangolin-cov/gd, with the bat viruses falling in more divergent positions, again indicative 197 of recombination ( figure 3c and figure s4c ). finally, phylogenetic analysis of the 198 complete rna dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) gene, which is often used in the 199 phylogenetic analysis of rna viruses, revealed that rmyn02, ratg13 and sars-cov-2 200 formed a well-supported sub-cluster distinct from the pangolin viruses ( figure 3d and 201 figure s4d ). 202 11 we confirmed the bat host of rmyn02, rhinolophus malayanus, by analyzing the 203 sequence of the cytochrome b (cytb) gene from the next generation sequencing data; this 204 revealed 100% sequence identity to a rhinolophus malayanus isolate (genbank 205 accession mk900703). both rhinolophus malayanus and rhinolophus affinis are widely 206 distributed in southwest china and southeast asia. generally, they do not migrate over 207 long distances and are highly gregarious such that they are likely to live in the same caves, 208 which might facilitate the exchange of viruses between them and the occurrence of 209 recombination. notably, ratg13 was identified from anal swabs and rmyn02 was 210 identified from feces, which is a simple, but feasible way for bats to spread the virus to 211 other animals, especially species that can utilize cave environments. 212our study reaffirms that bats, particularly those of the genus rhinolophus, are important 213 natural reservoirs for coronaviruses and currently harbor the closest relatives of 214 sars-cov-2, although this picture may change with increased wildlife sampling. in this 215 context it is striking that the rmyn02 virus identified here in rhinolophus malayanus is 216 the closest relative of sars-cov-2 in the long 1ab replicase gene, although the virus 217 itself has a complex history of recombination. finally, the observation that rmyn02 218 contains a polybasic insertion at the s1/s2 cleavage site in the spike protein clearly 219indicates that events of this kind are a natural and expected component of coronavirus 220 the s1/s2 cleavage site of rmyn02 and representative beta the s1/s2 cleavage site of rmyn02 and representative beta the s1/s2 cleavage site of rmyn02 and representative beta the s1/s2 cleavage site of rmyn02 and representative beta----covs covs covs figure s4 . (n=219), lung (n=2) and liver (n=3), and 300 feces (n=78). all but three bats were sampled alive and subsequently released. all 301 samples were first stored in rnalater and then kept at -80°c until use. 302 next next next next generation sequencing generation sequencing generation sequencing generation sequencing 303 based on the bat species primarily identified according to morphological criteria and 304 confirmed through dna barcoding, the 224 tissue and 78 fecal samples were merged into 305 38 and 18 pools, respectively, with each pool containing 1 to 11 samples of the same type 306 (table s1 ). samples were transferred into the rnaiso plus reagent (takara) for 307 homogenization with steel beads. total rna was extracted and subsequently purified 308 using ezna total rna kit (omega). libraries were constructed using the neb next 309 ultra rna library prep kit (neb). rrna of feces or tissues was removed using the to validate the two novel cov genomes, the clean reads of pool 39 were then de novo 18 assembled using trinity [24] with default settings. the assembled contigs were compared 335 with the consensuses obtained in the previous step and merged using geneious (version 336 11.1.5) (https://www.geneious.com). we found that contigs with high and low abundance 337 corresponded to rmyn02 and rmyn01, respectively, with the abundance of rmyn02 338 5-10 times greater than that of rmyn01. the gaps between contigs of rmyn02 were 339 complemented by re-mapping the reads to the ends of the contigs, which produced the 340 full-length genome sequence of rmyn02. however, due to the limited number of reads 341 available, only a partial genome sequence of rmyn01 was obtained (23395 bp reading frames (orfs) of the verified genome sequences were predicted using geneious 354 (version 11.1.5). pairwise sequence identities were also calculated using geneious. 355 19 potential recombination events were investigated using simplot (version 3.5.1) [10] . 356the three-dimensional structures of rbd from rmyn02, ratg13, pangolin/gd and 357 pangolin/gx were modeled using swiss-model program [20] using sars cov rbd 358 structure (pdb: 2dd8) [12] as a template. 359multiple sequence alignment of sars-cov-2 and the reference sequences was 360 performed using mafft [26] . phylogenetic analyses of the complete genome and major 361 encoding regions were performed using raxml [21] with 1000 bootstrap replicates, 362 employing the gtr nucleotide substitution model (figure 3 ). phylogenetic analysis was 363 also performed using mrbayes [27] , employing the gtr nucleotide substitution model 364 ( figure s4 ). ten million steps were run, with trees and parameters sampled every 1,000 365 steps. 366 sanger seq sanger seq sanger seq sanger sequencing uencing uencing uencing 367 based on the spike gene sequence of rmyn02, a taqman-based qpcr was performed 368 to test the feces of pool 39 (table s2) figure s1 ). to further 372 confirm the s1/s2 cleavage site and the 1b (rdrp) gene sequence of rmyn02, five pair 373 primers, f1/r1-f4/r4 and f6/r6, were designed for sanger sequencing (table s2) metagenomic analysis identified a novel coronavirus, rmyn02, from r. malayanus.rmyn02 was the closest relative of sars-cov-2 in most of the virus genome.two loop deletions in rbd may reduce the binding of rmyn02 with ace2.rmyn02 contains an insertion at the s1/s2 cleavage site in the spike protein. table 1 . sequence identity for sars-cov-2 compared with rmyn02 and representative beta-covs genomes.complete genome• genomic analyses reveal multiple virus importations into guangdong province, resulting in genetically distinct clusters that require careful interpretation.• large-scale epidemiological surveillance and intervention measures were effective in interrupting community transmission in guangdong summary covid-19 is caused by the sars-cov-2 coronavirus and was first reported in central china in december 2019. extensive molecular surveillance in guangdong, china's most populous province, during early 2020 resulted in 1,388 reported rna positive cases from 1.6 million tests. in order to understand the molecular epidemiology and genetic diversity of sars-cov-2 in china we generated 53 genomes from infected individuals in guangdong using a combination of metagenomic sequencing and tiling amplicon approaches. combined epidemiological and phylogenetic analyses indicate multiple independent introductions to guangdong, although phylogenetic clustering is uncertain due to low virus genetic variation early in the pandemic. our results illustrate how the timing, size and duration of putative local transmission chains were constrained by national travel restrictions and by the province's large-scale intensive surveillance and intervention measures. despite these successes, covid-19 surveillance in guangdong is still required as the number of cases imported from other countries is increasing.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https: //doi.org/10.1101 //doi.org/10. /2020 a new virus-associated disease, covid-19 (coronavirus disease 2019), was initially reported in china on 30 th december 2019 (wu et al., 2020) . the causative agent of covid-19 is the novel human coronavirus sars- cov-2 (wu et al., 2020; zhou et al., 2020) , and as of 24 th march 2020, there have been 372,757 confirmed infections and 16,231 deaths reported worldwide (who, 2020) .in china, the covid-19 epidemic grew exponentially during january 2020, peaking on 12 th february 2020 with 15,153 newly confirmed cases per day. one month later, reported covid-19 cases in china dropped to approximately 20 per day, suggesting the epidemic there was contained. however, since the second half of february 2020, the number of cases reported outside of china has risen exponentially. by 11 th march 2020, the day that who announced covid-19 as a new pandemic, 37,371 cases had been reported outside of china (who, 2020) .guangdong province and the pearl river delta metropolitan region contain some of the world's largest and most densely populated urban areas. guangdong is the most populous province of china (113m people) and contains many large cities including guangzhou (12m), shenzhen (10m), dongguan (8m) and foshan (7m). the province has strong transportation links to hubei province, where the first cases of covid-19 were reported. the wuhan-guangzhou high-speed railway has been estimated to transfer 0.1-0.2 million passengers per day during the spring festival period, which started on 10 th january 2020. by 19 th march 2020, guangdong had 1,388 confirmed cases of covid-19, the highest in china outside of hubei province.understanding the evolution and transmission patterns of a virus after it enters a new population is crucial for designing effective strategies for disease control and prevention (grubaugh et al., 2017; ladner et al., 2019) . in this study, we combine genetic and epidemiological data to investigate the genetic diversity, evolution, and epidemiology of sars-cov-2 in guangdong province. we generated virus genome sequences from 53 patients in guangdong and sought to investigate the timing and relative contributions of imported cases versus local transmission, the nature of genetically-distinct of transmission chains within guangdong, and how the emergency response in guangdong was reflected in the reduction and elimination of these transmission chains. our data may provide valuable information for implementing and interpreting genomic surveillance of covid-19 in other regions.enhanced surveillance was launched in all clinics in guangdong province following the first reports of patients with undiagnosed pneumonia on 30 th december 2019. initially, screening and sampling for sars-cov-2 was targeted towards patients with fever and respiratory symptoms and who had a history of travel in the 14 days before the date of symptom onset. the first detected case had symptom onset on 1 st january and was reported on 19 th january 2020 (kang et al. 2020) . covid-19 cases in guangdong grew until early february 2020 (peaking at >100 cases per day) and declined thereafter ( figure 1a ). after 22 nd february 2020, the daily number of locally-infected reported cases in . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.(which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https: //doi.org/10.1101 //doi.org/10. /2020 guangdong did not exceed one. however, since the beginning of march 2020, covid-19 cases imported to guangdong from abroad have been detected with increasing frequency. as of 26 th march 2020, a total of 102 imported cases were reported from 19 different countries ( figure 1a ), highlighting the risk that local covid-19 transmission could reignite in china.different surveillance strategies were applied during the epidemic in guangdong ( figure 1a ). more intense surveillance was initiated on 30 th january 2020 in response to the spring festival period, which results in greater mobility among regions and provinces in china (kraemer, 2020) and because asymptomatic covid-19 cases had been reported (guan et al., 2020) . this included monitoring (i) all travelers returning from hubei or other regions with high epidemic activity, (ii) their close contacts, and (iii) all hospitalized patients in clinics, including those without fever or respiratory symptoms, regardless of their exposure history. approximately 1.35 million samples were screened by six third-party institutions between 30 th january and 15 th march 2020. surveillance commenced at guangdong airports in early march, following the growth of covid-19 outbreaks outside of china.in total, approximately 1.6 million tests were performed by 19 th march, identifying 1,388 sars-cov-2 positive cases in 20 of 21 prefectures in guangdong province ( figure 1b ). around a quarter of cases (336) were judged to be linked to local transmission and two-thirds (1014) had a likely exposure history in hubei (see methods). for locally-infected cases, 181 (53%) were linked to transmissions among household members. more than half of reported cases (60%) were from the cities of shenzhen and guangzhou ( figure 1b ). we note that the number of detected cases will be less than the true number of infections, although the degree of under-reporting is unknown. surveillance was targeted towards travellers, hence these data may overestimate the proportion of travel-associated cases.to understand the genetic structure of the covid-19 outbreak in guangdong, we generated nearcomplete and partial genomes from 53 covid-19 patients in guangdong province. the genomes were generated by a combination of metagenomic sequencing and multiplex pcr amplification followed by nanopore sequencing on a minion device (see methods). sequence sampling dates ranged from 30 th january to 28 th february 2020 ( figure s1 ).. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20047076 doi: medrxiv preprint sequencing was performed on 79 clinical samples (throat swabs, n=32, anal swabs n=24, nasopharyngeal swabs n=10, sputum n=13) collected from 65 patients with varying disease symptoms, ranging from asymptomatic to very severe (see methods). rt-pcr ct (cycle threshold) values of these samples ranged from 19 to 40.86. figure 2a displays the ct values for the 53 samples with >50% genome coverage for which we report whole and partial genome sequences (see figure s2 for details of all 79 samples). when ct values are <30, sequence reads covered approximately 90% or more of the reference genome (genbank accession number: mn908947.3) irrespective of the amplification and sequencing approach used (see methods). however, genome coverage declined for samples with ct >30 ( figure s2 ). using a kruskal-wallis rank sum test we found an association between sample ct values and sample type ( figure 2b ; p<0.001), and sample ct values and disease severity ( figure 2c ; p=0.03; see also liu et al. 2020 ).sequences generated with nanopore sequencing indicate common regions of low coverage ( figure   2d ). the version 1 primer set used here was not able to amplify some regions with high frequency of changes from the reference genome mn908947.3. after completion of this study, the primers have been redesigned to improve coverage (quick 2020) . shared and unique single nucleotide variants (snvs) were observed at 97 sites across the virus genomes ( figure 2d , 2e), with 77 snvs present in only one genome. three snvs were present in >10 genomes: (c8782t, c21711t and t28144c).when compared to 49 previously released genomes from hubei and guangdong, 118 snvs are present in only one genome and the same three snvs are still the only snvs shared between more than 10 genomes ( figure s3 ).. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20047076 doi: medrxiv preprint to understand the genetic diversity of the sars-cov-2 epidemic in guangdong we performed phylogenetic analyses using maximum likelihood and bayesian molecular clock approaches. we added our new virus genomes from guangdong to 177 publicly-available sequences, which includes 73 sequences from china, 17 of which are previously-reported guangdong genomes. the final alignment comprised 250 sequences and increased the number of sars-cov-2 sequences from china by ~60% when our data was submitted to gisaid (on 9 th march).the estimated maximum likelihood (ml) phylogeny is shown in figure 3a . the sars-cov-2 sequences from guangdong (red) are interspersed with viral lineages sampled from other chinese provinces and other countries (black). this pattern agrees with the time series in figure 1a , indicating . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20047076 doi: medrxiv preprint that most detected cases were linked to travel rather than local community transmission. despite this, there were a number of instances where sequences from guangdong appeared to cluster together, sometimes with sequences sampled from other regions. to explore these lineages in more detail, we performed a bayesian molecular clock analysis that places the phylogenetic history of the genomes on an estimated timescale. a summary visualisation of the maximum clade credibility tree from that analysis is shown in figure 3b and is largely congruent with the ml tree. the current low genetic diversity of sars-cov-2 genomes worldwide means that most internal nodes have very low posterior probabilities; we caution that no conclusions should be drawn from these branching events as they will be informed by the phylogenetic prior distribution rather than variable nucleotide sites ( figure 3a ). nevertheless, five clusters (denoted a-e) containing guangdong sequences had posterior probability support of >80% (i.e. their sequences grouped monophyletically in over 80% of trees in the posterior sample; figure 3b ). these clusters are also observed in ml phylogeny ( figure 3a ). from the molecular clock analysis, we were able to estimate the times of the most recent common ancestor (tmrca) of clusteres a-e. we find that sars-cov-2 lineages were imported multiple . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. figure 3,4) , none of which are placed at the root of the cluster, and it is tempting to conclude that the whole cluster derived from community transmission within guangdong. however, 6 of the 8 genomes in this cluster reported travel from hubei and therefore the cluster in fact represents multiple sars-cov-2 introductions into guangdong, with dates of symptom onset around or shortly after the shutdown of travel from wuhan (figure 4) .. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20047076 doi: medrxiv preprint our analyses of the genomic epidemiology of sars-cov-2 in guangdong province indicate that, following the first covid-19 case detected in early january, most infections were the result of virus importation from elsewhere, and that chains of local transmission were limited in size and duration.were effective in interrupting community transmission in a densely populated urban region, ultimately containing the epidemic and limiting the potential for dissemination to other regions. however, vigilance is still required as the risk remains that sars-cov-2 transmission will reignite in guangdong, following a recent increase in the number of covid-19 cases imported to china from other countries.the results also suggest that early phylogenetic analyses of the pandemic should be interpreted carefully. the number of mutations that define phylogenetic lineages are small (often one), and may be similar to the number of sequence differences arising from errors introduced during reverse transcription, pcr amplification, or sequencing. bayesian estimates of divergence times (rannala and yang, 1996) , such as the tmrca of the pandemic, are based on aggregate numbers of mutations and are expected to be more robust. further, the low and variable sampling of covid-19 cases among different regions makes it challenging to evaluate phylogenetic clusters that comprise cases from a single region; although such clusters could indeed represent local transmission, our results show they can also include multiple introductions from a genomically-undersampled location. therefore, as with all phylogenetic analyses, the sars-cov-2 genomes must be interpreted in the context of all available epidemiological information. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https: //doi.org/10.1101 //doi.org/10. /2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https: //doi.org/10.1101 .04.01.20047076 doi: medrxiv preprint rannala, b., and yang, z. (1996 the new sequences have been deposited in gisaid with accession ids epi_isi_413850-413902.we gratefully acknowledge the efforts of local cdcs, hospitals and the third-party detection institutions in epidemiological investigations, sample collection, and detection. this work was a table with genome sequence acknowledgments can be found in supplementary table s2. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20047076 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20047076 doi: medrxiv preprintthis study was approved by the institutional ethics committee of the center for disease control and prevention of guangdong province. written consent was obtained from patients or their guardian(s) when samples were collected. patients were informed about the surveillance before providing written consent, and data directly related to disease control were collected and anonymized for analysis.after reports of hospitalized cases with undiagnosed, severe pneumonia on december 30 th 2019, enhanced surveillance was initiated in guangdong province to detect suspected infections, especially among cases with recent travel history to hubei or other epidemic regions over the last 14 days. virus genomes were generated by two different approaches, (i) untargeted metagenomic sequencing on the bgi mgiseq-2000 (n=63) and illumina nextseq (n=4) sequencing platforms, and (ii) using version 1 of the artic covid-19 multiplex pcr primers (https://artic.network/ncov-2019), followed by nanopore sequencing on an ont minion (n=45). we report only those genomes for which we were able to generate >50% genome coverage, and only report one genome per patient. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https: //doi.org/10.1101 //doi.org/10. /2020 samples were measured and checked with the agilent bioanalyzer 2100 and qubit. libraries were prepared using the smarter stranded total cat. no. 634412) according to the manufacturer's protocol starting with 10 ng total rna. briefly, purified rna was firstly fragmented and converted to cdna using reverse transcriptase. the ribosome cdna was depleted by using zaprv2 (mammalian-specific). the remaining cdna was converted to double stranded dna and subjected to end-repair, a-tailing, and adapter ligation. the constructed libraries were amplified using 9-16 pcr cycles. sequencing of metatranscriptome libraries was conducted using illumina nextseq 550 se 75 or bgi mgiseq-2000 pe100 platforms.for the multiplex pcr approach, we followed the general method of multiplex pcr as described in (https://artic.network/ncov-2019) (quick et al., 2017) . briefly, the multiplex pcr was performed with two pooled primer mixture and the cdna reverse transcribed with random primers was used as a template. after 35 rounds of amplification, the pcr products were collected and quantified, followed with end-repairing and barcoding ligation. around 50 fmol of final library dna was loaded onto the minion. the nanopore sequencing platform takes less than 24 hours to obtain 10gb of sequencing data, achieving between 0.3-0.6 million reads per sample. the artic bioinformatics pipeline for covid (https://artic.network/ncov-2019) was used to generate consensus sequences and call single nucleotide variants relative to the reference sequence.to test the precision and threshold of the multiplex pcr and nanopore sequencing method, we undertook a serial dilution experiment. viral rna was extracted from a cell strain of sars-cov-2.to mimic clinical samples with different viral loads, we diluted this viral rna with sars-cov-2 negative rna extracted from nasopharyngeal swab specimens. viral loads were estimated using rt-pcr with serial diluted plasmid as a standard. at each dilution level we performed multiplex pcr and nanopore sequencing and assembly as per the approach above, except that reads were assembled against the consensus genome obtained from the original sample using metagenomic sequencing. as expected, relative virus load, % genome coverage and average read depth decreased at higher dilutions. genome coverage exceeded 75% for all except the final dilution (table s3) .reference-based assembly of the metagenomic raw data was performed as follows. illumina adaptors were removed, and reads were filtered for quality (q30 threshold and read length >15nt) using cutadapt 1.18 (martin, 2011) . the mapping of cleaned reads was performed against genbank reference strain mn908947.3 using bowtie2 (langmead and salzberg, 2012) . consensus sequences were generated using samtools 1.2 (li et al., 2009) . sites were called at depth>=3 if they matched the reference strain, or depth>=5 if they differed from the reference, otherwise sites were denoted n.ambiguity nucleotide codes were used if (i) the minor variant is observed at >30% frequency and (ii) the minor variant is represented by 5 or more reads. assembly of the nanopore raw data was . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.01.20047076 doi: medrxiv preprint performed using the artic bioinformatic pipeline for covid-19 with minimap2 (li, 2018) and medaka (https://github.com/nanoporetech/medaka) for consensus sequence generation. for patient samples that were sequenced using both metagenomics and nanopore sequencing, we retained only the sequence with the highest genome coverage.all available sars-cov-2 sequences (n=323) on gisaid (gisaid.org) on 13 th march 2020 were downloaded. sequences from gisaid that were error-rich, those which represented multiple sequences from the same patient, and those without a date of sampling were removed. finally, the dataset was reduced by only retaining the earliest and most recently sampled sequences from epidemiologically linked outbreaks (e.g. the diamond princess cruise ship). the resulting dataset of 250 sequences therefore represents the global diversity of the virus while minimizing the impact of sampling bias. sequences were aligned using mafft v7.4 (katoh and standley, 2013) and manually inspected in geneious v11.0.3 (https://www.geneious.com). the final alignment length was 29,923 nucleotides.we used both the maximum likelihood (ml) and bayesian coalescent methods to explore the phylogenetic structure of sars-cov-2. the ml phylogeny was estimated with phyml (guindon et al., 2010) using the hky+ⲅ4 substitution model (hasegawa et al., 1985) with gamma-distributed rate variation (yang, 1994) . linear regression of root-to-tip genetic distance against sampling date indicated that the sars-cov-2 sequences evolve in clock-like manner (r = 0.539) ( figure s4 ). the bayesian coalescent tree analysis was undertaken in the beast (ayres et al., 2012; suchard et al., 2018) framework, also using the hky+ⲅ4 substitution model with gamma-distributed rate variation with an exponential population growth tree prior and a strict molecular clock. taxon sets were defined and used to estimate the posterior probability of monophyly and the posterior distribution of the tmrca of observed phylogenetic clusters a-e (supplementary table 1 ). four independent chains were run for 100 million states and parameters and trees were sampled every 10,000 states. upon completion, chains were combined using logcombiner after removing 10% of states as burn-in and convergence was assessed with tracer (rambaut et al., 2018) . the maximum clade credibility (mcc) tree was inferred from the bayesian posterior tree distribution using treeannotator, and visualised with figtreejs-react (https://github.com/jtmccr1/figtreejs-react@9874a5b). code for figure 3b is available at https://github.com/jtmccr1/tree-for-oli and a live version of the tree can be found at https://jtmccr1.github.io/tree-for-oli/. monophyly and tmrca (times to the most recent common ancestor) statistics were calculated for each taxon set from the posterior tree distribution.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.(which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10. 1101 the worldwide fast spread of sars-cov-2 virus during the first months of this year has caused 316,169 deaths with more than 4,731,458 confirmed cases since the first reports of novel pneumonia in wuhan, hubei province, china (zhou et al. 2020; wu et al. 2020 ) up to may 19 2020 (who 2020b . the virus belongs to the beta-coronavirus, and it is the seventh coronavirus known to infect humans, causing severe respiratory and systemic disorders (rothan and byrareddy 2020) , with a basic r0 index estimated to range from 1.4 to over 6 . the closest known relatives of sars-cov-2 circulate in animals, specifically bats or pangolins (zhang, wu, and zhang 2020) , suggesting that an animal virus crossed species boundaries to efficiently infect humans, possibly through multiple passages in intermediate animal hosts, even though the transmission route has not been yet identified to date (andersen et al. 2020 ).traces of the history of the spread are present in the viral genome and comparative genomics approaches can therefore be used to understand how viruses can adapt to multiple hosts, uncovering key signatures of this adaptation (andersen et al. 2020; wan et al. 2020) , and to trace the infection routes of the virus. at the same time, genomic studies can help tracing viral variants that may be geographically restricted and/or may account for different levels of infectivity and mortality in humans. these variants might arise during the spread of the epidemic, as viruses are known for their high frequency of mutation, particularly in single stranded rna viruses -as in the case of sars-cov-2 (sanjuán and domingo-calap 2016) , which has a single, positive-strand rna genome.randomly generated variants can then spread in the population, due to stochastic reasons (i.e. founder effect, drift) or as a consequence of positive selection exerted by intrinsic biological features (such as the level of virus infectivity and its transmission rate), or extrinsic factors such as use of antivirals or reactions by the immune system or other defence mechanisms put in place by the host (di giorgio et al. 2020) . therefore, haplotype(s) present at the beginning of the epidemic spread can change in time; sometimes novel variants can overcome ancestral ones, and this can be a consequence of different levels of aggressiveness but also of mechanisms beyond selection. if the different variants are identical in terms of their ability to infect and replicate in the host, country-specific switches in haplotype frequency with respect to the most common haplotypes can depend on the very first haplotype(s) arriving in the country (provine 2004) . instead, when haplotype frequency changes globally, then the hypothesis of differential aggressiveness becomes more probable, indicating that the novel variants may be better adapted to infect human hosts; however, even in this case, the complexity of global human mobility or sampling bias, may originate patterns that may seem causal but are not.here, we present a comprehensive study of the coding sequences from sars-cov-2 genome sequences isolated since the beginning of the epidemic. italy was the first european country registering non-imported covid-19 cases requiring hospitalization. the first registered case of covid-19 was on february 20, 2020, a young man in the lombardy region in northern italy, diagnosed with atypical pneumonia (livingston and bucher 2020) . in the next 24 hours 36 more cases were detected, and as of april 27th 2020, italy registered 197,675 cases with 26,644 deaths, one of the highest toll in europe and in the world. who classifies the spreading occurring in italy as community transmission, indicating that the country is experiencing large outbreaks of local transmission with no possibility to trace transmission chains between the cases, and with multiple and unrelated clusters of transmission. the high mortality rate observed in italy, especially at the beginning of the epidemic raised the question whether italian strain(s) might have increased aggressiveness. while the increased mortality observed in italy could be explained by the fact that, at the beginning of the epidemic, swabs were performed only on individuals showing up at a hospital, distorting the sampling toward a group of symptomatic individuals devoid of healthy carriers, we cannot exclude that italian haplotype frequency are partially different, at least genetically. to have a better insight on the history and spread of the covid-19 pandemic in italy and thanks to the sequences deposited in the gisaid database, we identified 7 non synonymous mutations that are differentially frequent in italian sars-cov-2 strains respect to strains circulating globally. these mutations are enriched in italy, but present in strains from other countries as well, as shown by tracing their relative frequency in time both globally and in different countries, therefore we traced their distribution worldwide and complemented with a phylogenetic analysis to understand how the variants are related.genomes were downloaded from the gisaid.org repository on april, 10, 2020, and a second time on april, 28, 2020, and are listed, together with reference to the submitting laboratories, in supplementary table 1 . we extracted coding sequences using a strategy based on tblastn (camacho et al. 2009 ) comparisons using as queries all the proteins from the sars-cov-2 reference sequence deposited in ncbi (accession mn908947). after the comparison, the coordinates of the blast alignments on each genome were used to extract the coding sequence. nucleotide sequences were then aligned and translated, and the alignments were manually checked for the presence of frameshifts, and manually edited. alignments were manually edited to remove partial and poorly aligned sequences, resulting in a variable number of sequences per alignment. this manual curation resulted in alignments containing a minimum number of 2262 sequences for orf3a and a maximum of 5585 sequences for the nucleocapsid protein, with an average of 4222 sequences per alignment. we are aware that by removing sequences with gaps we are likely removing part of the genuine variability present (i.e. indels), however, we observed indels with such a low frequency that we attributed them mostly to sequencing/assembly errors and decided that the clear advantage of a stronger signal outweighs the possible disadvantages deriving from information loss. additional analysis with high quality genome sequences will be necessary to evaluate whether indels represent an important source of variation. regardless, this does not change the results of our analysis as the target of this work are point mutations.sequences from the alignments were used to build amino acid frequency profiles by using the r-package seqinr (charif and jr 2007) . basically, for each protein encoded in the sars-cov-2 we obtained two profiles, one for italian strains and one for the entire set of sequences. as the positions in the alignments for the two groups under examination are congruent, we can then calculate:that is the maximum log ratio of the frequency (f) of all amino acids at a certain position i in the alignment in italian ( it ) and total ( all ) sequences. then we identify positions with s>0.5 that corresponds to the identification of positions where there is a frequency change in one of the residues of at least 2x. variability in multi-alignments was quantified by calculating entropy = − ∑ # -8 #9:-# at each position of each manually curated protein multi-alignment. mutual information was calculated based on (buck and atchley 2005) to assess whether variants tend to co-occur frequently.to build updated time profiles of the identified variants, sequences were downloaded a second time from gisaid.org on april, 28, 2020 (9075 sequences, only high quality and high coverage). sampling dates were retrieved from the database and can be found in the gisaid sequence acknowledgment table (supplementary table 1 ). sequences for which the geographic origin and/or the data were not correctly defined (supplementary table 1 ), were removed, to obtain a database of about 8500 sequences, with some per-site variability due to the variable presence of ns in the sequences. we calculated two different time series, one for the entire set of sequences available up to the moment of sequence download, and one by considering only sequences taken from predefined groups of countries (hereinafter the time series by country). in the latter, we merged nearby countries to increase the precision of the estimation of the relative frequency of variants within predefined time intervals. the total time range since the first sequence available (133 days) was split into 13 (9 for the analysis by country, as the number of sequences per interval is smaller) non-overlapping intervals of about 10 days (~13 days for the time series by country). interval duration was selected looking for a compromise among the number of sequences available on average per interval in the different groups and the time resolution of the time series. for each interval we calculated the frequency of the observed variants and the shannon diversity index considering all concatenated coding sequences (not limited to the positions considered in this work). in supplementary table 2 we show the number of sequences used for each country for each interval.we performed a phylogenetic analysis by concatenating nucleotide aligned on the basis of the manually curated amino acid alignments. we selected the best phylogenetic model for our alignment using modeltest-ng (darriba et al. 2020 ) (gtr+i+ model) and then we performed maximum likelihood phylogenetic estimation in raxml8 (stamatakis 2014) . the obtained phylogenetic tree was then visualized and integrated with additional information about variants and geographical origin using figtree (https://github.com/rambaut/figtree/).our analysis allowed us to identify 7 positions in four proteins that present drastic changes in amino acid frequencies when comparing italian sequences with worldwide sequences available on gisaid.org on april, 10, 2020 ( figure 1 ). however, we discovered that residues found at these positions are not peculiar of italy and, as a matter of fact, they are the most variable genomic positions across available sars-cov-2 sequences (supplementary figure 1) . therefore, we decided to proceed with a worldwide analysis. the sites that we identified are:1. position 614 in the spike protein, where an aspartate residue is found in high frequency in sequences obtained at the beginning of the pandemic. a variant, with a glycine residue at the same position is however now very common in europe, italy in particular. during the preparation of this manuscript, we realized that some of the variants are also the topic of other papers and preprints predating this work e.g. (korber et al. 2020; banerjee et al. 2020; somasundaram, mondal, and lawarde 2020; begum et al. 2020; bai et al. 2020; yang et al. 2020; pachetti et al. 2020) . the fact that we identify some of the previously known mutations by using a different approach indicates that they represent a genuine signal rather than artefacts; however, this does not necessarily mean that their increase in time (see below) is a consequence of a correspondingly increased transmissibility rate or aggressiveness in general -for which at the moment there is no conclusive data as stated in most of the available preprints. in the following, we summarize a thorough bibliographical analysis looking for functional information associated with these positions or the domains they belong to. however, we stress once more that virus spreading is characterized by haplotype shifts that are not necessarily related to the performances of the haplotypes themselves -for instance genetic drift or founder effect -therefore without targeted functional studies on the variants it is difficult to ascertain whether one or the other explanation is more probable. figure 1 for a confirmation of the variability of these positions in the entire set of sequences. note that to cope with zeros when taking the logarithm of the ratio of amino acid frequencies, we add a small number to every frequency that depends on the number of sequences in the two groups (italian and world). this makes so that positions with identical amino acid frequencies in the two groups do not get an s exactly equal to zero.d614 is located in the sd1 domain of the spike protein. it is positioned in a loop right after a beta-strand and close to a completely solvent exposed disordered region outside and downstream the ace2 interaction domain (wrapp et al. 2020; walls et al. 2020) . the resolution of the three available structures is not high enough to thoroughly discuss h-bond network. it is likely that d614 side chain does not establish close interactions with neighboring residues. conformationally, d614 lies in the region of left-handed helices. thus, from the structural point of view, the mutation d614g is likely to be neutral (no particularly strong interactions lost from the missing carboxylate group). on the other hand, the mutation might even be beneficial for overall protein stability: given the increased conformational freedom of glycine, it is indeed a perfect residue in turns following beta structures. other authors suggest a positive effect of d614g on the virus efficiency in binding the ace2 receptor. korber and colleagues (unpublished, (korber et al. 2020) ) suggest the possibility of structural changes in the protein or even an improved antibody-dependent enhancement effect.in coronaviruses, orf1 is translated to yield the polyprotein that is processed by proteolysis with the production of intermediate and mature nonstructural proteins (nsps). in figure 2 we highlight the position of the variant sites on the polyprotein with respect to known domains, as defined by the conserved domain database ). position 265 corresponds to residue 85 of the non-structural protein 2 (nsp2) which is characterized by four transmembrane helices (th) (angeletti et al. 2020) , whose role is still unknown. more in detail, position 85 lies at the n-terminal, which protrudes from the external face of the membrane. interaction analysis of the corresponding protein from sars virus shows that nsp2 can form dimeric or multimeric complexes that can also involve additional viral proteins (nsp3, nsp4, nsp6, nsp8, nsp11, nsp16, orf3a) (von brunn et al. 2007) suggesting that nsp2 might be involved in the viral life cycle. sars nsp2 also interact with host proteins, such as prohibitin 1 and 2 (cornillez-ty et al. 2009 ), that are involved in cell cycle progression, migration, differentiation, apoptosis and mitochondrial biogenesis (fusaro et al. 2003; merkwirth and langer 2009; rajalingam et al. 2005; sun et al. 2004) suggesting it might be important to manipulate prominent host functions. murine hepatitis virus and sars-cov strains deleted in this portion of the polyprotein (graham et al. 2005 ) have a strongly reduced viral growth and rna synthesis, but are not affected at the level of protein processing. ectopic expression of the nucleotide sequence coding for nsp2 in murine cells infected by strains missing nsp2, allowed to detect its recruitment in viral complexes. it is therefore possible that nsp2 is involved in global rna synthesis, interaction with host proteins and pathogenesis (von brunn et al. 2007 ). in infected cells, nsp2 seems to be present in small vesicular foci, but in absence of additional viral proteins it localizes in cytoplasmic or nuclear membranes, without a specific target (prentice et al. 2004; von brunn et al. 2007 ). unfortunately, mutagenesis experiments are still not available for sars-cov2, and therefore we still do not know whether the variant observed at this site has any effect on in vivo virus properties.position 3606 belongs to nsp6, a protein that induces the formation of autophagosomes, which is a sign of starvation in uninfected cells (cottam, whelband, and wileman 2014) . autophagosomes can act as an innate defense against viral infection but they can be hijacked and support the assembly of coronavirus replicase proteins (orvedahl et al. 2007; suhy, giddings, and kirkegaard 2000; wileman 2006 ). together with nsp3 and nsp4, nsp6 moreover promotes the formation of the double membrane vesicles typically observed in sars disease (angelini et al. 2013 ). nsp6 is a protein with 7 transmembrane domains (oostra et al. 2008 ) and position 3606 lays in the luminal loop between the first and second hydrophobic transmembrane domains. in the wild type sars-cov-2 sequence, we find 3 phenylalanine residues just before l3606. instead, some of the variants in this paper have a stretch of 4 phenylalanine, keeping this region highly hydrophobic.position 4715 belongs instead to the n-terminal domain of the rna-directed rna polymerase (rdrp, also known as nsp12). by inspecting its three-dimensional structure, sars-cov-2 rdrp displays a n-terminal nidovirus-like rdrp-associated nucleotidyltransferase domain (niran) followed by an interface domain and then by the canonical palm and finger domain structure (gao et al. 2020) . p4715 (p323 according to nsp12 numbering) is located in the alpha-beta interface domain which bridges niran with the finger domain. specifically, p4715 sits on a solvent exposed loop region in the groove formed between niran and the finger domain. the mutation p4715l mutation does not change the non-polar nature of the side chain and from the conformational point of view the substitution from p to l should not result in specific structural adjustment of the loop. thus, despite no information concerning mutations at the specific sites identified in this work, the three variant sites in the polyprotein belong to important functional regions of the sequence.orf8 codes for a secreted accessory protein not directly involved in viral replication (dediego et al. 2008; yount et al. 2005; tan et al., 2020) . homologs have been found in some beta-coronavirus, named orf7a (tan et al., 2020) . orf7a of sars codes for a protein with a structure similar to immunoglobulin superfamily proteins, specifically the metazoan ig involved in adhesion (nelson et al. 2005; hänel et al. 2006) . the function of this protein is not entirely clear, but could be related to the modulation of the immune system. studies have demonstrated that sars-orf7a protein localizes mainly in the perinuclear region of the host cell, where it interacts with bst-2 (bone marrow stromal antigen 2) preventing the glycosylation of bst-2 needed for functioning (taylor et al. 2015) . bst-2 inhibits the release of the virus, as observed in hiv-1 (taylor et al. 2015) likely at the level of the endoplasmic reticulum-golgi where it binds budding virions. orf8 has a structure composed of a beta-sandwich fold with seven beta-stands, which highly resembles orf7a's structure, but it lacks the c-terminal transmembrane region and has an additional long insert between strands 3 and 4 which is supposed to be involved in peptide binding (tan et al., 2020) . orf8 is a fast-evolving gene which, together with the absence of the transmembrane region and the presence of the insertion may suggest some functional divergence with respect to its ancestor (tan et al., 2020) . it has been proposed that orf8 may have acquired a function similar to the adenoviral cr1 protein, which interferes with mhc molecules to attenuate the antigen presentation and therefore the capability of the host immune system to detect the virus. in this context, we notice that l84 lays within the orf8 insert, indicating it may represent a further adaptation. because direct functional information on this site is lacking at the moment, it is not possible to ascribe a functional adaptation to these variants; however, variability at this site might counteract mhc interference function, as a fast-evolving region in the insert may have been selected positively to facilitate the interaction with a fast-evolving host molecule (tan et al., 2020) .after having identified variant sites, we explored the time profile of the seven variable sites across all sequences (figure 3 ) evidencing haplotype frequency changes for all of them between february and march, with five changes being moderate (nucleocapsid r203g and g204r, orf8 l84s, polyprotein t265i and l3606f) and two more drastic, now representing the most common haplotypes of non-chinese recent sequences (spike d614g and polyprotein p4715l). the spike variant, in particular, was sequenced only few times in china since the beginning of the epidemy, the first time in zhejiang on january 24; however, in this country it never reached a significant frequency. conversely, after the first sequencing of this variant in germany on january 28 this variant started at very low-frequency and then became the most common haplotype at this position outside china. a similar situation is true for the haplotype with a leucine in position 4715 of the polyprotein -that rapidly increases since the beginning of march.these patterns seem indicative of a functional role for at least some of the variants that undergo an increase in frequency, but in the absence of any functional test or experimental data, we cannot rule out that the observed frequency changes are a consequence of a founder effect in europe followed by a spreading wave from europe to countries where the epidemic started later. a founder effect, however, implies that the founder arrives first, while this is not always the case, at least for some of the variants and part of the countries. at the same time some data both reviewed and unreviewed start to be available, suggesting that d614g on the spike might provide some advantage to the virus. bai (bai et al. 2020 ) and brufsky (brufsky 2020 ) observed a correlation of g614 with increased mortality, while korber and coworkers (korber et al. 2020) found a correlation between the presence of the mutation and a higher viral load in patients. in the legend, we indicate the reference residue with an asterisk, and the variant on which we are focusing with an exclamation mark. additional variants were identified in the sequence dataset downloaded on april, 28, but they never reach significant percentages, at least at the moment.position 614 on the spike and position 4715 on the polyprotein covary in a significant way (data not shown). the most likely explanation for this is the rapid sequential fixation of both mutations in the same strain, together with the absence of recombinations in between the two. the two adjacent sites in the nucleocapsid sequences show a perfect agreement in the time profiles, strongly suggesting that they happened together or within a short time. these two mutations respectively remove and add an arginine (passing from rg to kr); by considering the overall frequencies of the possible amino acid pairs at these positions, we suggest that the second arginine may complement the loss of the first one. indeed, rr is never observed, kg is extremely rare (relative frequency, r.f.= 0.00036), while most genomes either present the original pair rg (r.f.= 0.87464) or kr (r.f.= 0.12500). we speculate that this could indeed be a consequence of the non-neutrality of configurations with no arginine at both positions, an information still not giving hints on the fitness of the fixed variant. next,we reasoned that grouping all the sequences uploaded from different countries may provide a picture averaged over variable and more complicated situations that might characterize the evolution of the virus within different countries or geographical areas. we therefore explored the time profiles of the variants in different geographical macro-regions ( figure  4 and figure 5 ) highlighting a highly heterogeneous situation. we also provide a movie illustrating the changes taking place in variant frequencies across overlapping time windows in macro-regions (supplementary movie 1), which provides a dynamical view of the time profiles of the variants. figure 4 shows that d614g in china never reaches significant frequency while it increased quite rapidly in several areas where it arrived and where it often started at very low frequency with respect to the original haplotype. if a functional role for this mutation will be demonstrated, this pattern seems to indicate that different variants might have different fitness when interacting with different host's haplotypes, i.e. in case asian and european have different haplotypes concerning some of the proteins interacting with the spike, like for instance furin. to conclude, it is clear that since the first appearance of d614g and other of the above variants, their relative frequency underwent a significant increase in several countries, most of the time overcoming in prevalence the original variant(s), except for china, south asia, south america and africa. in figure 6 we summarize the most recent situation, by using sequences from the interval april 10 to 20, 2020. the best phylogenetic model selected according to aic and bic was gtr+i+g, for which the estimated substitution rate matrix contains the following rates, relative to the g<->t rate, taken as unity: a<->c=0.34, a<->g=0.77, a<->t=0.32, c<->t=100. the extremely high rate for c to t (or better u, considering we are dealing with an rna virus) is in agreement with the involvement of host apobec-like editing mechanisms, as proposed in recent works (di giorgio et al. 2020) . besides not being the focus of this paper, these rates provide further evidence that host's mutagen systems may play an important role in the evolution of sars-cov-2 and its detection by the immune system. the phylogenetic tree integrated with additional information is reported in figure 7 , with different coloring schemes and together with an evolutionary model summarizing how the different variants configurations are likely related to each other. when considering the information about the residues found at the seven positions on which we are focusing (hereinafter variants configurations, vcs), as in figure 7a , we find that the phylogenetic clades correspond to the six most frequent ones (accounting for over 96.3% of the sequences), that is rgtlpdl, rgtlpds, rgtfpdl, krtllgl, rgtllgl, rgillgl -obtained by linking the variant residues in the order: protein nucleocapsid sites 203, and 204, polyprotein sites 265, 3606 and 4715, spike site 614 and orf8 site 84; for this reason hereinafter we will use clades a to f interchangeably with the vcs written above. we are aware that the correlation is not perfect, as can be seen by the presence of additional but low frequency variants within each clade, or the presence of vc misplaced with respect to their major clade. misplaced sequences can be a consequence of insufficient phylogenetic signal or of convergent evolution. for instance, as anticipated above one of the chinese sequences carrying spike variant 614g (vc: rgtlpgs), is indeed contained within clade b (rgtlpds), indicating convergent evolution with the spike d614g variant in clades d, e, f, or maybe an artifact. however, the limited number of similar cases supports our simplification and the correspondence among clades in the tree and vcs.our multi-alignment contains one sequence annotated as bat coronavirus (epi_isl_402131), which provides a rooting of the phylogenetic tree that falls in clade b and indeed contains most of the sequences obtained in china at the beginning of the epidemy ( figure 6, panel b) . the tree has two main "radiations", one corresponding to variants configurations rgtlpdl, rgtlpds, rgtfpdl and one to krtllgl, rgtllgl, rgillgl, therefore the main partition of the tree corresponds to the identity of residues at position 614 of the spike and 4715 of the polyprotein. the two radiations are present at different frequencies in the same countries, with the notable exception of chinese sequences within radiation 2, except for epi_isl_422425, the only sequence with a rgtllgl pattern sequenced in china that is also present in the phylogenetic tree (indicated in figure 7a ). this suggests that while most of the diversification of radiation 1 took place in china and was then exported outside, the ancestor of radiation 2 travelled outside china early to start a diversification in the countries where it arrived. this hypothesis is in agreement with the fact that epi_isl_422425 is placed very close to the root of the branch leading to radiation 2, indicating it may indeed represent a strain closely related to the true radiation 2 ancestor. these observations raise important questions (1) about the identity and movements of the first individual carrying the ancestral radiation 2 variant outside china (2) on the timing of the epidemic, but most importantly (3) the reason why it did not increase in frequency in china but elsewhere.following the topology of the tree we propose an evolutionary model (figure 7c ) whereby the ancestral bat variants configuration (rgtvpds or any other present in the presently unknown animal host) evolved into rgtlpds and from this to rgtlpdl. we stress that this likely took place through unobserved states/hosts as the root branch length is close to the total length of the tree and therefore we do not consider mutation v3606l in the polyprotein full sequence as an adaptation to the human host. the latter originated rgtfpdl on one side, and the ancestor of radiation 2 (rgtllgl) that originated both krtllgl (through kg unfit strains?) and later rgillgl.given the almost perfect agreement of the tree with the variants configurations, we analysed the geographical distribution and the time profiles of the seven sites at once, similar to what is done for mlst-based classification of pathogens. in figure  8a we show the time profiles of the relative abundance of sequences belonging to the 6 clades, clearly showing not only the appearance and increase of the novel clades, but most importantly the gradual disappearance of sequences belonging to clade a (see also supplementary movies 2 and 3). when focusing on single clades across all macro-regions previously defined, we find a heterogeneous situation with different variants increasing in time in different countries. however, we can see that all vcs with a proline at position 4715 of the polyprotein and an aspartate at position 614 of the spike almost disappear in time, remaining abundant only in south asia and oceania; in the rest of the world, only vcs with a leucine and a glycine at those positions remain in the last interval of our time range, after replacing the existing vcs. this is indeed clear from figure 8c showing that vc for clade a (rgtlpdl) is no more present in the interval april 10 to 20, 2020. south asia is particular because it is the only area where vcs of radiation 2 (rgtllgl,krtllgl,rgillgl) are present for some time but then disappear with a re-increase of clade c (rgtfpdl). this may suggest these variants have equal phenotypic characteristics, but as written above, we cannot exclude differential fitness depending on host's haplotypes. by calculating the shannon index for sequences within the same intervals of times used to track the changes in frequency of the variants, we were able to trace the evolution of diversity in different places. peaks indicate the emergence (from outside or by evolution of pre-existing strains) of variants and their increase in frequency. values maintaining a high shannon index correspond to situations where different variants coexist at comparable frequencies, while a decrease after a peak means that after the appearance of one or more new variants / clades, one of them (novel or old) takes over -reducing the variability. we also indicate the first sampled sequence for each of the six clades. variability increases when a new variant appears, then it stays more or less stable when the existing variants maintain their relative frequencies. however, if one of the variants becomes dominant, then variability decreases again after a peak. increasing variability in time means that the arrival of novel variants continues steadily, or that the existing ones become more homogeneous in frequency.in this work, we identified seven positions in coding sequences of the sars-cov-2 genome that are characterized by a different pattern of amino acids when comparing italian sequences with the global trends around the world. further analysis revealed that these sites are not peculiar of italian strains, and that different combinations of these variants are present at varying relative frequencies in different geographic areas. we found that the combination of these residues identifies six abundant configurations that corresponds to 6 phylogenetic clades and that cover over 96% of all sequences. this suggests that the characterization of these positions can represent a fast and portable method for the sars-cov-2 typing, but novel variants are emerging that might eventually take over the old ones through mutations at additional sites. using this approach we were able to follow the evolution of the virus over time among continents, showing that the different clades evolved in different moments and that their frequencies vary among continents.these sites are also the most variable among all available sars-cov-2 sequences, raising intriguing questions about their functional effects. variants with a leucine at position 4715 of the polyprotein together with a glycine at position 614 of the spike, underwent an increase in frequency since the end of january in most countries, overcoming the original haplotypes. mutations that might affect the structure of the spike protein are of primary interest, since many vaccine candidates and serological tests rely on the conformation of this protein (who 2020a). this and other works also explore the hypothesis that the variants may indeed provide a selective advantage to the virus. clade prevalence in different countries could be used to check for mortality rate differences and association with variants, but as the rates depend on many other factors (different screening strategies, different ways to define an individual infected and so on), we feel premature discussing such correlations. once the numbers will be standardized for different countries, this kind of associations, if present, will clearly emerge. moreover, to really clarify these issues, experimental data is required, such as for instance in the form of tninsertion mutagenesis, as performed on other viruses in the past (fulton et al. 2017 ) followed by competition experiments in in vitro cultures or the design of genomes carrying well-defined changes. this would allow to understand how the virus tolerate mutations at different sites and might provide information on the importance of different genomic regions for different stages of the infection. query seq. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), a new coronavirus that causes severe respiratory diseases and is closely related to sars-cov, was described for the first time in the city of wuhan in the hubei province of china in late december 2019 (https://www.who.int/ csr/don/05-january-2020-pneumonia-of-unkown-cause-china/en/). it belongs to the β-coronavirus genus of the coronaviridae family, and has 96% genomic identity with a previously detected sars-like bat coronavirus. 1, 2 the virus subsequently spread and, on 30 january 2020, the world health organisation (who) declared it a public health emergency of international concern (https://www.who.int/ news-room/detail/30-01-2020-statement-on-the-second-meeting-of-theinternational-health-regulations-(2005)-emergency-committee-regardingthe-outbreak-of-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov). on 26 february, the director-general of the who announced that the number of new cases of the disease, now officially known as covid-19, reported outside china since the day before had for the first time exceeded the number of new cases in china (https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/whodirector-general-s-opening-remarks-at-the-mission-briefing-oncovid-19---26-february-2020). by 13 march 2020, a total of 137 445 cases and 5088 fatalities had been reported in 117 countries (https:// gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/bda75947 40fd40299423467b48e9ecf6), giving rise to major concerns throughout the world, but particularly in south korea, iran, and italy. we have now molecularly characterized and phylogenetically analyzed three complete genomes of sars-cov-2 isolated from gianguglielmo zehender and alessia lai contributed equally to this paper. three of the first 16 patients observed in italy, none of whom reported a recent history of foreign travel.all of the data used in this study were previously anonymized as using geneious software, v. 9.1.5 (http://www.geneious.com). 4 the genomes obtained from the three patients were aligned with a total of 157 sars-cov-2 genomes obtained worldwide and publicly available at gisaid on 3 march 2020 (https://www.gisaid.org/), and with an additional italian strain that became available during the study. table s1 shows the accession ids, and sampling dates and locations of the sequences included in the dataset.a root-to-tip regression analysis was made using tempest in order to investigate the temporal signal of the dataset. two coalescent priors (constant population size and exponential growth) and strict vs relaxed molecular clock models were tested by means of path sampling (ps) and stepping stone (ss) sampling. 8 the substitution rate prior was set as a normal distribution with mean 2.2 × 10 −6 substitutions/site/day, standard deviation = 1.1 × 10 −6 (http:// virological.org/t/phylodynamic-analysis-176-genomes-6-mar-2020/356). 9 the time of the most recent common ancestor (tmrca) was calculated using days as the unit of time.all of the genes were tested for selection pressure using datamonkey (https://www.datamonkey.org/). the present phylogenetic analysis confirms that the common origin of the sars-cov-2 strains characterized so far was several weeks before the first cases of covid-19 pneumonia were described inchina. 9 it also shows that the whole genomes of the three sars-cov-2 strains isolated from patients in northern italy and characterized by us are closely related to each other, as well as to the other two published italian sequences, and the german, finnish, mexican, and brazilian sequences, all of which formed a highly supported clade.the german sequence at the outgroup of the clade came from a covid-19 outbreak reported between 20 and 24 january and occurring after business meetings with a shanghai business woman who tested positive after returning to china. 10 our tmrca estimate showed that the root of clade a was in the month of january 2020, a period compatible with this event. however, our data do not allow us to make any hypotheses concerning the possible routes followed by the virus to reach italy because, given the limited number of sparsely sampled sequences in the tree, 11 it is impossible to infer the directionality of transmission, and this means that multiple independent importations to europe cannot be excluded.our data suggest that sars-cov-2 virus entered northern italy between the second half of january and early february 2020, which is weeks before the first italian case of covid-19 was identified and therefore long before the current containment measures were taken.f i g u r e 1 root-to-tip regression analysis of the 161 sars-cov-2 sequences aligned f i g u r e 2 dated tree of 161 sars-cov-2 sequences showing statistically significant support for clades along the branches (posterior probability >0.7). clade a containing the italian strains is highlighted in red. the patients characterized in this study are indicated by a symbol. the table shows the time of the most recent common ancestor (tmrca) estimates and 95% high posterior density of the significant clade a nodes. sars-cov-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2the emerging sars-coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) poses tremendous threat to human health. zhang, wu et al. show that like bats, pangolin species are a natural reservoir of sars-cov-2-like covs. this finding might help to find the intermediate host of sars-cov-2 for blocking a global coronavirus pandemic.similar to the case for sars-cov and mers-cov [2] , the bat is still a probable species of origin for 2019 novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) because sars-cov-2 shares 96% wholegenome identity with a bat cov, batcov ratg13, from rhinolophus affinis from yunnan province [3] . however, sars-cov and mers-cov usually pass into intermediate hosts, such as civets or camels, before leaping to humans [4] . this fact indicates that sars-cov-2 was probably transmitted to humans by other animals. considering that the earliest coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) patient reported no exposure at the seafood market [5] , it is vital to find the intermediate sars-cov-2 host to block interspecies transmission. on 24 october 2019, liu and his colleagues from the guangdong wildlife rescue center of china [1] first detected the existence of a sars-cov-like cov from lung samples of two dead malayan pangolins with a frothy liquid in their lungs and pulmonary fibrosis, and this fact was discovered close to when the covid-19 outbreak occurred. using their published results, we showed that all virus contigs assembled from two lung samples (lung07 and lung08) exhibited low identities, ranging from 80.24% to 88.93%, with known sarsr-covs. hence, we conjectured that the dead malayan pangolins may carry a new cov closely related to sars-cov-2.to confirm our assumption, we downloaded raw rna sequencing (rna-seq) data (sra: prjna573298) for those two lung samples from the sra and conducted consistent quality control and contaminant removal, as described by liu's study [1] . we found 1,882 clean reads from the lung08 sample that mapped to the sars-cov-2 reference genome (genbank: mn908947) [6] and covered 76.02% of the sars-cov-2 genome. we performed de novo assembly of those reads and obtained 36 contigs with lengths ranging from 287 bp to 2,187 bp, with a mean length of 700 bp. via blast analysis against proteins from 2,845 cov reference genomes, including ratg13, sars-cov-2s, and other known covs, we found that 22 contigs were best matched to sars-cov-2s (70.6%-100% amino acid identity; average: 95.41%) and that 12 contigs matched to bat sars-cov-like cov (92.7%-100% amino acid identity; average: 97.48%) (table s1 ). these results indicate that the malayan pangolin might carry a novel cov (here named pangolin-cov) that is similar to sars-cov-2.draft genome of pangolin-cov and its genomic characteristics using a reference-guided scaffolding approach, we created a pangolin-cov draft genome (19,587 bp) based on the above 34 contigs. to reduce the effect of raw read errors on scaffolding quality, small fragments that aligned against the reference genome with a length less than 25 bp were manually discarded if they were unable to be covered by any large fragments or reference genome. remapping 1,882 reads against the draft genome resulted in 99.99% genome coverage (coverage depth range: 1x-47x) ( figure 1a ). the mean coverage depth was 7.71x across the whole genome, which was two times higher than the lowest common 3x read coverage depth for snp calling based on low-coverage sequencing in the 1000 genomes project pilot phase [7] . similar coverage levels are also sufficient to detect rare or low-abundance microbial species from metagenomic datasets [8] , indicating that our assembled pangolin-cov draft genome is reliable for further analyses. based on simplot analysis [9] , pangolin-cov showed high overall genome sequence identity to ratg13 (90.55%) and sars-cov-2 (91.02%) throughout the genome ( figure 1b) , although there was a higher identity (96.2%) between sars-cov-2 and ratg13 [3] . other sars-cov-like covs similar to pangolin-cov were bat sarsr-cov zxc21 (85.65%) and bat sarsr-cov zc45 (85.01%). while this manuscript was under review, two similar preprint studies found that covs in pangolins shared 90.3% [10] and 92.4% [11] dna identity with sars-cov-2, approximating the 91.02% identity to sars-cov-2 observed here and supporting our findings. taken together, these results indicate that pangolin-cov might be the common origin of sars-cov-2 and ratg13.the pangolin-cov genome organization was characterized by sequence alignment against sars-cov-2 (genbank: mn908947) and ratg13. the pangolin-cov genome consists of six major open reading frames (orfs) common to covs and four other accessory genes ( figure 1c ; table s2 ). further analysis indicated that pangolin-cov genes aligned to sars-cov-2 genes with coverage ranging from 45.8% to 100% (average coverage 76.9%). pangolin-cov genes shared high average nucleotide and amino acid identity with both sars-cov-2 (genbank: table s2. mn908947) (93.2% nucleotide/94.1% amino acid identity) and ratg13 (92.8% nucleotide/93.5% amino acid identity) genes ( figure 1c ; table s2) . surprisingly, some pangolin-cov genes showed higher amino acid sequence identity to sars-cov-2 genes than to ratg13 genes, including orf1b (73.4%/72.8%), the spike (s) protein (97.5%/95.4%), orf7a (96.9%/ 93.6%), and orf10 (97.3%/94.6%). the high s protein amino acid identity implies functional similarity between pangolin-cov and sars-cov-2.phylogenetic relationships among pangolin-cov, ratg13, and sars-cov-2 to determine the evolutionary relationships among pangolin-cov, sars-cov-2, and previously identified covs, we estimated phylogenetic trees based on the nucleotide sequences of the whole-genome sequence, rna-dependent rna polymerase gene (rdrp), non-structural protein genes orf1a and orf1b, and main structural proteins encoded by the s and m genes. in all phylogenies, pangolin-cov, ratg13, and sars-cov-2 were clustered into a well-supported group, here named the ''sars-cov-2 group'' (figures 2, s1, and s2) . this group represents a novel betacoronavirus group. within this group, ratg13 and sars-cov-2 were grouped together, and pangolin-cov was their closest common ancestor. however, whether the basal position of the sars-cov-2 group is sarsr-cov zxc21 and/or sarsr-cov zc45 is still under debate. such debate also occurred in both the wu et al. [6] and zhou et al. [3] studies. a possible explanation is a past history of recombination in the betacoronavirus group [6] . it is noteworthy that the discovered evolutionary relationships of covs shown by the whole genome, rdrp gene, and s gene were highly consistent with those exhibited by complete genome information in the zhou et al. study [3] . this correspondence indicates that our pangolin-cov draft genome has enough genomic information to trace the true evolutionary position of pangolin-cov in covs.the cov s protein consists of two subunits (s1 and s2), mediates infection of receptor-expressing host cells, and is a critical target for antiviral neutralizing antibodies [12] . s1 contains a receptor-binding domain (rbd) that consists of an approximately 193 amino acid fragment, which is responsible for recognizing and binding the cell surface receptor [13, 14] . zhou et al. experimentally confirmed that sars-cov-2 is able to use human, chinese horseshoe bat, civet, and pig ace2 proteins as an entry receptor in ace2-expressing cells [3] , suggesting that the rbd of sars-cov-2 mediates infection in humans and other animals. to gain sequence-level insight into the pathogenic potential of pangolin-cov, we first investigated the amino acid variation pattern of the s1 proteins from pangolin-cov, sars-cov-2, ratg13, and other representative sars/sarsr-covs. the amino acid phylogenetic tree showed that the s1 protein of pangolin-cov is more closely related to that of 2019-cov than to that of ratg13. within the rbd, we further found that pangolin-cov and sars-cov-2 were highly conserved, with only one amino acid change (500h/500q) (figure 3) , which is not one of the five key residues involved in the interaction with human ace2 [3, 14] . these results indicate that pangolin-cov could have pathogenic potential similar to that of sars-cov-2. in contrast, ratg13 has changes in 17 amino acid residues, 4 of which are among the key amino acid residues (figure 3 ). there are evidences suggesting that the change of 472l (sars-cov) to 486f (sars-cov-2) (corresponding to the second key amino acid residue change in figure 3 ) may make stronger van der waals contact with m82 (ace2) [15] . besides, the major substitution of 404v in the sars-cov-rbd with 417k in the sars-cov-2-rbd (see 420 alignment position in figure 3 and without amino acid change between the sars-cov-2 and ratg13) may result in tighter association because of the salt bridge formation between 417k and 30d of ace2 [15] . nevertheless, further investigation is still needed about whether those mutations affect the affinity for ace2. whether the pangolin-cov or ratg13 are potential infectious agents to humans remains to be determined.the s1/s2 cleavage site in the s protein is also an important determinant of the transmissibility and pathogenicity of sars-cov/sars-covr viruses [16] . the trimetric s protein is processed at the s1/s2 cleavage site by host cell proteases during infection. following cleavage, also known as priming, the protein is divided into an n-terminal s1-ectodomain that recognizes a cognate cell surface receptor and a c-terminal s2-membrane anchored protein that drives fusion of the viral envelope with a cellular membrane. we found that the sars-cov-2 s protein contains a putative furin recognition motif (prrarsv) (figure 4 ) similar to that of mers-cov, which has a prsvrsv motif that is likely cleaved by furin [16, 17] during virus egress. conversely, the furin sequence motif at the s1/s2 site is missing in the s protein of pangolin-cov and all other sars/sarsr-covs. this difference indicates the sars-cov-2 might gain a distinct mechanism to promote its entry into host cells [18] . interestingly, aside from mers-cov, similar sequence patterns to the sars-cov-2 were also presented in some members of alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, and gammcoronavirus [19] , raising an interesting question regarding whether this furin sequence motif in sars-cov-2 might be derived from those existing s proteins of other coronaviruses or alternatively if the sars-cov-2 might be the recombinant of pangolin-cov or ratg13 and other coronaviruses with a similar furin recognition motif in the unknown intermediate host.the n protein is the most abundant protein in covs. the n protein is a highly immunogenic phosphoprotein, and it is normally very conserved. the cov n protein is often used as a marker in diagnostic assays. to gain further insight into the diagnostic potential of pangolin-cov, we investigated the amino acid variation pattern of the n proteins from pangolin-cov, sars-cov-2, ratg13, and other representative sars-covs. phylogenetic analysis based on the n protein supported the classification of pangolin-cov as a sister taxon of sars-cov-2 and ratg13 ( figure s3 ). we further found seven amino acid mutations that differentiated our defined ''sar-cov-2 group'' covs (12n, 26 g, 27s, 104d, 218a, 335t, 346n, and 350q) from other known sars-covs (12s, 26d, 27n, 104e, 218t, 335h, 346q, and 350n). two amino acid sites (38p and 268q) are shared by pangolin-cov, ratg13, and sars-covs, which are mutated to 38s and 268a in sars-cov-2. only one amino acid residue shared by pangolin-cov and other sars-covs (129e) is consistently different in both sars-cov-2 and ratg13 (129d). the observed amino acid changes in the n protein would be useful for developing antigens with improved sensitivity for sars-cov-2 serological detection.based on published metagenomic data, this study provides the first report on a potential closely related kin (pangolin-cov) of sars-cov-2, which was discovered from dead malayan the receptor-binding motif of sars-cov and the homologous region of other covs are indicated by the gray box. the key amino acid residues involved in the interaction with human ace2 are marked with the orange box. bat sars-cov-like covs had been reported to not use ace2 and have amino acid deletions at two motifs marked by the yellow box. detailed information can be found in the star methods. pangolins after extensive rescue efforts. aside from ratg13, the pangolin-cov is the cov most closely related to sars-cov-2. due to unavailability of the original sample, we did not perform further experiments to confirm our findings, including pcr validation, serological detection, or even isolation of the virus particles. our discovered pangolin-cov genome showed 91.02% nucleotide identity with the sars-cov-2 genome. however, whether pangolin species are good candidates for sars-cov-2 origin is still under debate. considering the wide spread of sarsr-covs in natural reservoirs, such as bats, camels, and pangolins, our findings would be meaningful for finding novel intermediate sars-cov-2 hosts to block interspecies transmission.detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following: four amino acid insertions (sprrs) unique to sars-cov-2 are marked in yellow. conserved s1/ s2 cleavage sites are marked in green.the emerging sars-coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) poses tremendous threat to human health. zhang, wu et al. show that like bats, pangolin species are a natural reservoir of sars-cov-2-like covs. this finding might help to find the intermediate host of sars-cov-2 for blocking a global coronavirus pandemic.similar to the case for sars-cov and mers-cov [2] , the bat is still a probable species of origin for 2019 novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) because sars-cov-2 shares 96% wholegenome identity with a bat cov, batcov ratg13, from rhinolophus affinis from yunnan province [3] . however, sars-cov and mers-cov usually pass into intermediate hosts, such as civets or camels, before leaping to humans [4] . this fact indicates that sars-cov-2 was probably transmitted to humans by other animals. considering that the earliest coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) patient reported no exposure at the seafood market [5] , it is vital to find the intermediate sars-cov-2 host to block interspecies transmission. on 24 october 2019, liu and his colleagues from the guangdong wildlife rescue center of china [1] first detected the existence of a sars-cov-like cov from lung samples of two dead malayan pangolins with a frothy liquid in their lungs and pulmonary fibrosis, and this fact was discovered close to when the covid-19 outbreak occurred. using their published results, we showed that all virus contigs assembled from two lung samples (lung07 and lung08) exhibited low identities, ranging from 80.24% to 88.93%, with known sarsr-covs. hence, we conjectured that the dead malayan pangolins may carry a new cov closely related to sars-cov-2.to confirm our assumption, we downloaded raw rna sequencing (rna-seq) data (sra: prjna573298) for those two lung samples from the sra and conducted consistent quality control and contaminant removal, as described by liu's study [1] . we found 1,882 clean reads from the lung08 sample that mapped to the sars-cov-2 reference genome (genbank: mn908947) [6] and covered 76.02% of the sars-cov-2 genome. we performed de novo assembly of those reads and obtained 36 contigs with lengths ranging from 287 bp to 2,187 bp, with a mean length of 700 bp. via blast analysis against proteins from 2,845 cov reference genomes, including ratg13, sars-cov-2s, and other known covs, we found that 22 contigs were best matched to sars-cov-2s (70.6%-100% amino acid identity; average: 95.41%) and that 12 contigs matched to bat sars-cov-like cov (92.7%-100% amino acid identity; average: 97.48%) (table s1 ). these results indicate that the malayan pangolin might carry a novel cov (here named pangolin-cov) that is similar to sars-cov-2.draft genome of pangolin-cov and its genomic characteristics using a reference-guided scaffolding approach, we created a pangolin-cov draft genome (19,587 bp) based on the above 34 contigs. to reduce the effect of raw read errors on scaffolding quality, small fragments that aligned against the reference genome with a length less than 25 bp were manually discarded if they were unable to be covered by any large fragments or reference genome. remapping 1,882 reads against the draft genome resulted in 99.99% genome coverage (coverage depth range: 1x-47x) ( figure 1a ). the mean coverage depth was 7.71x across the whole genome, which was two times higher than the lowest common 3x read coverage depth for snp calling based on low-coverage sequencing in the 1000 genomes project pilot phase [7] . similar coverage levels are also sufficient to detect rare or low-abundance microbial species from metagenomic datasets [8] , indicating that our assembled pangolin-cov draft genome is reliable for further analyses. based on simplot analysis [9], pangolin-cov showed high overall genome sequence identity to ratg13 (90.55%) and sars-cov-2 (91.02%) throughout the genome ( figure 1b) , although there was a higher identity (96.2%) between sars-cov-2 and ratg13 [3] . other sars-cov-like covs similar to pangolin-cov were bat sarsr-cov zxc21 (85.65%) and bat sarsr-cov zc45 (85.01%). while this manuscript was under review, two similar preprint studies found that covs in pangolins shared 90.3% [10] and 92.4% [11] dna identity with sars-cov-2, approximating the 91.02% identity to sars-cov-2 observed here and supporting our findings. taken together, these results indicate that pangolin-cov might be the common origin of sars-cov-2 and ratg13.the pangolin-cov genome organization was characterized by sequence alignment against sars-cov-2 (genbank: mn908947) and ratg13. the pangolin-cov genome consists of six major open reading frames (orfs) common to covs and four other accessory genes ( figure 1c ; table s2 ). further analysis indicated that pangolin-cov genes aligned to sars-cov-2 genes with coverage ranging from 45.8% to 100% (average coverage 76.9%). pangolin-cov genes shared high average nucleotide and amino acid identity with both sars-cov-2 (genbank: a b c figure 1 . genome-related analysis (a) sequence depth of reads remapped to pangolin-cov. (b) similarity plot based on the full-length genome sequence of pangolin-cov. full-length genome sequences of sars-cov-2 (beta-cov/wuhan-hu-1), batcov ratg13, bat sarsr-cov 21, bat sarsr-cov45, bat sarsr-cov wiv1, and sars-cov bj01 were used as reference sequences. (c) comparison of common genome organization similarity among sars-cov-2, pangolin-cov, and batcov ratg13. related to table s2. mn908947) (93.2% nucleotide/94.1% amino acid identity) and ratg13 (92.8% nucleotide/93.5% amino acid identity) genes ( figure 1c ; table s2) . surprisingly, some pangolin-cov genes showed higher amino acid sequence identity to sars-cov-2 genes than to ratg13 genes, including orf1b (73.4%/72.8%), the spike (s) protein (97.5%/95.4%), orf7a (96.9%/ 93.6%), and orf10 (97.3%/94.6%). the high s protein amino acid identity implies functional similarity between pangolin-cov and sars-cov-2.phylogenetic relationships among pangolin-cov, ratg13, and sars-cov-2 to determine the evolutionary relationships among pangolin-cov, sars-cov-2, and previously identified covs, we estimated phylogenetic trees based on the nucleotide sequences of the whole-genome sequence, rna-dependent rna polymerase gene (rdrp), non-structural protein genes orf1a and orf1b, and main structural proteins encoded by the s and m genes. in all phylogenies, pangolin-cov, ratg13, and sars-cov-2 were clustered into a well-supported group, here named the ''sars-cov-2 group'' (figures 2, s1, and s2). this group represents a novel betacoronavirus group. within this group, ratg13 and sars-cov-2 were grouped together, and pangolin-cov was their closest common ancestor. however, whether the basal position of the sars-cov-2 group is sarsr-cov zxc21 and/or sarsr-cov zc45 is still under debate. such debate also occurred in both the wu et al. [6] and zhou et al. [3] studies. a possible explanation is a past history of recombination in the betacoronavirus group [6] . it is noteworthy that the discovered evolutionary relationships of covs shown by the whole genome, rdrp gene, and s gene were highly consistent with those exhibited by complete genome information in the zhou et al. study [3] . this correspondence indicates that our pangolin-cov draft genome has enough genomic information to trace the true evolutionary position of pangolin-cov in covs.the cov s protein consists of two subunits (s1 and s2), mediates infection of receptor-expressing host cells, and is a critical target for antiviral neutralizing antibodies [12] . s1 contains a receptor-binding domain (rbd) that consists of an approximately 193 amino acid fragment, which is responsible for recognizing and binding the cell surface receptor [13, 14] . zhou et al. experimentally confirmed that sars-cov-2 is able to use human, chinese horseshoe bat, civet, and pig ace2 proteins as an entry receptor in ace2-expressing cells [3] , suggesting that the rbd of sars-cov-2 mediates infection in humans and other animals. to gain sequence-level insight into the pathogenic potential of pangolin-cov, we first investigated the amino acid variation pattern of the s1 proteins from pangolin-cov, sars-cov-2, ratg13, and other representative sars/sarsr-covs. the amino acid phylogenetic tree showed that the s1 protein of pangolin-cov is more closely related to that of 2019-cov than to that of ratg13. within the rbd, we further found that pangolin-cov and sars-cov-2 were highly conserved, with only one amino acid change (500h/500q) (figure 3 ), which is not one of the five key residues involved in the interaction with human ace2 [3, 14] . these results indicate that pangolin-cov could have pathogenic potential similar to that of sars-cov-2. in contrast, ratg13 has changes in 17 amino acid residues, 4 of which are among the key amino acid residues ( figure 3 ). there are evidences suggesting that the change of 472l (sars-cov) to 486f (sars-cov-2) (corresponding to the second key amino acid residue change in figure 3 ) may make stronger van der waals contact with m82 (ace2) [15] . besides, the major substitution of 404v in the sars-cov-rbd with 417k in the sars-cov-2-rbd (see 420 alignment position in figure 3 and without amino acid change between the sars-cov-2 and ratg13) may result in tighter association because of the salt bridge formation between 417k and 30d of ace2 [15] . nevertheless, further investigation is still needed about whether those mutations affect the affinity for ace2. whether the pangolin-cov or ratg13 are potential infectious agents to humans remains to be determined.the s1/s2 cleavage site in the s protein is also an important determinant of the transmissibility and pathogenicity of sars-cov/sars-covr viruses [16] . the trimetric s protein is processed at the s1/s2 cleavage site by host cell proteases during infection. following cleavage, also known as priming, the protein is divided into an n-terminal s1-ectodomain that recognizes a cognate cell surface receptor and a c-terminal s2-membrane anchored protein that drives fusion of the viral envelope with a cellular membrane. we found that the sars-cov-2 s protein contains a putative furin recognition motif (prrarsv) (figure 4 ) similar to that of mers-cov, which has a prsvrsv motif that is likely cleaved by furin [16, 17] during virus egress. conversely, red text denotes the malayan pangolin-cov. pink text denotes sars-cov-2. green text denotes a bat cov with 96% similarity at the genome level to sars-cov-2. blue text denotes the reference covs used in figure 1b . detailed information can be found in the star methods. related to figures s1-s3. the furin sequence motif at the s1/s2 site is missing in the s protein of pangolin-cov and all other sars/sarsr-covs. this difference indicates the sars-cov-2 might gain a distinct mechanism to promote its entry into host cells [18] . interestingly, aside from mers-cov, similar sequence patterns to the sars-cov-2 were also presented in some members of alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, and gammcoronavirus [19] , raising an interesting question regarding whether this furin sequence motif in sars-cov-2 might be derived from those existing s proteins of other coronaviruses or alternatively if the sars-cov-2 might be the recombinant of pangolin-cov or ratg13 and other coronaviruses with a similar furin recognition motif in the unknown intermediate host.the n protein is the most abundant protein in covs. the n protein is a highly immunogenic phosphoprotein, and it is normally very conserved. the cov n protein is often used as a marker in diagnostic assays. to gain further insight into the diagnostic potential of pangolin-cov, we investigated the amino acid variation pattern of the n proteins from pangolin-cov, sars-cov-2, ratg13, and other representative sars-covs. phylogenetic analysis based on the n protein supported the classification of pangolin-cov as a sister taxon of sars-cov-2 and ratg13 ( figure s3 ). we further found seven amino acid mutations that differentiated our defined ''sar-cov-2 group'' covs (12n, 26 g, 27s, 104d, 218a, 335t, 346n, and 350q) from other known sars-covs (12s, 26d, 27n, 104e, 218t, 335h, 346q, and 350n). two amino acid sites (38p and 268q) are shared by pangolin-cov, ratg13, and sars-covs, which are mutated to 38s and 268a in sars-cov-2. only one amino acid residue shared by pangolin-cov and other sars-covs (129e) is consistently different in both sars-cov-2 and ratg13 (129d). the observed amino acid changes in the n protein would be useful for developing antigens with improved sensitivity for sars-cov-2 serological detection.based on published metagenomic data, this study provides the first report on a potential closely related kin (pangolin-cov) of sars-cov-2, which was discovered from dead malayan the receptor-binding motif of sars-cov and the homologous region of other covs are indicated by the gray box. the key amino acid residues involved in the interaction with human ace2 are marked with the orange box. bat sars-cov-like covs had been reported to not use ace2 and have amino acid deletions at two motifs marked by the yellow box. detailed information can be found in the star methods. pangolins after extensive rescue efforts. aside from ratg13, the pangolin-cov is the cov most closely related to sars-cov-2. due to unavailability of the original sample, we did not perform further experiments to confirm our findings, including pcr validation, serological detection, or even isolation of the virus particles. our discovered pangolin-cov genome showed 91.02% nucleotide identity with the sars-cov-2 genome. however, whether pangolin species are good candidates for sars-cov-2 origin is still under debate. considering the wide spread of sarsr-covs in natural reservoirs, such as bats, camels, and pangolins, our findings would be meaningful for finding novel intermediate sars-cov-2 hosts to block interspecies transmission.detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following: z.z. performed project planning, coordination, execution, and facilitation. t.z. and q.w. performed the metagenomic analysis. t.z. carried out assemblies, gene prediction, and annotation. q.w. processed data collection and phylogenetic analysis. z.z., t.z., and q.w. prepared the manuscript.the authors declare no competing interests. requests for further information and data resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, zhigang zhang (zhangzhigang@ynu.edu.cn). this study did not generate new unique reagents.we downloaded raw data for the lung08 and lung07 samples published in liu's study [1] com/bioedit-7-0-9-biological-sequence-alignment-editor.html) following manual quality checking. small fragments less than 25 bp in length were discarded if these fragments were not covered by any large fragments. the potential orfs of the final draft genome obtained were annotated by alignment to the sars-cov-2 reference genome (accession number mn908947). simplot 3.5. 1 [9] was used to analyze whole genome nucleotide identity.sequence alignment was carried out using muscle software [25] . alignment accuracy was checked manually base by base. gblocks [26] was used to process the gap in the aligned sequence. using megax (version 10.1.7) [27], we inferred all maximum likelihood (ml) phylogenetic trees.using megax software [27], we constructed all maximum likelihood (ml) phylogenetic trees under the best-fit dna/amino acid substitution model with 1000 bootstrap replications. phylogenetic analyses were performed using the nucleotide sequences of various cov gene datasets: the whole genome, orf1a, orf1b, and the membrane (m), s and rdrp genes. the best model of m was gtr+g, and the best for all the others was gtr+g+i. two additional protein-based trees were constructed under wag+g (s1 subunit of the s protein) and jtt+g (n protein). branches with bootstrap values < 70% were hidden in all phylogenetic trees.the dataset used in this study is provided as supplementary material (tables s1 and s2 ). this study did not generate code. bat sarsr-cov sx2013bat sarsr-cov sc2018bat sarsr-cov rs4231bat sarsr-cov gx2013bat sarsr-cov rp3bat sarsr-cov longquan-140bat sarsr-cov hub2013bat sarsr-cov hku3-1bat sarsr-cov bm48-31bat sarsr-cov zc45beta-cov/wuhan-hu-1bat hp-betacov zhejiang2013rousettus bat cov hku9 bat sarsr-cov wiv16bat sarsr-cov rs4231bat sarsr-cov shc014bat sarsr-cov ynlf31cbat sarsr-cov gx2013bat sarsr-cov rp3bat sarsr-cov sc2018bat sarsr-cov hub2013bat sarsr-cov rf1bat sarsr-cov sx2013bat sarsr-cov hku3-1bat sarsr-cov longquan-140bat sarsr-cov zc45bat cov ratg13beta-cov/wuhan-hu-1 bat sarsr-cov wiv16bat sarsr-cov rs4231bat sarsr-cov shc014bat sarsr-cov gx2013bat sarsr-cov rp3bat sarsr-cov ynlf31cbat sarsr-cov sc2018bat sarsr-cov hub2013bat sarsr-cov rf1bat sarsr-cov sx2013bat sarsr-cov hku3-1bat sarsr-cov longquan-140bat sarsr-cov bm48-31bat sarsr-cov zc45bat cov ratg13beta-cov/wuhan-hu-1beta-cov/wuhan/ipbcams-wh-03bat hp-betacov zhejiang2013rousettus bat cov hku9 bat sarsr-cov wiv16bat sarsr-cov rs4231bat sarsr-cov shc014bat sarsr-cov gx2013bat sarsr-cov rp3bat sarsr-cov ynlf31cbat sarsr-cov sc2018bat sarsr-cov rf1bat sarsr-cov sx2013bat sarsr-cov hub2013bat sarsr-cov hku3-1bat sarsr-cov longquan-140bat sarsr-cov zxc21bat sarsr-cov bm48-31beta-cov/wuhan-hu-1beta-cov/wuhan/ipbcams-wh-03bat hp-betacov zhejiang2013rousettus bat cov hku9 .|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|....|   msdngpq-nqrnapritfggpsdstgsnqngersgarskqrrpqglpnntaswftaltqhgkedlkfprgqgvpintnsspddqigyyrratrrirggdgkmkdlsprwyfyylgtgpeaglpygankdgiiwvategalntpkdhigtrnpannaaivlqlpqgttlpkgfyaegsrggsqassrsssrsrnssrnstpgssrgtsparmagnggdaal  .......-....................................................................................................................................................................................................................  .......-....................................................................................................................................................................................................................  .......-....................................................................................................................................................................................................................  .......-....................................................................................................................................................................................................................  .......-....................................................................................................................................................................................................................  .......-.............................p.................................................................................................................................................................................s....  .......-................a............p...........................r..............................................................e......n.............................................................t......................  .......-..ss............sdns.....n...p.........................n.t..............k......................e........................e........................................................................................t..  .......-...s............sdnsk....n...p.........................n.t..............k......................e........................e........................................................................................t..  .......s...s.........t...dn....g.n...p.........................e.r.............g..............v........e................s.......e..v....................n....t..................................gn...........n......sg..et..  .......s...s.........t...dn....g.n...p.........................e.r.............g..............v........e................s.......e..v....................n....t..................................gn...........n......sg..et..  .......s...s.........t...dn....g.n...p.........................e.r.............g..............v........e................s.......e..v....................n....t..................................gn...........n......sg..et..  .......p...s.........t.p.dn....g.n...p.........................e.r.............g..............v........e................s.......e..v....................n....t..................................gn...........n......sg..et..  .......p...s.........t..idn....g.n...p.........................e.r.............g..............v........e................s.......e..v....................n....t..................................gn...........n......sg..et..  ......h-...s.s.......t...dn....g.n...p.........................e.r..q..........g..............v........e................s.......e.......................n....t..................................gn................i.sg..et..  .......p...s.........t...dn....g.n...p.........................e.r.............g..............v........e................s.......e.......................n....t..................................gn...........n......sg..et..  .......-s..s.........t..adn..d.g.....p.........................e.r.............gk........k....v........e................s.......e..v....................n.......................................gn...........n ...........v................................q......................d...........................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v.....................r..........q......................d...........................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v................................q......................d...........................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v................................q......................d...........................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v................................q............d.........d...........................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v................................q......................d...........................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v.......p........................q..................................................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p....p...p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v.......p........................q............................i.....................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...h...ga.......*  ..............v................................q......................d.t.........................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v................ts..............q............d........................................s..........i.h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v.................s..............q............d.....................................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v................................s..................................................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p....-...p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v..rs............................q..................................................................h..........q...n............i.............t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v................................q..................................................................h..........q...n.m..........a.............t..a.p bat sarsr-cov sx2013bat sarsr-cov sc2018bat sarsr-cov rs4231bat sarsr-cov gx2013bat sarsr-cov rp3bat sarsr-cov longquan-140bat sarsr-cov hub2013bat sarsr-cov hku3-1bat sarsr-cov bm48-31bat sarsr-cov zc45beta-cov/wuhan-hu-1beta-cov/wuhan/ipbcams-wh-02beta-cov/wuhan/ipbcams-wh-04bat hp-betacov zhejiang2013rousettus bat cov hku9 bat sarsr-cov wiv16bat sarsr-cov rs4231bat sarsr-cov shc014bat sarsr-cov gx2013bat sarsr-cov rp3bat sarsr-cov ynlf31cbat sarsr-cov sc2018bat sarsr-cov hub2013bat sarsr-cov rf1bat sarsr-cov sx2013bat sarsr-cov hku3-1bat sarsr-cov longquan-140bat sarsr-cov bm48-31bat sarsr-cov zc45bat cov ratg13beta-cov/wuhan-hu-1beta-cov/wuhan/ipbcams-wh-03bat hp-betacov zhejiang2013rousettus bat cov hku9 bat sarsr-cov wiv16bat sarsr-cov rs4231bat sarsr-cov shc014bat sarsr-cov gx2013bat sarsr-cov rp3bat sarsr-cov ynlf31cbat sarsr-cov sc2018bat sarsr-cov rf1bat sarsr-cov sx2013bat sarsr-cov hub2013bat sarsr-cov hku3-1bat sarsr-cov longquan-140bat sarsr-cov zxc21bat sarsr-cov bm48-31beta-cov/wuhan-hu-1beta-cov/wuhan/ipbcams-wh-02beta-cov/wuhan/ipbcams-wh-04bat hp-betacov zhejiang2013rousettus bat cov hku9 s............sdnsk....n...p.........................n.t..............k......................e........................e........................................................................................t..  .......s...s.........t...dn....g.n...p.........................e.r.............g..............v........e................s.......e..v....................n....t..................................gn...........n......sg..et..  .......s...s.........t...dn....g.n...p.........................e.r.............g..............v........e................s.......e..v....................n....t..................................gn...........n......sg..et..  .......s...s.........t...dn....g.n...p.........................e.r.............g..............v........e................s.......e..v....................n....t..................................gn...........n......sg..et..  .......p...s.........t.p.dn....g.n...p.........................e.r.............g..............v........e................s.......e..v....................n....t..................................gn...........n......sg..et..  .......p...s.........t..idn....g.n...p.........................e.r.............g..............v........e................s.......e..v....................n....t..................................gn...........n......sg..et..  ......h-...s.s.......t...dn....g.n...p.........................e.r..q..........g..............v........e................s.......e.......................n....t..................................gn................i.sg..et..  .......p...s.........t...dn....g.n...p.........................e.r.............g..............v........e................s.......e.......................n....t..................................gn...........n......sg..et..  .......-s..s.........t..adn..d.g.....p.........................e.r.............gk........k....v........e................s.......e..v....................n.......................................gn...........n ....-...s.........t...dn..d.g.....p.........................e.r.............gk.............v........e................s.......e..v....................n.......................................gn...........n......sg..et..  .......-...s.........t...dn..d.g.....p.........................e...............gk.............v........e................s.......e..v....................n.......................................gn...........n ..............................................................................................................................................................................................--.......*  .................................................................................................................................................................................................--.......*  .................................................................................................................................................................................................--.......*  .................................................................................................................................................................................................--.......*  .................................................................................................................................................................................................-- ...........v................................q......................d...........................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v.....................r..........q......................d...........................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v................................q......................d...........................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v................................q......................d...........................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v................................q............d.........d...........................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v................................q......................d...........................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v.......p........................q..................................................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p....p...p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v.......p........................q............................i.....................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...h...ga.......*  ..............v................................q......................d.t.........................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v................ts..............q............d........................................s..........i.h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v.................s..............q............d.....................................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v................................s..................................................................h..........q...n..........................t..a.p....-...p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v..rs............................q..................................................................h..........q...n............i.............t..a.p........p.........m....r...n...ga.......*  ..............v................................q..................................................................h..........q...n.m..........a.............t..a.p viruses of the family coronaviridae possess a singlestrand, positive-sense rna genome ranging from 26 to 32 kilobases in length. 1 coronaviruses have been identified in several avian hosts, 2,3 as well as in various mammals, including camels, bats, masked palm civets, mice, dogs, and cats. novel mammalian coronaviruses are now regularly identified. 1 for example, an hku2related coronavirus of bat origin was responsible for a fatal acute diarrhoea syndrome in pigs in 2018. 4 for 2494 laboratory-confirmed cases of infection and 858 fatalities since september, 2012, including 38 deaths following a single introduction into south korea. 8, 9 in late december, 2019, several patients with viral pneumonia were found to be epidemiologically associated with the huanan seafood market in wuhan, in the hubei province of china, where a number of non-aquatic animals such as birds and rabbits were also on sale before the outbreak. a novel, human-infecting coronavirus, 10, 11 provisionally named 2019 novel corona virus (2019-ncov), was identified with use of next-generation sequencing. as of jan 28, 2020, china has reported more than 5900 confirmed and more than 9000 suspected cases of 2019-ncov infection across 33 chinese provinces or municipalities, with 106 fatalities. in addition, 2019-ncov has now been reported in thailand, japan, south korea, malaysia, singapore, and the usa. infections in medical workers and family clusters were also reported and human-to-human transmission has been confirmed. 12 most of the infected patients had a high fever and some had dyspnoea, with chest radiographs revealing invasive lesions in both lungs. 12, 13 we report the epidemiological data of nine inpatients, from at least three hospitals in wuhan, who were diagnosed with viral pneumonia of unidentified cause. using next-generation sequencing of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid samples and cultured isolates from these patients, 2019-ncov was found. we describe the genomic characterisation of ten genomes of this novel virus, providing important information on the origins and cell receptor binding of the virus.nine patients with viral pneumonia and negative for common respiratory pathogens, who presented to at least three hospitals in wuhan, were included in this study. eight of the patients had visited the huanan seafood market before the onset of illness, and one patient (wh04) did not visit the market but stayed in a hotel near the market between dec 23 and dec 27, 2019 (table) . five of the patients (wh19001, wh19002, wh19004, wh19008, and ys8011) had samples collected by the chinese center for disease control and prevention (cdc) which were tested for 18 viruses and four bacteria using the respifindersmart22 kit (pathofinder, maastricht, netherlands) on the lightcycler 480 real-time pcr system (roche, rotkreuz, switzerland). presence of sars-cov and mers-cov was tested using a previously reported method. 14 all five cdc samples were negative for all common respiratory pathogens screened for. four of the patients (wh01, wh02, wh03, and wh04) had samples collected by bgi (beijing, china), and were tested for five viruses and one bacterium using the respipathogen 6 kit (jiangsu macro & micro test, nantong, china) on the applied biosystems abi 7500 real-time pcr system (thermofisher scientific, foster city, ca, usa). all four samples were negative for the targeted respiratory pathogens.special-pathogen-free human airway epithelial (hae) cells were used for virus isolation. briefly, bronchoalveolar lavage fluids or throat swabs from the patients were inoculated into the hae cells through the apical surfaces. hae cells were maintained in an air-liquid interface incubated at 37°c. the cells were monitored daily for cytopathic effects by light microscopy and the cell supernatants were collected for use in quantitative rt-pcr assays. after three passages, apical samples were collected for sequencing.evidence before this study the causal agent of an outbreak of severe pneumonia in wuhan, china, is a novel coronavirus, provisionally named 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov). the first cases were reported in december, 2019.we have described the genomic characteristics of 2019-ncov and similarities and differences to other coronaviruses, including the virus that caused the severe acute respiratory syndrome epidemic of 2002-03. genome sequences of 2019-ncov sampled from nine patients who were among the early cases of this severe infection are almost genetically identical, which suggests very recent emergence of this virus in humans and that the outbreak was detected relatively rapidly. 2019-ncov is most closely related to other betacoronaviruses of bat origin, indicating that these animals are the likely reservoir hosts for this emerging viral pathogen.by documenting the presence of 2019-ncov in a sample of patients, our study extends previous evidence that this virus has led to the novel pneumonia that has caused severe disease in wuhan and other geographical localities. currently available data suggest that 2019-ncov infected the human population from a bat reservoir, although it remains unclear if a currently unknown animal species acted as an intermediate host between bats and humans.reverse-transcribed into cdna, followed by the secondstrand synthesis. using the synthetic double-stranded dna, a dna library was constructed through dnafragmentation, end-repair, adaptor-ligation, and pcr amplification. the constructed library was qualified with an invitrogen qubit 2.0 fluorometer (thermofisher, foster city, ca, usa), and the qualified double-stranded dna library was transformed into a single-stranded circular dna library through dna-denaturation and circularisation. dna nanoballs were generated from singlestranded circular dna by rolling circle amplification, then qualified with qubit 2.0 and loaded onto the flow cell and sequenced with pe100 on the dnbseq-t7 platform (mgi, shenzhen, china).after removing adapter, low-quality, and low-complexity reads, high-quality genome sequencing data were generated. sequence reads were first filtered against the human reference genome (hg19) using burrows-wheeler alignment. 15 the remaining data were then aligned to the local nucleotide database (using burrows-wheeler alignment) and non-redundant protein database (using rapsearch), 16 downloaded from the us national center for biotechnology information website, which contain only coronaviruses that have been published. finally, the mapped reads were assembled with spades 17 to obtain a high-quality coronavirus genome sequence.primers were designed with use of oligo primer analysis software version 6.44 on the basis of the assembled partial genome, and were verified by primer-blast (for more details on primer sequencs used please contact the corresponding author). pcr was set up as follows: 4·5 μl of 10x buffer, 4 μl of dntp mix (2·5 μmol/l), 1 μl of each primer (10 μmol/l), and 0·75 units of hs ex taq (takara biomedical technology, beijing, china), in a total volume of 30 μl. the cdnas reverse transcribed from clinical samples were used as templates, and random primers were used. the following program was run on the thermocycler: 95°c for 5 min; 40 cycles of 95°c for 30 s, 55°c for 30 s, and 72°c for 1 min as determined by product size; 72°c for 7 min; and a 4°c hold. finally, the pcr products were separated by agarose gel electrophoresis, and products of the expected size were sequenced from both ends on the applied biosystems 3730 dna analyzer platform (applied biosystems, life technologies, foster city, ca, usa; for more details on expected size please contact the corresponding author).the whole-genome sequences of 2019-ncov from six samples (wh19001, wh19005, wh19002, wh19004, wh19008, and ys8011) were generated by a combination sanger, illumina, and oxford nanopore sequencing. first, viral rnas were extracted directly from clinical samples with the qiaamp viral rna mini kit, and then used to synthesise cdna with the superscript iii reverse transcriptase (thermofisher, waltham, ma, usa) and n6 random primers, followed by second-strand synthesis with dna polymerase i, large (klenow) fragment (thermofisher). viral cdna libraries were prepared with use of the nextera xt library prep kit (illumina, san diego, ca, usa), then purified with agencourt ampure xp beads (beckman coulter, brea, ca, usa), followed by quantification with an invitrogen qubit 2.0 fluorometer. the resulting dna libraries were sequenced on either the miseq or iseq platforms (illumina) using a 300-cycle reagent kit. about 1·2-5 gb of data were obtained for each sample.the raw fastq files for each virus sample were filtered using previously described criteria, 18 then subjected to de novo assembly with the clcbio software version 11.0.1. mapped assemblies were also done using the batderived sars-like coronavirus isolate bat-sl-covzc45 (accession number mg772933.1) as a reference. variant calling, genome alignments, and sequence illustrations were generated with clcbio software, and the assembled genome sequences were confirmed by sanger sequencing. rapid amplification of cdna ends (race) was done to obtain the sequences of the 5ʹ and 3ʹ termini, using the invitrogen 5ʹ race system and 3ʹ race system (invitrogen, carlsbad, ca, usa), according to the manufacturer's instructions. gene-specific primers (appendix p 1) for 5ʹ and 3ʹ race pcr amplification were designed to obtain a fragment of approximately 400-500 bp for the two regions. purified pcr products were cloned into the pmd18-t simple vector (takara, takara biotechnology, dalian, china) and chemically com petent escherichia coli (dh5α cells; takara), according to the manufacturer's instructions. pcr products were sequenced with use of m13 forward and reverse primers.reference virus genomes were obtained from genbank using blastn with 2019-ncov as a query. the open reading frames of the verified genome sequences were predicted using geneious (version 11.1.5) and annotated using the conserved domain database. 19 pairwise sequence identities were also calculated using geneious. potential genetic recombination was investigated using simplot software (version 3.5.1) 20 and phylogenetic analysis.sequence alignment of 2019-ncov with reference sequences was done with mafft software (version 7.450). 21 phylogenetic analyses of the complete genome and major coding regions were done with raxml software (version 8.2.9) 22 with 1000 bootstrap replicates, employing the general time reversible nucleotide substitution model.on the basis of the genome sequences obtained, a real-time pcr detection assay was developed. pcr primers and probes were designed using applied biosystems primer express software (thermofisher scientific, foster city, ca, usa) on the basis of our sequenced virus genomes. the specific primers and probe set (labelled with the reporter 6-carboxyfluorescein [fam] and the quencher black hole quencher 1 [bhq1]) for orf1a were as follows: for ward primer 5ʹ-agaagattggttagatgatgatagt-3ʹ; re verse pri mer 5ʹ-ttccatctctaattgaggttgaacc-3ʹ; and probe 5ʹ-fam-tcctcactgccgtcttgttg acca-bhq1-3ʹ. the human gapdh gene was used as an internal con trol (forward primer 5ʹ-tcaagaa ggtggtgaagcagg-3ʹ; reverse primer 5ʹ-cagcgtc aaa ggtg gaggagt-3ʹ; probe 5ʹ-vic-cct caa ggg catcc tggg ctacact-bhq1-3ʹ). primers and probes were synthesised by bgi (beijing, china). rt-pcr was done with an applied biosystems 7300 real-time pcr system (thermo-scientific), with 30 µl reaction volumes consisting of 14 µl of diluted rna, 15 µl of 2x taqman one-step rt-pcr master mix reagents (4309169; applied biosystems, thermofisher), 0·5 µl of 40x multiscribe and rnase inhibitor mixture, 0·75 μl forward primer (10 μmol/l), 0·75 μl reverse primer (10 μmol/l), and 0·375 μl probe (10 μmol/l). thermal cycling parameters were 30 min at 42°c, followed by 10 min at 95°c, and a subsequent 40 cycles of amplification (95°c for 15 s and 58°c for 45 s). fluorescence was recorded during the 58°c phase.the funder of the study had no role in data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of report. gfg and ws had access to all the data in the study, and gfg, ws, wt, wc, and gw were responsible for the decision to submit for publication.from the nine patients' samples analysed, eight complete and two partial genome sequences of 2019-ncov were obtained. these data have been deposited in the china national microbiological data center (accession number nmdc10013002 and genome accession numbers nmdc60013002-01 to nmdc60013002-10) and the data from bgi have been deposited in the china national genebank (acces sion numbers cna0007332-35).based on these genomes, we developed a real-time pcr assay and tested the original clinical samples from the bgi (wh01, wh02, wh03, and wh04) again to determine their threshold cycle (ct) values (table) . the remaining samples were tested by a different real-time pcr assay developed by the chinese cdc, with ct values ranging from 22·85 to 32·41 (table) . these results confirmed the presence of 2019-ncov in the patients. bronchoalveolar lavage fluid samples or cultured viruses of nine patients were used for next-generation sequencing. after removing host (human) reads, de novo assembly was done and the contigs obtained used as queries to search the non-redundant protein database. some contigs identified in all the samples were closely related to the bat sars-like betacoronavirus bat-sl-covzc45 betacoronavirus. 23 bat-sl-covzc45 was then used as the reference genome and reads from each pool were mapped to it, generating consensus sequences corresponding to all the pools. these consensus sequences were then used as new reference genomes. eight complete genomes and two partial genomes (from samples wh19002 and wh02; table) were obtained. the de novo assembly of the clean reads from all the pools did not identify any other long contigs that corresponded to other viruses at high abundance.the eight complete genomes were nearly identical across the whole genome, with sequence identity above 99·98%, indicative of a very recent emergence into the human population ( figure 1a) . the largest nucleotide difference was four mutations. notably, the sequence identity between the two virus genomes from the same patient (wh19001, from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, and wh19005, from cell culture) was more than 99·99%, 3'3'3' base pairs with 100% identity at the amino acid level. in addition, the partial genomes from samples wh02 and wh19002 also had nearly 100% identity to the complete genomes across the aligned gene regions. a blastn search of the complete genomes of 2019-ncov revealed that the most closely related viruses available on genbank were bat-sl-covzc45 (sequence identity 87·99%; query coverage 99%) and another sars-like betacoronavirus of bat origin, bat-sl-covzxc21 (accession number mg772934; 23 87·23%; query coverage 98%). in five gene regions (e, m, 7, n, and 14) , the sequence identities were greater than 90%, with the highest being 98·7% in the e gene ( figure 2a) . the s gene of 2019-ncov exhibited the lowest sequence identity with bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21, at only around 75%. in addition, the sequence identity in 1b (about 86%) was lower than that in 1a (about 90%; figure 2a) . most of the encoded proteins exhibited high sequence identity between 2019-ncov and the related bat-derived coronaviruses ( figure 2a) . the notable exception was the spike protein, with only around 80% sequence identity, and protein 13, with 73·2% sequence identity. notably, the 2019-ncov strains were less genetically similar to sars-cov (about 79%) and mers-cov (about 50%). the similarity between 2019-ncov and related viruses was visualised using simplot software, with the 2019-ncov consensus sequence employed as the query ( figure 2b) .comparison of the predicted coding regions of 2019-ncov showed that they possessed a similar genomic organisation to bat-sl-covzc45, bat-sl-covzxc21, and sars-cov phylogenetic analysis of 2019-ncov and its closely related reference genomes, as well as representative betacoronaviruses, revealed that the five subgenera formed five well supported branches ( figure 3) . the subgenus sarbecovirus could be classified into three well supported clades: two sars-cov-related strains from rhinolophus sp from bulgaria (accession number gu190215) and kenya (ky352407) formed clade 1; the ten 2019-ncov from wuhan and the two bat-derived sars-like strains from zhoushan in eastern china (bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21) formed clade 2, which was notable for the long branch separating the human and bat viruses; and sars-cov strains from humans and many genetically similar sars-like corona viruses from bats collected from southwestern china formed clade 3, with bat-derived coronaviruses also falling in the basal positions ( figure 3 ). in addition, 2019-ncov was distinct from sars-cov in a phylogeny of the complete rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) gene (appendix p 2). this evidence indicates that 2019-ncov is a novel beta coronavirus from the subgenus sarbecovirus.as the sequence similarity plot revealed changes in genetic distances among viruses across the 2019-ncov genome, we did additional phylogenetic analyses of the major encoding regions of representative members of the subgenus sarbecovirus. consistent with the genome phylogeny, 2019-ncov, bat-sl-covzc45, and bat-sl-covzxc21 clustered together in trees of the 1a and spike genes (appendix p 3). by contrast, 2019-ncov did not cluster with bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21 in the 1b tree, but instead formed a distinct clade with sars-cov, bat-sl-covzc45, and bat-sl-covzxc21 (appendix p 3), indicative of potential recombination events in 1b, although these probably occurred in the bat coronaviruses rather than 2019-ncov. phylogenetic analysis of the 2019-ncov genome excluding 1b revealed similar evolutionary relationships as the full-length viral genome (appendix p 3).the envelope spike (s) protein mediates receptor binding and membrane fusion 24 and is crucial for determining host tropism and transmission capacity. 25, 26 generally, the spike protein of coronaviruses is functionally divided into the s1 domain (especially positions 318-510 of sars-cov), responsible for receptor binding, and the s2 domain, responsible for cell membrane fusion. 27 the 2019-ncov s2 protein showed around 93% sequence identity with bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21-much higher than that of the s1 domain, which had only around 68% identity with these bat-derived viruses. both the n-terminal domain and the c-terminal domain of the s1 domain can bind to host receptors. 28 we inspected amino acid variation in the spike protein among the sarbecovirus coronaviruses the receptor-binding domain of betacoronaviruses, which directly engages the receptor, is commonly located in the c-terminal domain of s1, as in sars-cov 29 for lineage b, and mers-cov 30,31 and batcov hku4, 32 for lineage c (figure 5). through phylogenetic analysis of the receptor-binding domain of four different lineages of betacoronaviruses (appendix p 4), we found that, although 2019-ncov was closer to bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21 at the whole-genome level, the receptor-binding domain of 2019-ncov fell within lineage b and was closer to that of sars-cov (figure 5a). the three-dimensional structure of 2019-ncov receptorbinding domain was modelled using the swiss-model program 33 with the sars-cov receptor-binding domain structure (protein data bank id 2dd8) 34 as a template. this analysis suggested that, like other betacoronaviruses, the receptor-binding domain was composed of a core and an external subdomain ( figure 5b-d) .notably, the external subdomain of the 2019-ncov receptor-binding domain was more similar to that of sars-cov. this result suggests that 2019-ncov might also use angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as a cell receptor. however, we also observed that several key residues responsible for the binding of the sars-cov receptor-binding domain to the ace2 receptor were variable in the 2019-ncov receptor-binding domain (including asn439, asn501, gln493, gly485 and phe486; 2019-ncov numbering).from genomic surveillance of clinical samples from patients with viral pneumonia in wuhan, china, a novel coronavirus (termed 2019-ncov) has been identified. 10, 11 our phylogenetic analysis of 2019-ncov, sequenced from nine patients' samples, showed that the virus belongs to the subgenus sarbecovirus. 2019-ncov was more similar to two bat-derived coronavirus strains, bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21, than to known human-infecting coronaviruses, including the virus that caused the sars outbreak of 2003.epidemiologically, eight of the nine patients in our study had a history of exposure to the huanan seafood market in wuhan, suggesting that they might have been in close contact with the infection source at the market. however, one patient had never visited the market, although he had stayed in a hotel near the market before the onset of their illness. this finding suggests either possible droplet transmission or that the patient was infected by a currently unknown source. evidence of clusters of infected family members and medical workers has now confirmed the presence of human-to-human transmission. 12 clearly, this infection is a major public health concern, particularly as this outbreak coincides with the peak of the chinese spring festival travel rush, during which hundreds of millions of people will travel through china. as a typical rna virus, the average evolutionary rate for coronaviruses is roughly 10 -⁴ nucleotide substitutions per site per year, 1 with mutations arising during every replication cycle. it is, therefore, striking that the sequences of 2019-ncov from different patients described here were almost identical, with greater than 99·9% sequence identity. this finding suggests that 2019-ncov originated from one source within a very short period and was detected relatively rapidly. however, as the virus transmits to more individuals, constant surveillance of mutations arising is needed.phylogenetic analysis showed that bat-derived coronaviruses fell within all five subgenera of the genus betacoronavirus. moreover, bat-derived coronaviruses fell in basal positions in the subgenus sarbecovirus, with 2019-ncov most closely related to bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21, which were also sampled from bats. 23 these data are consistent with a bat reservoir for coronaviruses in general and for 2019-ncov in particular. however, despite the importance of bats, several facts suggest that another animal is acting as an intermediate host between bats and humans. first, the outbreak was first reported in late december, 2019, when most bat species in wuhan are hibernating. second, no bats were sold or found at the huanan seafood market, whereas various non-aquatic animals (including mammals) were available for purchase. third, the sequence identity between 2019-ncov and its close relatives bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21 was less than 90%, which is reflected in the relatively long branch between them. hence, bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21 are not direct ancestors of 2019-ncov. fourth, in both sars-cov and mers-cov, bats acted as the natural reservoir, with another animal (masked palm civet for sars-cov 35 and dromedary camels for mers-cov) 36 acting as an intermediate host, with humans as terminal hosts. therefore, on the basis of current data, it seems likely that the 2019-ncov causing the wuhan outbreak might also be initially hosted by bats, and might have been transmitted to humans via currently unknown wild animal(s) sold at the huanan seafood market.previous studies have uncovered several receptors that different coronaviruses bind to, such as ace2 for sars-cov 29 and cd26 for mers-cov. 30 our molecular modelling showed structural similarity between the receptor-binding domains of sars-cov and 2019-ncov. therefore, we suggest that 2019-ncov might use ace2 as the receptor, despite the presence of amino acid mutations in the 2019-ncov receptor-binding domain. although a previous study using hela cells expressing ace2 proteins showed that 2019-ncov could employ the ace2 receptor, 37 whether these mutations affect ace2 binding or change receptor tropism requires further study.recombination has been seen frequently in coronaviruses. 1 as expected, we detected recombination in the sarbecoviruses analysed here. our results suggest that recombination events are complex and are more likely occurring in bat coronaviruses than in 2019-ncov. hence, despite its occurrence, recombination is probably not the reason for emergence of this virus, although this inference might change if more closely related animal viruses are identified.in conclusion, we have described the genomic structure of a seventh human coronavirus that can cause severe pneumonia and have shed light on its origin and we declare no competing interests.data are available on various websites and have been made publicly available (more information can be found in the first paragraph of the results section).viruses of the family coronaviridae possess a singlestrand, positive-sense rna genome ranging from 26 to 32 kilobases in length. 1 coronaviruses have been identified in several avian hosts, 2,3 as well as in various mammals, including camels, bats, masked palm civets, mice, dogs, and cats. novel mammalian coronaviruses are now regularly identified. 1 for example, an hku2related coronavirus of bat origin was responsible for a fatal acute diarrhoea syndrome in pigs in 2018. 4 for 2494 laboratory-confirmed cases of infection and 858 fatalities since september, 2012, including 38 deaths following a single introduction into south korea. 8, 9 in late december, 2019, several patients with viral pneumonia were found to be epidemiologically associated with the huanan seafood market in wuhan, in the hubei province of china, where a number of non-aquatic animals such as birds and rabbits were also on sale before the outbreak. a novel, human-infecting coronavirus, 10, 11 provisionally named 2019 novel corona virus (2019-ncov), was identified with use of next-generation sequencing. as of jan 28, 2020, china has reported more than 5900 confirmed and more than 9000 suspected cases of 2019-ncov infection across 33 chinese provinces or municipalities, with 106 fatalities. in addition, 2019-ncov has now been reported in thailand, japan, south korea, malaysia, singapore, and the usa. infections in medical workers and family clusters were also reported and human-to-human transmission has been confirmed. 12 most of the infected patients had a high fever and some had dyspnoea, with chest radiographs revealing invasive lesions in both lungs. 12, 13 we report the epidemiological data of nine inpatients, from at least three hospitals in wuhan, who were diagnosed with viral pneumonia of unidentified cause. using next-generation sequencing of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid samples and cultured isolates from these patients, 2019-ncov was found. we describe the genomic characterisation of ten genomes of this novel virus, providing important information on the origins and cell receptor binding of the virus.nine patients with viral pneumonia and negative for common respiratory pathogens, who presented to at least three hospitals in wuhan, were included in this study. eight of the patients had visited the huanan seafood market before the onset of illness, and one patient (wh04) did not visit the market but stayed in a hotel near the market between dec 23 and dec 27, 2019 (table) . five of the patients (wh19001, wh19002, wh19004, wh19008, and ys8011) had samples collected by the chinese center for disease control and prevention (cdc) which were tested for 18 viruses and four bacteria using the respifindersmart22 kit (pathofinder, maastricht, netherlands) on the lightcycler 480 real-time pcr system (roche, rotkreuz, switzerland). presence of sars-cov and mers-cov was tested using a previously reported method. 14 all five cdc samples were negative for all common respiratory pathogens screened for. four of the patients (wh01, wh02, wh03, and wh04) had samples collected by bgi (beijing, china), and were tested for five viruses and one bacterium using the respipathogen 6 kit (jiangsu macro & micro test, nantong, china) on the applied biosystems abi 7500 real-time pcr system (thermofisher scientific, foster city, ca, usa). all four samples were negative for the targeted respiratory pathogens.special-pathogen-free human airway epithelial (hae) cells were used for virus isolation. briefly, bronchoalveolar lavage fluids or throat swabs from the patients were inoculated into the hae cells through the apical surfaces. hae cells were maintained in an air-liquid interface incubated at 37°c. the cells were monitored daily for cytopathic effects by light microscopy and the cell supernatants were collected for use in quantitative rt-pcr assays. after three passages, apical samples were collected for sequencing.evidence before this study the causal agent of an outbreak of severe pneumonia in wuhan, china, is a novel coronavirus, provisionally named 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov). the first cases were reported in december, 2019.we have described the genomic characteristics of 2019-ncov and similarities and differences to other coronaviruses, including the virus that caused the severe acute respiratory syndrome epidemic of 2002-03. genome sequences of 2019-ncov sampled from nine patients who were among the early cases of this severe infection are almost genetically identical, which suggests very recent emergence of this virus in humans and that the outbreak was detected relatively rapidly. 2019-ncov is most closely related to other betacoronaviruses of bat origin, indicating that these animals are the likely reservoir hosts for this emerging viral pathogen.by documenting the presence of 2019-ncov in a sample of patients, our study extends previous evidence that this virus has led to the novel pneumonia that has caused severe disease in wuhan and other geographical localities. currently available data suggest that 2019-ncov infected the human population from a bat reservoir, although it remains unclear if a currently unknown animal species acted as an intermediate host between bats and humans.reverse-transcribed into cdna, followed by the secondstrand synthesis. using the synthetic double-stranded dna, a dna library was constructed through dnafragmentation, end-repair, adaptor-ligation, and pcr amplification. the constructed library was qualified with an invitrogen qubit 2.0 fluorometer (thermofisher, foster city, ca, usa), and the qualified double-stranded dna library was transformed into a single-stranded circular dna library through dna-denaturation and circularisation. dna nanoballs were generated from singlestranded circular dna by rolling circle amplification, then qualified with qubit 2.0 and loaded onto the flow cell and sequenced with pe100 on the dnbseq-t7 platform (mgi, shenzhen, china).after removing adapter, low-quality, and low-complexity reads, high-quality genome sequencing data were generated. sequence reads were first filtered against the human reference genome (hg19) using burrows-wheeler alignment. 15 the remaining data were then aligned to the local nucleotide database (using burrows-wheeler alignment) and non-redundant protein database (using rapsearch), 16 downloaded from the us national center for biotechnology information website, which contain only coronaviruses that have been published. finally, the mapped reads were assembled with spades 17 to obtain a high-quality coronavirus genome sequence.primers were designed with use of oligo primer analysis software version 6.44 on the basis of the assembled partial genome, and were verified by primer-blast (for more details on primer sequencs used please contact the corresponding author). pcr was set up as follows: 4·5 μl of 10x buffer, 4 μl of dntp mix (2·5 μmol/l), 1 μl of each primer (10 μmol/l), and 0·75 units of hs ex taq (takara biomedical technology, beijing, china), in a total volume of 30 μl. the cdnas reverse transcribed from clinical samples were used as templates, and random primers were used. the following program was run on the thermocycler: 95°c for 5 min; 40 cycles of 95°c for 30 s, 55°c for 30 s, and 72°c for 1 min as determined by product size; 72°c for 7 min; and a 4°c hold. finally, the pcr products were separated by agarose gel electrophoresis, and products of the expected size were sequenced from both ends on the applied biosystems 3730 dna analyzer platform (applied biosystems, life technologies, foster city, ca, usa; for more details on expected size please contact the corresponding author).the whole-genome sequences of 2019-ncov from six samples (wh19001, wh19005, wh19002, wh19004, wh19008, and ys8011) were generated by a combination sanger, illumina, and oxford nanopore sequencing. first, viral rnas were extracted directly from clinical samples with the qiaamp viral rna mini kit, and then used to synthesise cdna with the superscript iii reverse transcriptase (thermofisher, waltham, ma, usa) and n6 random primers, followed by second-strand synthesis with dna polymerase i, large (klenow) fragment (thermofisher). viral cdna libraries were prepared with use of the nextera xt library prep kit (illumina, san diego, ca, usa), then purified with agencourt ampure xp beads (beckman coulter, brea, ca, usa), followed by quantification with an invitrogen qubit 2.0 fluorometer. the resulting dna libraries were sequenced on either the miseq or iseq platforms (illumina) using a 300-cycle reagent kit. about 1·2-5 gb of data were obtained for each sample.the raw fastq files for each virus sample were filtered using previously described criteria, 18 then subjected to de novo assembly with the clcbio software version 11.0.1. mapped assemblies were also done using the batderived sars-like coronavirus isolate bat-sl-covzc45 (accession number mg772933.1) as a reference. variant calling, genome alignments, and sequence illustrations were generated with clcbio software, and the assembled genome sequences were confirmed by sanger sequencing. rapid amplification of cdna ends (race) was done to obtain the sequences of the 5ʹ and 3ʹ termini, using the invitrogen 5ʹ race system and 3ʹ race system (invitrogen, carlsbad, ca, usa), according to the manufacturer's instructions. gene-specific primers (appendix p 1) for 5ʹ and 3ʹ race pcr amplification were designed to obtain a fragment of approximately 400-500 bp for the two regions. purified pcr products were cloned into the pmd18-t simple vector (takara, takara biotechnology, dalian, china) and chemically com petent escherichia coli (dh5α cells; takara), according to the manufacturer's instructions. pcr products were sequenced with use of m13 forward and reverse primers.reference virus genomes were obtained from genbank using blastn with 2019-ncov as a query. the open reading frames of the verified genome sequences were predicted using geneious (version 11.1.5) and annotated using the conserved domain database. 19 pairwise sequence identities were also calculated using geneious. potential genetic recombination was investigated using simplot software (version 3.5.1) 20 and phylogenetic analysis.sequence alignment of 2019-ncov with reference sequences was done with mafft software (version 7.450). 21 phylogenetic analyses of the complete genome and major coding regions were done with raxml software (version 8.2.9) 22 with 1000 bootstrap replicates, employing the general time reversible nucleotide substitution model.on the basis of the genome sequences obtained, a real-time pcr detection assay was developed. pcr primers and probes were designed using applied biosystems primer express software (thermofisher scientific, foster city, ca, usa) on the basis of our sequenced virus genomes. the specific primers and probe set (labelled with the reporter 6-carboxyfluorescein [fam] and the quencher black hole quencher 1 [bhq1]) for orf1a were as follows: for ward primer 5ʹ-agaagattggttagatgatgatagt-3ʹ; re verse pri mer 5ʹ-ttccatctctaattgaggttgaacc-3ʹ; and probe 5ʹ-fam-tcctcactgccgtcttgttg acca-bhq1-3ʹ. the human gapdh gene was used as an internal con trol (forward primer 5ʹ-tcaagaa ggtggtgaagcagg-3ʹ; reverse primer 5ʹ-cagcgtc aaa ggtg gaggagt-3ʹ; probe 5ʹ-vic-cct caa ggg catcc tggg ctacact-bhq1-3ʹ). primers and probes were synthesised by bgi (beijing, china). rt-pcr was done with an applied biosystems 7300 real-time pcr system (thermo-scientific), with 30 µl reaction volumes consisting of 14 µl of diluted rna, 15 µl of 2x taqman one-step rt-pcr master mix reagents (4309169; applied biosystems, thermofisher), 0·5 µl of 40x multiscribe and rnase inhibitor mixture, 0·75 μl forward primer (10 μmol/l), 0·75 μl reverse primer (10 μmol/l), and 0·375 μl probe (10 μmol/l). thermal cycling parameters were 30 min at 42°c, followed by 10 min at 95°c, and a subsequent 40 cycles of amplification (95°c for 15 s and 58°c for 45 s). fluorescence was recorded during the 58°c phase.the funder of the study had no role in data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of report. gfg and ws had access to all the data in the study, and gfg, ws, wt, wc, and gw were responsible for the decision to submit for publication.from the nine patients' samples analysed, eight complete and two partial genome sequences of 2019-ncov were obtained. these data have been deposited in the china national microbiological data center (accession number nmdc10013002 and genome accession numbers nmdc60013002-01 to nmdc60013002-10) and the data from bgi have been deposited in the china national genebank (acces sion numbers cna0007332-35).based on these genomes, we developed a real-time pcr assay and tested the original clinical samples from the bgi (wh01, wh02, wh03, and wh04) again to determine their threshold cycle (ct) values (table) . the remaining samples were tested by a different real-time pcr assay developed by the chinese cdc, with ct values ranging from 22·85 to 32·41 (table) . these results confirmed the presence of 2019-ncov in the patients. bronchoalveolar lavage fluid samples or cultured viruses of nine patients were used for next-generation sequencing. after removing host (human) reads, de novo assembly was done and the contigs obtained used as queries to search the non-redundant protein database. some contigs identified in all the samples were closely related to the bat sars-like betacoronavirus bat-sl-covzc45 betacoronavirus. 23 bat-sl-covzc45 was then used as the reference genome and reads from each pool were mapped to it, generating consensus sequences corresponding to all the pools. these consensus sequences were then used as new reference genomes. eight complete genomes and two partial genomes (from samples wh19002 and wh02; table) were obtained. the de novo assembly of the clean reads from all the pools did not identify any other long contigs that corresponded to other viruses at high abundance.the eight complete genomes were nearly identical across the whole genome, with sequence identity above 99·98%, indicative of a very recent emergence into the human population ( figure 1a) . the largest nucleotide difference was four mutations. notably, the sequence identity between the two virus genomes from the same patient (wh19001, from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, and wh19005, from cell culture) was more than 99·99%, 3'3'3' base pairs with 100% identity at the amino acid level. in addition, the partial genomes from samples wh02 and wh19002 also had nearly 100% identity to the complete genomes across the aligned gene regions. a blastn search of the complete genomes of 2019-ncov revealed that the most closely related viruses available on genbank were bat-sl-covzc45 (sequence identity 87·99%; query coverage 99%) and another sars-like betacoronavirus of bat origin, bat-sl-covzxc21 (accession number mg772934; 23 87·23%; query coverage 98%). in five gene regions (e, m, 7, n, and 14) , the sequence identities were greater than 90%, with the highest being 98·7% in the e gene ( figure 2a) . the s gene of 2019-ncov exhibited the lowest sequence identity with bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21, at only around 75%. in addition, the sequence identity in 1b (about 86%) was lower than that in 1a (about 90%; figure 2a) . most of the encoded proteins exhibited high sequence identity between 2019-ncov and the related bat-derived coronaviruses ( figure 2a) . the notable exception was the spike protein, with only around 80% sequence identity, and protein 13, with 73·2% sequence identity. notably, the 2019-ncov strains were less genetically similar to sars-cov (about 79%) and mers-cov (about 50%). the similarity between 2019-ncov and related viruses was visualised using simplot software, with the 2019-ncov consensus sequence employed as the query ( figure 2b) .comparison of the predicted coding regions of 2019-ncov showed that they possessed a similar genomic organisation to bat-sl-covzc45, bat-sl-covzxc21, and sars-cov phylogenetic analysis of 2019-ncov and its closely related reference genomes, as well as representative betacoronaviruses, revealed that the five subgenera formed five well supported branches ( figure 3) . the subgenus sarbecovirus could be classified into three well supported clades: two sars-cov-related strains from rhinolophus sp from bulgaria (accession number gu190215) and kenya (ky352407) formed clade 1; the ten 2019-ncov from wuhan and the two bat-derived sars-like strains from zhoushan in eastern china (bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21) formed clade 2, which was notable for the long branch separating the human and bat viruses; and sars-cov strains from humans and many genetically similar sars-like corona viruses from bats collected from southwestern china formed clade 3, with bat-derived coronaviruses also falling in the basal positions ( figure 3 ). in addition, 2019-ncov was distinct from sars-cov in a phylogeny of the complete rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) gene (appendix p 2). this evidence indicates that 2019-ncov is a novel beta coronavirus from the subgenus sarbecovirus.as the sequence similarity plot revealed changes in genetic distances among viruses across the 2019-ncov genome, we did additional phylogenetic analyses of the major encoding regions of representative members of the subgenus sarbecovirus. consistent with the genome phylogeny, 2019-ncov, bat-sl-covzc45, and bat-sl-covzxc21 clustered together in trees of the 1a and spike genes (appendix p 3). by contrast, 2019-ncov did not cluster with bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21 in the 1b tree, but instead formed a distinct clade with sars-cov, bat-sl-covzc45, and bat-sl-covzxc21 (appendix p 3), indicative of potential recombination events in 1b, although these probably occurred in the bat coronaviruses rather than 2019-ncov. phylogenetic analysis of the 2019-ncov genome excluding 1b revealed similar evolutionary relationships as the full-length viral genome (appendix p 3).the envelope spike (s) protein mediates receptor binding and membrane fusion 24 and is crucial for determining host tropism and transmission capacity. 25, 26 generally, the spike protein of coronaviruses is functionally divided into the s1 domain (especially positions 318-510 of sars-cov), responsible for receptor binding, and the s2 domain, responsible for cell membrane fusion. 27 the 2019-ncov s2 protein showed around 93% sequence identity with bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21-much higher than that of the s1 domain, which had only around 68% identity with these bat-derived viruses. both the n-terminal domain and the c-terminal domain of the s1 domain can bind to host receptors. 28 we inspected amino acid variation in the spike protein among the sarbecovirus coronaviruses the receptor-binding domain of betacoronaviruses, which directly engages the receptor, is commonly located in the c-terminal domain of s1, as in sars-cov 29 for lineage b, and mers-cov 30,31 and batcov hku4, 32 for lineage c (figure 5). through phylogenetic analysis of the receptor-binding domain of four different lineages of betacoronaviruses (appendix p 4), we found that, although 2019-ncov was closer to bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21 at the whole-genome level, the receptor-binding domain of 2019-ncov fell within lineage b and was closer to that of sars-cov (figure 5a). the three-dimensional structure of 2019-ncov receptorbinding domain was modelled using the swiss-model program 33 with the sars-cov receptor-binding domain structure (protein data bank id 2dd8) 34 as a template. this analysis suggested that, like other betacoronaviruses, the receptor-binding domain was composed of a core and an external subdomain ( figure 5b-d) .notably, the external subdomain of the 2019-ncov receptor-binding domain was more similar to that of sars-cov. this result suggests that 2019-ncov might also use angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as a cell receptor. however, we also observed that several key residues responsible for the binding of the sars-cov receptor-binding domain to the ace2 receptor were variable in the 2019-ncov receptor-binding domain (including asn439, asn501, gln493, gly485 and phe486; 2019-ncov numbering).from genomic surveillance of clinical samples from patients with viral pneumonia in wuhan, china, a novel coronavirus (termed 2019-ncov) has been identified. 10, 11 our phylogenetic analysis of 2019-ncov, sequenced from nine patients' samples, showed that the virus belongs to the subgenus sarbecovirus. 2019-ncov was more similar to two bat-derived coronavirus strains, bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21, than to known human-infecting coronaviruses, including the virus that caused the sars outbreak of 2003.epidemiologically, eight of the nine patients in our study had a history of exposure to the huanan seafood market in wuhan, suggesting that they might have been in close contact with the infection source at the market. however, one patient had never visited the market, although he had stayed in a hotel near the market before the onset of their illness. this finding suggests either possible droplet transmission or that the patient was infected by a currently unknown source. evidence of clusters of infected family members and medical workers has now confirmed the presence of human-to-human transmission. 12 clearly, this infection is a major public health concern, particularly as this outbreak coincides with the peak of the chinese spring festival travel rush, during which hundreds of millions of people will travel through china. as a typical rna virus, the average evolutionary rate for coronaviruses is roughly 10 -⁴ nucleotide substitutions per site per year, 1 with mutations arising during every replication cycle. it is, therefore, striking that the sequences of 2019-ncov from different patients described here were almost identical, with greater than 99·9% sequence identity. this finding suggests that 2019-ncov originated from one source within a very short period and was detected relatively rapidly. however, as the virus transmits to more individuals, constant surveillance of mutations arising is needed.phylogenetic analysis showed that bat-derived coronaviruses fell within all five subgenera of the genus betacoronavirus. moreover, bat-derived coronaviruses fell in basal positions in the subgenus sarbecovirus, with 2019-ncov most closely related to bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21, which were also sampled from bats. 23 these data are consistent with a bat reservoir for coronaviruses in general and for 2019-ncov in particular. however, despite the importance of bats, several facts suggest that another animal is acting as an intermediate host between bats and humans. first, the outbreak was first reported in late december, 2019, when most bat species in wuhan are hibernating. second, no bats were sold or found at the huanan seafood market, whereas various non-aquatic animals (including mammals) were available for purchase. third, the sequence identity between 2019-ncov and its close relatives bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21 was less than 90%, which is reflected in the relatively long branch between them. hence, bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21 are not direct ancestors of 2019-ncov. fourth, in both sars-cov and mers-cov, bats acted as the natural reservoir, with another animal (masked palm civet for sars-cov 35 and dromedary camels for mers-cov) 36 acting as an intermediate host, with humans as terminal hosts. therefore, on the basis of current data, it seems likely that the 2019-ncov causing the wuhan outbreak might also be initially hosted by bats, and might have been transmitted to humans via currently unknown wild animal(s) sold at the huanan seafood market.previous studies have uncovered several receptors that different coronaviruses bind to, such as ace2 for sars-cov 29 and cd26 for mers-cov. 30 our molecular modelling showed structural similarity between the receptor-binding domains of sars-cov and 2019-ncov. therefore, we suggest that 2019-ncov might use ace2 as the receptor, despite the presence of amino acid mutations in the 2019-ncov receptor-binding domain. although a previous study using hela cells expressing ace2 proteins showed that 2019-ncov could employ the ace2 receptor, 37 whether these mutations affect ace2 binding or change receptor tropism requires further study.recombination has been seen frequently in coronaviruses. 1 as expected, we detected recombination in the sarbecoviruses analysed here. our results suggest that recombination events are complex and are more likely occurring in bat coronaviruses than in 2019-ncov. hence, despite its occurrence, recombination is probably not the reason for emergence of this virus, although this inference might change if more closely related animal viruses are identified.in conclusion, we have described the genomic structure of a seventh human coronavirus that can cause severe pneumonia and have shed light on its origin and we declare no competing interests.data are available on various websites and have been made publicly available (more information can be found in the first paragraph of the results section).the global community is at the peak of emerging bugs, even though the earlier scares of zoonotic viruses were not retained. the re-emergence of viral agents is a great threat and challenge for the global health community [1] . the global community has witnessed that over the last two decades, the world has experienced three outbreaks of coronaviruses with elevated morbidity rates. in december 2019, cases of mysterious pneumonia with unknown etiology were reported in wuhan, hubei, a province of china, which got the attention of the world [2] . researchers and the chinese government responded swiftly, and after deep etiological and sequencing investigation, the international committee on taxonomy of viruses entitled it as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [3] .the sars-cov-2 belongs to betacoronavirus, a member of the subfamily coronavirinae having four genera: alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, gammacoronavirus, and deltacoronavirus in family coronaviridae, categorized in the order nidovirales ( figure 1 ). generally, covs are broadly distributed among humans, birds and other mammals, usually causing hepatic, enteric, neurologic and respiratory syndromes [4, 5] . four (229e, oc43, nl63 and hku1) out of six human disease-causing covs are widespread, and in immune-competent individuals they normally cause common cold symptoms [6] . two other strains that were linked with fatal illness were zoonotic in origin, including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) [7] .in 2002-2003, the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome occurred due to sars-cov in the guangdong province of china and quickly became pandemic to twenty-seven countries, infecting 8098 people with 774 deaths and was declared the first endemic of the 21st century [8] . a decade later in 2012, mers-cov caused a severe respiratory disease that emerged in the middle east with 2494 confirmed human infection cases and 858 deaths [9] . in both epidemics, bats were identified as the original source of sars and mers-covs. the rate of human-to-human transmission of sars-cov-2 appears higher than earlier outbreaks of covs via cough and/or sneezing droplets emitted from an infected person. sars-cov-2 has appeared more transmissible but less deadly than sars-cov. to date worldwide, 194,029 confirmed cases of human infection and 7873 deaths across 164 countries have been recorded [10] .in natural populations, mutations, recombination, and reassortment are the strategic evolutionary process considered for genetic diversity. the high incidence of homologous rna recombination is one of the most fascinating features of covs replication [11] [12] [13] [14] . kottier et al. reported the first experimental-based recombination evidence for avian infectious bronchitis virus (ibv) [15] , although additional studies have also concluded that ibv evolves through recombination [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] . moreover, murine hepatitis virus (mhv) evolution through recombination was also practically confirmed [22] . this encouraged exploration of the probable role of recombination in the sars-cov emergence. the current condition might appear as a vulnerable factor for severe disease and may impose serious health threats to the human. due to wide distribution with the increasing prevalence of covs, frequent genomes recombination, large genetic diversity and high humananimal interface behavior, covs might be emerged from time-to-time in humans due to occasional spillover and recurrent cross-species infectious events [7, 23] .as an emerging virus, very limited information is available to describe the genetic diversity, evolutionary ancestors and possible routes of transmission of sars-cov-2 from the natural reservoir to humans. this study aimed to track the evolutionary ancestors of sars-cov-2 and different evolutionary strategies (mutations, recombination or reassortment) that were genetically adapted by the novel coronavirus. generally, covs are broadly distributed among humans, birds and other mammals, usually causing hepatic, enteric, neurologic and respiratory syndromes [4, 5] . four (229e, oc43, nl63 and hku1) out of six human disease-causing covs are widespread, and in immune-competent individuals they normally cause common cold symptoms [6] . two other strains that were linked with fatal illness were zoonotic in origin, including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) [7] .in 2002-2003, the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome occurred due to sars-cov in the guangdong province of china and quickly became pandemic to twenty-seven countries, infecting 8098 people with 774 deaths and was declared the first endemic of the 21st century [8] . a decade later in 2012, mers-cov caused a severe respiratory disease that emerged in the middle east with 2494 confirmed human infection cases and 858 deaths [9] . in both epidemics, bats were identified as the original source of sars and mers-covs. the rate of human-to-human transmission of sars-cov-2 appears higher than earlier outbreaks of covs via cough and/or sneezing droplets emitted from an infected person. sars-cov-2 has appeared more transmissible but less deadly than sars-cov. to date worldwide, 194,029 confirmed cases of human infection and 7873 deaths across 164 countries have been recorded [10] .in natural populations, mutations, recombination, and reassortment are the strategic evolutionary process considered for genetic diversity. the high incidence of homologous rna recombination is one of the most fascinating features of covs replication [11] [12] [13] [14] . kottier et al. reported the first experimental-based recombination evidence for avian infectious bronchitis virus (ibv) [15] , although additional studies have also concluded that ibv evolves through recombination [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] . moreover, murine hepatitis virus (mhv) evolution through recombination was also practically confirmed [22] . this encouraged exploration of the probable role of recombination in the sars-cov emergence. the current condition might appear as a vulnerable factor for severe disease and may impose serious health threats to the human. due to wide distribution with the increasing prevalence of covs, frequent genomes recombination, large genetic diversity and high human-animal interface behavior, covs might be emerged from time-to-time in humans due to occasional spillover and recurrent cross-species infectious events [7, 23] .as an emerging virus, very limited information is available to describe the genetic diversity, evolutionary ancestors and possible routes of transmission of sars-cov-2 from the natural reservoir to humans. this study aimed to track the evolutionary ancestors of sars-cov-2 and different evolutionary strategies (mutations, recombination or reassortment) that were genetically adapted by the novel coronavirus.it is the utmost priority of the scientific community to minimize the public health risk through tracing the origin and natural inhabitants of sars-cov-2 to restrict human-to-human and cross-species transmission. to understand the genetic diversity relationship and potential origin of sars-cov-2 with the other members of coronavirinae, we have performed molecular phylogenetic analysis with a number of covs whole-genome sequences obtained from national center for biotechnology information (ncbi) ( table s1 ). the phylogenetic tree results demonstrate that all the covs responsible for the outbreak of concentrated pneumonia belong to the genera betacoronavirus ( figure 2 ). all the sars-cov-2 clade grouped with the cluster of sars/sars-like covs, with bat covs hku9-1, hku9-2 hku9-3 and hku9-4 as an immediate ancestor ( figure 2 ). the interior shared neighbors include sars-cov ns-1, sars-cov sino1-11, sars-cov gz02 and sars-cov gd01, and they were the human-infecting covs ( figure 2 ). the whole genome-based phylogenetic analysis presented that two bat sars-like covs (zxc21 and zc45) were the closest relatives of sars-cov-2. most of the inner and outer joint neighbors of sars-cov-2 were found to have bats as their natural reservoir including bat sars-cov wiv1 in rhinolophus sinicus, bat sars-cov hku3-1, and bat cov hku9-3 in rousettus bats. consequently, the bat would be the convenient native host of sars-cov-2, thus the probable intermediate host for the transmission cascade used by sars-cov-2 from bats to humans would be the same as that used by other sars-cov.pathogens 2020, 9, 240 3 of 13it is the utmost priority of the scientific community to minimize the public health risk through tracing the origin and natural inhabitants of sars-cov-2 to restrict human-to-human and crossspecies transmission. to understand the genetic diversity relationship and potential origin of sars-cov-2 with the other members of coronavirinae, we have performed molecular phylogenetic analysis with a number of covs whole-genome sequences obtained from national center for biotechnology information (ncbi) ( table s1 ). the phylogenetic tree results demonstrate that all the covs responsible for the outbreak of concentrated pneumonia belong to the genera betacoronavirus ( figure  2 ). all the sars-cov-2 clade grouped with the cluster of sars/sars-like covs, with bat covs hku9-1, hku9-2 hku9-3 and hku9-4 as an immediate ancestor ( figure 2 ). the interior shared neighbors include sars-cov ns-1, sars-cov sino1-11, sars-cov gz02 and sars-cov gd01, and they were the human-infecting covs ( figure 2 ). the whole genome-based phylogenetic analysis presented that two bat sars-like covs (zxc21 and zc45) were the closest relatives of sars-cov-2. most of the inner and outer joint neighbors of sars-cov-2 were found to have bats as their natural reservoir including bat sars-cov wiv1 in rhinolophus sinicus, bat sars-cov hku3-1, and bat cov hku9-3 in rousettus bats. consequently, the bat would be the convenient native host of sars-cov-2, thus the probable intermediate host for the transmission cascade used by sars-cov-2 from bats to humans would be the same as that used by other sars-cov.evolutionary phylogenetic tree analysis of coronaviruses: whole-genome sequences based on the phylogenetic tree of covs was constructed with the maximum-likelihood method using beast with gtr+i+g as the nucleotide substitution model with an applied posterior probability value of 0.5. branches with different colors represent different genera of coronaviruses; black, alpha coronavirus, blue, beta coronavirus; red, sars-cov-2; green, delta coronavirus; purple, gamma coronavirus.covs genome is comprised of single-stranded positive-sense rna with 5'-cap and 3´-poly-a tail (figure 3 ). at the 5´ end, non-structure protein including poly-proteins pp1a and pp1b are directly translated from the genomic rna strand. other structure proteins are envelope (e), nucleocapsid evolutionary phylogenetic tree analysis of coronaviruses: whole-genome sequences based on the phylogenetic tree of covs was constructed with the maximum-likelihood method using beast with gtr+i+g as the nucleotide substitution model with an applied posterior probability value of 0.5. branches with different colors represent different genera of coronaviruses; black, alpha coronavirus, blue, beta coronavirus; red, sars-cov-2; green, delta coronavirus; purple, gamma coronavirus.covs genome is comprised of single-stranded positive-sense rna with 5'-cap and 3'-poly-a tail (figure 3 ). at the 5' end, non-structure protein including poly-proteins pp1a and pp1b are directly translated from the genomic rna strand. other structure proteins are envelope (e), nucleocapsid (n), membrane (m) and spike (s) proteins. in addition, covs encoded some special accessory proteins like 3a/b, 4a/b, 5, 6, 7a/b etc. proteins ( figure 3 ). wuhan-hu-1-cov in the phylogenetic tree was uniquely positioned with sars/sars-like covs that share a common ancestor which resembled bat coronavirus hku9-1, hku9-2 hku9-3 and hku9-4. during the course of evolution, various recombinant events possibly obscure the path substantially by the patterns of genomic homologous diversity. thus, we compared the e, m, n and s genomic regions of wuhan-hu-1-cov as representative of sars-cov-2, sars, and mers-cov ( figures s1-s4 ). wuhan-hu-1-cov genome had more sequence homology with sars-cov (table1, figure 4 ) as compared to mers-cov. although high genetic diversity was found between wuhan-hu-1-cov and sars-cov (table 1) in the e, m, n and s genes, low sequence homology between wuhan-hu-1-cov and mers-cov was observed ( figures s1-4) .examining the envelop (e) protein disclosed that the sequence conservation of wuhan-hu-1-cov in view of sars-cov was more than mers cov ( figure s1 ). wuhan-hu-1-cov shared 93% amino acid sequence homology with 7% genetic variation in the e protein with the sars-cov (table  1) .furthermore, the amino acid sequence of the membrane (m) protein of wuhan-hu-1-cov, sars-cov, and mers-cov were compared ( figure s2 ). in wuhan-hu-1-cov, about 92% conservation of amino acid sequences and 17 mutations (8%) with respect to sars-cov were observed (table 1) .further, we analyzed the nucleocapsid (n) protein, which is a more abundant protein in covs. with no exception, about 93% of the amino acid sequence identity of the n protein for wuhan-hu-1-cov with sars-cov (table 1) with 7% genetic variations was found, while a less conserved sequence percentage was found with mers-cov ( figure s3 ). the conserved nature of sars-cov-2 along with other covs was an important factor to trace the evolutionary pathway of the cov and would be wuhan-hu-1-cov in the phylogenetic tree was uniquely positioned with sars/sars-like covs that share a common ancestor which resembled bat coronavirus hku9-1, hku9-2 hku9-3 and hku9-4. during the course of evolution, various recombinant events possibly obscure the path substantially by the patterns of genomic homologous diversity. thus, we compared the e, m, n and s genomic regions of wuhan-hu-1-cov as representative of sars-cov-2, sars, and mers-cov ( figures s1-s4 ). wuhan-hu-1-cov genome had more sequence homology with sars-cov (table 1, figure 4 ) as compared to mers-cov. although high genetic diversity was found between wuhan-hu-1-cov and sars-cov (table 1) in the e, m, n and s genes, low sequence homology between wuhan-hu-1-cov and mers-cov was observed ( figures s1-s4) .examining the envelop (e) protein disclosed that the sequence conservation of wuhan-hu-1-cov in view of sars-cov was more than mers cov ( figure s1 ). wuhan-hu-1-cov shared 93% amino acid sequence homology with 7% genetic variation in the e protein with the sars-cov (table 1) .furthermore, the amino acid sequence of the membrane (m) protein of wuhan-hu-1-cov, sars-cov, and mers-cov were compared ( figure s2 ). in wuhan-hu-1-cov, about 92% conservation of amino acid sequences and 17 mutations (8%) with respect to sars-cov were observed (table 1) .further, we analyzed the nucleocapsid (n) protein, which is a more abundant protein in covs. with no exception, about 93% of the amino acid sequence identity of the n protein for wuhan-hu-1-cov with sars-cov (table 1) with 7% genetic variations was found, while a less conserved sequence percentage was found with mers-cov ( figure s3 ). the conserved nature of sars-cov-2 along with other covs was an important factor to trace the evolutionary pathway of the cov and would be important to limit the outbreak of pneumonia-related viruses. in covs, the n protein was crucial for rna transcription and viral assembly disrupting the host cell and is also important to evaluate the virus-host adaptation and drug design.further, we compared spike glycoprotein (s) protein of wuhan-hu-1-cov, sars-cov and mers-cov ( figure s4 ). it was observed that during the viral infection, s protein underwent several drastic changes. the s protein of wuhan-hu-1-cov was more prone to mutations; particularly, the amino acid sequence represented~19% alteration with four major insertions and~81% homology in contrast to sars (table 1, figure 4a,b) . additionally, we found that the wuhan-hu-1-cov s protein was vulnerable to mutations, especially in spike protein-cell receptor interface-associated amino acids.sars-cov used a receptor-binding domain that stretched between 306-527 amino acid sequences. we compared the receptor-binding domain of sars-cov and wuhan-hu-1-cov and we found that 73% of conserved amino acid regions were observed in wuhan-hu-1-cov ( figure s5 ). in the meantime, similar conservation patterns of the amino acid were also found in the binding receptor motif extended 424-494 amino acid residues used by sars-cov to bind human ace2 ( figure s6 ). it was suggested that a significant affinity of wuhan-hu-1-cov with ace2 imposed high public health risk for humans by transmission through the s protein-ace2 binding channel. subsequently, homology protein modeling was used to predict the s protein structure of wuhan-hu-1-cov via the structure of sars-cov spike glycoprotein (pdb: c5xlrc) (figure 4b,c) . rna transcription and viral assembly disrupting the host cell and is also important to evaluate the virus-host adaptation and drug design. further, we compared spike glycoprotein (s) protein of wuhan-hu-1-cov, sars-cov and mers-cov ( figure s4 ). it was observed that during the viral infection, s protein underwent several drastic changes. the s protein of wuhan-hu-1-cov was more prone to mutations; particularly, the amino acid sequence represented ~19% alteration with four major insertions and ~81% homology in contrast to sars (table 1, figure 4a,b) . additionally, we found that the wuhan-hu-1-cov s protein was vulnerable to mutations, especially in spike protein-cell receptor interface-associated amino acids.sars-cov used a receptor-binding domain that stretched between 306-527 amino acid sequences. we compared the receptor-binding domain of sars-cov and wuhan-hu-1-cov and we found that 73% of conserved amino acid regions were observed in wuhan-hu-1-cov ( figure s5 ). in the meantime, similar conservation patterns of the amino acid were also found in the binding receptor motif extended 424-494 amino acid residues used by sars-cov to bind human ace2 ( figure s6 ). it was suggested that a significant affinity of wuhan-hu-1-cov with ace2 imposed high public health risk for humans by transmission through the s protein-ace2 binding channel. subsequently, homology protein modeling was used to predict the s protein structure of wuhan-hu-1-cov via the structure of sars-cov spike glycoprotein (pdb: c5xlrc) (figure 4b,c) . nine regions in complete genome nucleotide sequences of wuhan-hu-1-cov were detected as putative recombinant regions and our recombination detection program (rdp) analysis suggested that wuhan-hu-1-cov could be a recombinant of sars (gz02, rf1), sars-like (zxc21, zc45, w1v1) and mers-covs ( table 2 ). the phi-test provided significant evidence of recombination (p-value <0.00001). moreover, the similarity plot showed that the 5-genomic region of wuhan-hu-1-cov shared substantially higher similarity with sars-like covs, while the 3-genomic region shared a mixture of sars and sars-like covs nucleotide sequence ( figure 5 ). taken together, our study found that most of the recombination events occurred in the spike glycoprotein motif of wuhan-hu-1-cov, mostly towards the 5´end of the s gene. only a single recombination event was identified in rna-dependent rna polymerase, helicase, and orf3a (table 2 ). nine regions in complete genome nucleotide sequences of wuhan-hu-1-cov were detected as putative recombinant regions and our recombination detection program (rdp) analysis suggested that wuhan-hu-1-cov could be a recombinant of sars (gz02, rf1), sars-like (zxc21, zc45, w1v1) and mers-covs ( table 2 ). the phi-test provided significant evidence of recombination (p-value < 0.00001). moreover, the similarity plot showed that the 5-genomic region of wuhan-hu-1-cov shared substantially higher similarity with sars-like covs, while the 3-genomic region shared a mixture of sars and sars-like covs nucleotide sequence ( figure 5 ). taken together, our study found that most of the recombination events occurred in the spike glycoprotein motif of wuhan-hu-1-cov, mostly towards the 5´end of the s gene. only a single recombination event was identified in rna-dependent rna polymerase, helicase, and orf3a (table 2) . sars-cov-2 is a novel emerging contagious agent that found a way into human civilization. the outbreak of sars-cov-2 is the third pandemic of the 21st century and the situation is still ongoing. the prediction of fan et al. [24] that a future sars or mers-like covs epidemic would emerge in china with a probable bat source became reality when the first case of concentrated viral pneumonia was reported on december 30, 2019 in wuhan city of china [25] . later on, the novel coronavirus designated as sars-cov-2 was found responsible for the viral outbreak of pneumonia sars-cov-2 is a novel emerging contagious agent that found a way into human civilization. the outbreak of sars-cov-2 is the third pandemic of the 21st century and the situation is still ongoing. the prediction of fan et al. [24] that a future sars or mers-like covs epidemic would emerge in china with a probable bat source became reality when the first case of concentrated viral pneumonia was reported on december 30, 2019 in wuhan city of china [25] . later on, the novel coronavirus designated as sars-cov-2 was found responsible for the viral outbreak of pneumonia in wuhan [26] .generally, emerging and re-emerging viral infections belong to the rna family of viruses since these viruses have high mutation rates that lead to eminent environmental adaptation with rapid evolution [27] . to date, very little knowledge is available about sars-cov-2. to understand the genetic diversity relationship and potential origin of sars-cov-2, our molecular phylogenetic analysis predicted that sars and sars-like covs were the ancestors of sars-cov-2. two bat sars-like covs (zxc21 and zc45) were the closest relatives of sars-cov-2 ( figure 2) . consequently, we found that the bat would be the convenient native host of sars-cov-2. previously, it was found that several bat covs were able to cause infection in humans without any intermediate host [28, 29] .rapid sequencing of sars-cov-2 provided an opportunity for the research community to look into its genetic diversity, developing diagnostic tests and ultimately helping with vaccine production. the whole-genome sequence of sars-cov-2 retained~80% nucleotide homology with sars epidemic viruses. all the structural proteins were well conserved except for spike glycoprotein that showed a high rate of mutation in sars-cov-2 [30, 31] . our results demonstrated that compared with sars-cov, the sars-cov-2 shares~81% amino acid similarity in spike (s) protein (table 1, figure 4 ), which represented less conserved patterns of s protein than other covs like hku3-cov [32] . through deep receptor-binding domain (rbd) analysis of sars-cov (amino acids), the sars-cov-2 rbd was 73% preserved comparatively to the pandemic rbd ( figure s5 ). this conservation pattern of rbd placed the sars-cov-2 between hku3-4 (62.7% conserved), a bat virus that was not capable of using the human ace2 receptor, and the divergent bat cov rshc014 (80.8%), a spike known to use the human ace2 receptor for entrance [29, 33] . moreover, the binding free energies for the s-protein to human ace2 binding complexes were calculated and the binding free energy for the wuhan-hu-1-cov s-protein increased by 28 kcal mol -1 when compared to the sars-cov s-protein binding, representing more binding affinity to the human ace2 receptor [34] .moreover, a recent study revealed that a polybasic cleavage site was present at the s1 and s2 junction of sars-cov-2 that effectively allowed cleavage by furin and the other protease and took part in viral host range and infectivity [35] , whereas these polybasic cleavage sites in other human beta-corona viruses have not been detected [36] . experimental investigation of follis et al. with sars-cov demonstrated that furin cleavage site insertion at the s1-s2 junction increases cell-cell fusion [37] . additionally, an effective cleavage site in the mers-cov spike motif empowers bat mers-like covs to infect human cells [38] . on the other hand, in avian influenza viruses, quick replication and diffusion effectively acquired polybasic cleavage sites in the hemagglutinin (ha) protein, which served a similar function to that of the coronavirus spike protein. in covs, insertion or recombination facilitates acquisition of transforming low-pathogenicity into highly pathogenic forms for polybasic cleavage sites [39] . so far sampled pangolin beta-corona viruses and the bat beta coronaviruses do not have polybasic cleavage sites. covs could have adopted a natural evolutionary mechanism to mutate and to attain the polybasic cleavage site because the virus must have both the mutations and polybasic cleavage site for appropriate human ace2 receptor binding. for this purpose, it required a large population density for natural selection to attain an ace2-encoding gene that is akin to the human ortholog [40, 41] . the recent study of peng et al. revealed that might it be possible that sars-cov-2 ancestors jumped into humans, getting the genetic features through adaptation and remaining undetected during human-to-human transmission. once it adapted, these variations became pandemic and sufficiently produced a large number of cases to activate the immune system that identified it [40, 41] .usually viruses adopt different strategies including recombination, mutation and reassortment which facilitate the viruses in getting to equilibrium in the final host. due to low fidelity of reverse transcriptase and rna-dependent rna polymerase, rna viruses are more vulnerable to point mutations even though the point mutation rates in rna viruses are approximately 10 −4 to 10 −5 [42] . during the 2002 sars-cov epidemics, three mutations per rna in each replication round were estimated (8.26 × 10 −6 per nucleotide per day) [43] . often, large population size and high rate of mutations in rna viruses rapidly adjust genotypes allowing for quick adaptations in a rapidly changing environment. respectively, mutations have a specific influence on virus reproductive fitness as positive selection drives to fix the positive fitness effects of beneficial alleles, while negative selection removes lethal and deleterious alleles from a population. together with these selective approaches, the evolutionary routes of virus populations can be figured out across a sequence space [34] . examining the genetic insight of sars and wuhan-hu-1-cov presented more than 90% sequence conservation between the e, m and n protein with few numbers of point mutations (table 1) , whereas the higher rate of mutations in the s protein of wuhan-hu-1-cov were also observed and shared~81% identity (table 1, figure 4a ). these results were in accordance with the results of xu et al. and pradhan et al. [44, 45] .recombination and reassortment became a powerful tool of emerging viruses to get innovative antigenic combinations that might aid the course of cross-species diffusion. the recombination strategy facilitates this mechanism to find a better fraction of sequence space than the mutation, raising the probability of finding a genetic configuration which supports host adaptations [46] . it is important to note that numerous recently emerged rna viruses which were involved in human diseases exhibited active recombination or reassortment events. mostly rna viruses get entry into the new host through the cross-species transmission [47] . the recombination events in viruses are in fact related to discontinuous utilization of rna polymerase involved in the transcriptional mechanism to make mrnas. rna polymerase of viruses must use different rna prototypes while making negative or positive rna strands that eventually result in rna recombination that is either homologous or non-homologous [12] . in rna viruses, this model of recombination is called the copy-choice model of recombination [13, 14] . in covs, a high recombination rate has been reported [48] . it might be due to having large genome size, discontinuous transcription, and sub-or fully transcriptionally active genomic length of rna. the co-infection of two covs in same animal or cells can potentially facilitate crossing over. in the recent past, the emergence of new infectious bronchitis virus recombinant (ibv), a new type of cov in turkeys, was reported. the genome sequence revealed that the s protein gene of this virus was the recombinant of another covs [49] . in the s protein, the recombination event is certainly significant as it permits the virus to modify superficial antigenicity to get from the immune reconnaissance into the animals, and then adapt to a human host. we identified nine putative recombination patterns, which encompass, in terms of genes involved, the spike glycoprotein, rdrp, helicase and orf3a. six of the nine recombination regions were spotted in the s gene (table 2) . significantly, in this study each of the recombinant regions were predicted with at least two methods (table 2) according to the method of posada. he recommended that one should not be dependent on a single method [50] . these results were in agreement with previous reports where the recombinant event was reported between parent viruses in the avian-like and mammalian-like sars-cov evolution [51, 52] .when segments of multiple viral genomes infect the same animal or tissue simultaneously, it ultimately results in new viral progeny with a multiple parent genome set. this process is termed as gene reassortment used by viruses for evolution [28] . the literature suggests that a typical rna influenza a virus has eight ssrna segments and the assortment occurred among multiple influenza viruses termed as genetic "shift" or "antigenic shift" resulted in the change of influenza viral surface glycoprotein's/neuraminidase. thus, the sequence of these virus strains diverges widely when host animal cell gets infected by confection and the progeny is developed by reassortment or recombination [27] .taking this together, we found that sars-cov-2 was the descendent of sars/sars-like coronaviruses, being a close relative of bat sars-like covs (zxc21 and zc45). we confirmed that mutations in different genomic regions of sars-cov-2 have a specific influence on virus reproductive adaptability, allowing genotypes to adjust and quickly adapt in a rapidly changing environment. moreover, for the first time we identified nine putative recombination patterns in sars-cov-2 which were undoubtedly important for evolutionary survival, meanwhile permitting the virus to modify superficial antigenicity to get from immune reconnaissance into animals and then adapting to a human host. with these combined natural selected strategies, sars-cov-2 emerged as a novel virus in human society.for molecular phylogenetic analysis, the whole-genome sequences of 53 viruses including 10 sars-cov-2 were retrieved from ncbi through blastn search, with wuhan-hu-1-cov being used as reference (table s1 ). all the sequences were aligned by using mafft (v 7.452) online server [53] .to determine the nucleotides substitution model, the bayesian information criterion (bic) value for aligned sequences was determined using jmodel test 2 and the substitution model with minimum bic values was considered for phylogenetic inference (table s2 ) [54] . the whole-genome sequence was considered as a single partition, and three chains of bayesian analysis were performed by applying the gtr+i+g model of substitution. reaching the maximum allowed number of generations after discarding burin (270030000), the optimal analyses trees were pooled into a single tree file. posterior probability values with majority consensus rule were visualized. figure 3 was used to visualize the best tree and the likelihood phylogram was exported as a picture [55] . multalin software was used to align and visualized the envelope, membrane, nucleocapsid, and spike glycoprotein regions of sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2 [56] . the amino acid conservation motifs of the receptor-binding domain (rbd) in sars-cov and sars-cov-2 genome were traced by performing muscle alignment using megax software. the three-dimensional structures of spike glycoproteins of sars-cov2 and sars-cov were generated by using an online server protein homology/analogy recognition engine v 2.0 (phyre2) [57] and the structure was visualized and marked by using pymol [58] . to detect the recombination events, whole-genome nucleotide sequences of seven viral strains (wuhan-hu-1-cov; bat sars-like including w1v1, zxc21, zc45; bat sars gz02, rf1 and mers) were aligned using clustalw. preliminarily, maxchi and chimaera algorithms were used to detect the recombination events in the dataset by a recombination detection program (rdp5) [59] . additionally, bootscan analyses and similarity plots were performed using simplot 3.5.1 [60] to confirm the rdp-suggested potential recombination events and were analyzed on the whole-genome sequence of wuhan as a query and bat sars-like, sars and mers as potential parental sequences (table s1) . a phi statistical test was applied to evaluate the significance of recombination evidence between closely and distantly related genomes. furthermore, the point of recombination along with major and minor parents of the recombinant was accessed through rdp, bootscan, maxchi, chimaera and 3seq methods [59] .the following are available online at http://www.mdpi.com/2076-0817/9/3/240/s1, figure s1 : envelop (e) protein multialign sequence comparison of wuhan-hu-1-cov (wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus), sars-cov (gz02) and mers cov, figure s2 : membrane (m) protein multialign sequence comparison of wuhan-hu-1-cov (wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus), sars-cov (gz02) and mers cov, figure s3 : nucleocapsid (n) protein multialign sequence comparison of wuhan-hu-1-cov (wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus), sars-cov (gz02) and mers cov, figure s4 : spike (s) protein multialign sequence comparison of wuhan-hu-1-cov (wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus), sars-cov (gz02) and mers co, figure s5 : receptor binding domain (306-527) comparison between wuhan-hu-1 (wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus), sars-cov (gz02), figure s6 : receptor binding motif receptor binding to human ace2 (424-494); comparison between wuhan-hu-1-cov (wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus), sars-cov (gz02), table s1 : coronavirus and their ncbi accession numbers used for phylogenetic analysis, table s2 : bayesian information criterion (bic) values for nucleotides substitution model selection. coronaviruses are enveloped non-segmented positive sense rna viruses. in the recent 51 two decades, human coronaviruses (hcovs) have caused to at least three major 52 pandemics and pose a huge threat to the public health worldwide (1). until now, seven 53 different hcovs have been identified and all of them belong to the family 54coronaviridae of the order nidovirales. especially, the species severe acute respiratory 55 syndrome-related coronavirus (sarsr-cov) of the genus betacoronavirus contains the 56 most pathogenic hcovs, including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 57 (sars-cov) and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) (2). 58 sars-cov caused the sars pandemic in years of 2002 -2003, resulting in more than 59 8,000 clinical cases with a mortality of 10% (3, 4) . after the sars pandemic, plenty of 60 research and measurements have been done to prevent the emergence and re-emergence 61 of coronavirus epidemics, including transmission tracing, pathogenesis studies and 62 therapy development (5). nevertheless, 17 years later, a novel human coronavirus, 63 sars-cov-2, brought a much more severe and widespread pandemic of coronavirus 64disease 2019 to the world and this pandemic is lasting until now (6, 7). up 65 to may 25, 2025, about 5 month after the first reported case of covid-19, sars-cov-66 2 has caused 5,432,302 confirmed infections and 342,318 deaths worldwide, far 67 surpassing the sars pandemic. so far, most countries around the world are suffering 68 from the public health crisis, medical system overload and economic loss due to the 69 pandemic. among common pathogenic viruses, sars-cov-2 emerges a high 70 transmissibility whose r0 value is currently estimated as 2.3 but could be as high as 5.7 71 when more infection cases are identified (8). the high transmissibility of sars-cov-2 72 is probably a major reason for the rapid development of covid-19 epidemic. in order 73 to relieve the current pandemic and prevent hcov epidemics in the future, more studies 74 on the transmission of pathogenic hcov is urgently required. 75interspecies transmission from wide animals to humans is a major cause leading to 76 the epidemics of highly pathogenic coronaviruses, such as sars-cov and sars-cov-77 2. previous virus tracing studies have shown that chinese horseshoe bats are natural 78 reservoirs of sars-cov (9, 10), and a recent phylogenetic analysis has revealed that 79 sars-cov-2 might also be originated from bat-sarsr-cov (11) as an exopeptidase expressed in vascular endothelial cells in the heart and the kidney 95 that catalyses the conversion of angiotensins (16, 17) . ace2 is highly conserved and 96 ubiquitously expressed in most vertebrates, but not all ace2s can serve as the receptor 97 for sars-cov and sars-cov-2, which is a key determinant of the host range of these 98 two viruses. for instance, sars-cov can use mouse ace2 as its receptor but sars-99cov-2 cannot, indicating that mouse is a potential host for sars-cov but not for 100 sars-cov-2 (1). our previous study predicted the ace2 utilization of sars-cov-2 101 and showed that sars-cov-2 could potentially utilize most mammalian ace2s except 102 murine ace2s and even some avian ace2s. meanwhile, we also predicted 9 amino 103 acid (aa) residues in ace2 critical for sars-cov-2 utilization (18). however, this 104 study was mainly based on the aa analysis and lacked experimental evidence, which 105 could be hardly referred to clarify the host range of sars-cov-2. 106in this study, we ectopically expressed ace2 of 20 different animals in hela cells, a 107 cell line lacking of ace2 expression naturally, and then infected the cells with hiv-108 based pseudoviral particles carrying coronavirus spike proteins to test their utilization of 109 these ace2s. the result showed that both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 could use 110 most mammalian ace2s as their receptors but not fish or reptilian ace2s. interestingly, 111 similar to mouse ace2, sars-cov but not sars-cov-2 was capable of using 112 chicken ace2, indicating a narrower host range of sars-cov-2, especially in murine 113and birds. we also tested pangolin cov pseudovirus with spike highly similar to sars-114cov-2. to our surprise, pangolin cov showed an ace2 utilization profile similar to 115 sars-cov rather than sars-cov-2. by alignment of the aa sequence of the 20 ace2 116 orthologs, we further confirmed several aa residues (among the 9 residues predicted 117 previously) critical for sars-cov-2 utilization, including t20, k31, q42 and y83, and 118 excluded some critical aa residues, such as y41 and k68. especially, t20 of ace2 119 probably played critical roles in spike-ace2 binding by interacting with s477 and t478 120 within the receptor-binding motif (rbm) of sars-cov-2 spike protein, but it was not 121 necessary for the binding of ace2s with sars-cov and pangolin cov spikes. these 122 aa residues might partially determine the unique receptor utilization and host range of 123 sars-cov-2. in summary, our study provides a more clear view of ace2 utilization 124 by sars-cov-2, which may contribute to a better understanding about the virus-125 receptor interaction and the host range of sars-cov-2. 126 127 results 128in this study, we investigated the ace2 utilization of three sarsr-covs, including 130 sars-cov-bj01, sars-cov-2 and pangolin cov. pangolin cov was tested since 131 pangolins were suspected to be a potential intermediate host of . 132notably, the rbm of pangolin cov spike is almost identical with sars-cov-2 spike 133 except for the 498 th aa residue, but they are different from sars-cov spike on multiple 134 aa sites ( figure 1a) . 135in order to validate the successful preparation of the three pseudovirus, the hek293t 136 cells for virus package were lysed after virus harvest the cells were lysed and subjected 137to western blot detection of ha-tagged spike proteins. as shown in figure 1b to evaluate the phylogenetic relationship of the 20 ace2s assessed above, we built a 172 phylogenetic tree based on the aa sequences of all the ace2s (figure 3a) . in the tree, 173 we observed the obvious branches of mammalian, bird, reptilia and fish ace2s. 174 however, with the mammalian ace2s, there were no significant branches 175 corresponding to the ace2 utilization by sars-cov-bj01 or sars-cov-2 176 pseudoviruses, indicating that the whole sequence analysis could hardly reveal the key 177 factors underlying the receptor utilization by the viruses. 178in our previous study, we predicted 9 key aa sites on human ace2 potentially 179 critical for the receptor utilization, including t20, k31, y41, k68, y83, k353, d355, 180 r357 and m383, based on the sars-cov-2 utilization of human, bat, civet, swine and 181 mouse ace2s (18). here we tested 15 more species, and then we checked the 9 sites of 182 the 20 ace2 orthologs to validate the role of the nine sites in sars-cov-2 utilization. 183as shown in figure 3a , y/h41, d355, r357 and r383 were conserved in all ace2s, 184indicating that these sites were not determining the receptor utilization by sars-cov-2. 185similarly, k68 was conserved in both mouse and chicken ace2s that could not be used 186 by sars-cov-2 and was probably not important for sars-cov-2 utilization either. 187 q42 was conserved in mouse ace2 but was substituted by e42 in chicken ace2 188 whose role in sars-cov-2 might be complicated. on the contrary, t20, k31 and y83 189 in usable ace2s were distinct from the corresponding aa in unusable ace2s, indicating 190 their cirtical role in determining sars- in history, most pandemic viruses originated from wild reservoir animals and 194 transmitted directly or indirectly to humans, such as ebola virus from bats (19) the covid-19 pandemic caused by sars-cov-2 is the most severe worldwide 202 pandemic in the recent years surpassing the sars pandemic in 2003, so it is likely to 203 speculate that sars-cov-2 has a broad host range. surprisingly, our cell-entry result 204showed that sars-cov-2 had a smaller range of ace2 utilization than sars-cov. 205 sars-cov-2 could not utilize mouse or chicken ace2 which could be used by cov, indicating a narrower host range of sars-cov-2, especially in murine and birds. 207the reason is probably that the host range of sars-cov-2 is broad enough to support 208 its transmission from bats to humans, and lack of infection to some kinds of animals 209does not affect such transmission due to redundant routes. thus, it is not suggested to 210 over-interpret the determination of the host range on the possibility of a virus to cause 211 pandemics, especially for the viruses with broad host ranges. 212notably, sars-cov-2 has a better utilization of bat ace2 than sars-cov. though 213 sars-cov originate from bat-sarsr-cov, the utilization of bat ace2 by sars-cov 214 is quite limited which is supported by the previous reports (10, 21). according our 215 current results, sars-cov-2 utilizes chinese horseshoe bat ace2 much better than 216 sars-cov, indicating a higher homology between sars-cov-2 and its ancestor. this 217 speculation is supported by the phylogenetic analysis of viral genomes in the previous 218 study (1). 219our cell-entry result showed that sars-cov and sars-cov-2 could use a wide 220 variety of mammalian ace2s, which is further supported by the reports about the 221 susceptibility of various mammals to sars-cov-2 infection (22). however, the 222 utilization of fish and reptilian ace2s was quite poor for both sars-cov and sars-223cov-2. this can be explained by the remote phylogenetic relationship between 224 fish/reptilian ace2s and mammalian ace2s. by comparison, bird ace2s have closer 225 phylogenetic relationship with mammalian ace2s, and thus, bird ace2s could be used 226 by some but not all sarsr-covs, such as sars-cov. this indicates that sarsr-covs 227 are more likely to be transmitted by mammals and birds but not fish and reptiles, and 228 more attention should be paid to domestic mammals and birds to prevent cov pandemic. 229our previous study predicted 9 critical aa residues on ace2 orthologs based on the 230 aa sequence comparison of chinese horseshoe bat, civet, swine and mouse ace2s, 231 since these were the only ace2s tested by sars-cov-2 utilization at that time (18). in 232this study, we have tested 16 more ace2s which could help to confirm or exclude 233 critical aa residues found previously. k31 and y83 in human ace2 were confirmed by 234 this study as critical aa residues for sars-cov-2 utilization. substitutions of k31d and 235 y83f were reported to abolish or strongly inhibit sars-cov binding (23, 24). here we 236 have found more k31 substitutions abolishing sars-cov-2 utilization that chicken 237 ace2 with k31e, crocodile and viper snake ace2s with k31q and mouse ace2 with 238 k31n could not be utilized by sars-cov-2, matching our previous prediction. 239considering both chicken and mouse ace2s could be utilized by sars-cov, k31 may 240 be a key aa residue leading to the different receptor utilization of sars-cov and 241 sars-cov-2. also, chicken, mouse and viper snake ace2s with y83f could not be 242 utilized by sars-cov-2, consistent with our previous prediction and other former 243 reports. on the contrary, though y41a was reported to abolish sars-cov binding (23), 244 horse ace2 with y41h could be used by sars-cov-2 well, indicating that y41h 245 barely affect sars-cov-2 utilization. however, chinese horseshoe bat ace2 with 246 y41h showed a relatively lower utilization by sars-cov-2 and even lower utilization 247 by sars-cov, indicating y41h might decrease receptor utilization synergistically with 248 only with other unknown substitutions, especially for sars-cov. substitution of k68 249 was reported to slightly inhibit sars-cov binding (23). nevertheless, horse ace2 250 with k68r could be used by sars-cov-2 well, indicating that k68r might not affect 251 sars-cov-2 utilization either. crucian and viper snake ace2 with k68i could not be 252 used by sars-cov-2, but these ace2s contains so many other substitutions that we 253 may not attribute the abolishment of sars-cov-2 utilization to k68i. 254 remarkably, our study revealed t20 of ace2 as a potential key aa residue for 255 sars-cov-2 utilization. t20 has not been reported to affect sars-cov utilization but 256 mouse ace2 with t20l and chicken ace2 with t20v could not be used by sars-257cov-2. t20 is located at the n terminus of most mature mammalian ace2s (excluding 258 the signal peptide). according to the structure of sars-cov-2 receptor-binding domain 259 complexed with human ace2, the n-terminal t20 of ace2 is close to s477 and t478 260 of sars-cov-2 rbm ( figure 3b ) (25). both threonine and serine contain hydroxyl 261 radicals that allow them to form hydrogen bonds with each other. thus, t20 of human 262 ace2 is likely to bridge with s477 and t478 of sars-cov-2 spike via hydrogen 263 bonds, which stabilizes the ace2-spike binding. however, l20 on mouse ace2 and 264 v20 on chicken ace2 are both aliphatic aa that cannot form hydrogen bonds to support 265 the ace2-spike binding, which may impair the utilization of these two ace2s by 266 sars-cov-2. in sars-cov spike, the two aa residues are substituted by g463 and 267 k464. k464 can form hydrogen bonds with threonine and g463 is a non-polar aa that 268 can interact with valine or leucine via hydrophobic bond together with the adjacent 269 a461. therefore, sars-cov spike can interact with various n-terminal aa of ace2s, 270 and this may be the reason why sars-cov can utilize mouse and chicken ace2s 271 while sars-cov-2 cannot. pangolin cov spike shares high similarity with sars-272cov-2 which keeps s477 and t478. however, pangolin cov spike harbors alkaline 273 h498 that can interact with acidic q42 and e42 of mouse and chicken ace2, 274 respectively, via ionic affinity, which may complementally support the ace2-spike 275 binding and allow the utilization of mouse and chicken ace2 by pangolin cov. on the 276 contrary, sars-cov-2 spike substitutes h498 with acidic q498, leading to ionic 277 repulsion with q42 and e42, blocking its binding with mouse and chicken ace2s. 278 these proposed interactions provide a possible explanation for the different utilization 279 of ace2s by sars-cov-2 and pangolin cov. nevertheless, all the speculation about 280 the aa residues on ace2 key for spike-ace2 binding is based on the sequence analysis, 281 and mutation validation is necessary to further verify the roles of those sites. 282in summary, our current study has validated the ace2 utilization by sars-cov-2 283 predicted in our previous analysis by pseudovirus cell-entry assay. the results showed 284 less ace2 utilization by sars-cov-2 compared to sars-cov and pangolin cov, 285 especially for murine and bird ace2s, indicating narrower host range of sars-cov-2. 286meanwhile, with these data, we screend 5 key aa residues of ace2 for sars-cov-2 287 utilization. especially, the n-terminal t20 and q42 might be critical in determining the 288 (bioworld, usa, 1:5000) was used as the first antibody, followed by incubation with 318 hrp-conjugated goat anti-mouse igg at the same dilution. 319the pseudovirus cell-entry assay was performed as described previously (26) covid-19 has opened a new chapter of human civilization with a lots of tragedy stories. a new strain of coronavirus family, 2019 novel coronavirus or sars-cov-2 has emerged and infected thousands of humans. it is gaining importance due to daily increases in the deaths caused by this disease [1] [2] [3] . the virus has already been reported from wuhan (china), thailand, japan, south korea, iran, and the us and is poised to occur in many more areas of the world community causing a pandemic scenario [4] [5] [6] and globally increasing the potential for rapid horizontal spread geographically [7] . determining the origin, evolution and antigenic resemblance of sars-cov-2 is urgently needed to study its molecular pathogenesis, perform surveillance, [8, 9] were employed for the study.again, as some reports and analyses guessed bats as the probable original host of sars-cov-2, we also considered two strains of bat-originated coronavirus (hku4 and hku5) in this study.from database and literature searches, only a single buffalo-originated coronavirus strain collected from bangladesh (bufcov-hku26-m) [10] was used for the comparative study with covid-19 strains isolated from wuhan, china [11] . the global risk of the 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19 [sars-cov-2]) has recently been addressed by many scientists [12] [13] [14] [15] . outside china,covid-19 transmission has been found in over 210 countries and territories [1, 15] . the us declared emergency funds because of coronavirus to the countries that are either affected or at high risk of spread, including bangladesh [16] . as the outbreak of the 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19 [sars-cov-2]) is expanding rapidly, analysis of epidemiological data of covid-19 is necessary to explore the measures of burden associated with the disease and to simultaneously gather information on determinants and interventions. therefore, we designed this study to compare the genetic materials of sars-cov-2 with different previously reported [17] [18] [19] [20] . accordingly, we also extracted population data of countries and provinces (china) from several websites [21] [22] [23] .the retrieved protein sequences were subjected to multiple sequence alignment (msa) by clustalw [24] and phylogenetic relationship (maximum parsimony, mp) studies by using mega x [25] to understand the ancestral origin and antigenic resemblance of sars-cov-2 with other coronaviruses. in addition, pairwise sequence alignment of sars-cov-2 proteins with other viral strains was performed by the emboss needle online software, which uses the needleman-wunsch alignment algorithm to find the optimum alignment (including gaps) of two sequences along their entire length [26] . moreover, sequence alignment was also visualized and analyzed by using jalview software (https://www.jalview.org/).targeting potential antigens from viral proteins is crucial for constructing peptide-based vaccine molecules that can interact with b lymphocytes [27] . it was reported that peptide flexibility and j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof proper surface accessibility are prerequisites for being a potential b cell epitope. considering those parameters, the immunogenic peptide sequences from four types of viral proteins were determined by using the b cell epitope prediction tools of the immune epitope database (iedb)[28], which employs the bepipred linear epitope prediction method [29] . the vaxijen v2.0 server (http://www.ddgpharmfac.net/vaxijen/) was used for screening out the most immunogenic peptides determined from iedb [28] . however, epitope conservancy analysis is an important step to determine the degree of desired epitope distribution in its homologous protein set. in this study, the conservancy pattern of mostly immunogenic b cell peptide sequences of covid-19 was compared with other homologous sequences retrieved from the ncbi database by using blastp [30] . moreover, the conservancy study of immunogenic peptides predicted from the sars-cov-2 proteins was also compared against other human coronavirus strains (hcov-229e, hcov-oc43, sars-cov, hcov-nl63, hku1 and mers-cov). the epitope conservancy analysis tool (http://tools.iedb.org/conservancy/) of the iedb was used to continue the conservancy analysis [31].homology modeling of spike glycoprotein (p0dtc2), membrane protein(p0dtc5), envelope protein (p0dtc4) and nucleoprotein (p0dtc9) of sars-cov-2 was performed by using the i-tasser server [32] . although 3d structures were generated by multiple threading alignments in the i-tasser server, refinement was conducted using modrefiner [33] followed by the fg-md refinement server to improve the accuracy of the predicted 3d modeled structure [34].modrefiner allowed for significant improvements in the physical quality of the local structure based on hydrogen bonds, side-chain positioning and backbone topology of the native-state proteins. again, fg-md, a molecular dynamics-based algorithm for structure refinement, usually works at the atomic level. the refined protein structure was further validated by rampage [35] and eraat analyses [36] .structures were visualized and analyzed by pymol [37] .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fwe illustrated the number of cases and deaths of sars-cov-2 in a consecutive way through graphs to elucidate the pattern of occurrence of those outcomes. we covered country-wise cases and deaths, the onset of global and chinese cases by date, the global death toll per day, and province-wise cases and deaths in china.we calculated the crude mortality rate and case fatality according to the formulas suggested by the cdc [38] as well as jacob and ganguli [39] . here, we calculated the crude mortality rate for those countries and for chinese provinces, having death records per 1 crore persons, for better interpretation.it is already known that the sars-cov-2 can multiply even at high temperatures, especially temperatures higher than 15° c [40, 41] ; however, sars-cov-2 is rapidly inactivated at 20°c [41] . therefore, temperature plays a great role in its multiplication. for this purpose, recent environmental temperature data from the place of first occurrence as well as bangladesh were obtained from landsat-8 satellite data. this satellite provides high spatial resolution (30 m) data at 15-day intervals. using the brightness temperature of band number 10 (tir-1) and emissivity data temperature (in °c) of bands 4 and 5 (l8 data users handbook), a large area (a 30-km-wide swath) can be obtained for a time with minor deviation from in situ temperature data (maximum 0.45 degree celsius sd). therefore, cloudless or less cloudy images (less than 90%) were obtained from the usgs webpage (www.earthexplorer.usg.gov). a maximum of 2 data points were available for one area in each month. however, neighboring path and row image borders shared some common areas, which provided more frequencies for those overlapped areas. level-1 tier-1 images, which are radiometrically and geometrically corrected, were used in this study.first, all images fulfilling the cloud-related conditions were downloaded. a total of 90 images covering the land areas of wuhan, china, korea, italy and bangladesh were downloaded. then, dn of band 10 data were converted to emissivity and simultaneously converted to brightness j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof temperature by using "equation 1" [42] . then, the emissivity was converted to temperature by using "equation 2" [43] .the estimated data were obtained by the landsat 8 thermal infrared sensor (tirs) of band 10. this information was automatically obtained from metadata.the four phylogenetic trees constructed from four types of representative viral proteins (spike, besides, fewer level of similarity and identical patterns were found with other viral strains, including bufcov-hku26 of bangladesh origin ( table 1) . were employed to determine the most antigenic sites by using the b cell epitope prediction tool of iedb and vaxijen scoring. the vaxijen server, which gave a result well above the threshold value (0.40), usually reveals the immunogenic potential to stimulate a protective response in host organisms [44] . from the analysis, a total of 17 epitopes from s proteins, 1 epitope from m proteins, 1 epitope from e proteins and 5 epitopes from n proteins were found to be mostly immunogenic in sars-cov-2, with almost 100% of peptides carrying more than the threshold value of the antigenic score of the vaxijen server ( and were subjected to conservancy analysis with the immunogenic epitopes from sars-cov-2proteins. it was found that antigenic sites are almost conserved in all of the homologous protein sequences deposited in the ncbi database ( table 2) . cross-checked conservancy analysis of covid-19 antigenic epitopes with sars-cov proteins showed that conservancy when crosschecked with other coronaviruses, including bufcov-hku26 of bangladesh origin, was not significant ( table 3) . in china, 28 of 34 provinces experienced deaths from covid-19, and the highest death toll occurred in hubei (3,122) province, followed by henan (22) and heilongjiang (13); in other provinces, the death toll was below ten up until 19 march 2020 (supplementary file 4) .upon analysis of mortality data over the time period from 11 january 2020 to 09 march 2020, therefore, only the eastern part is shown here. similarly, during the study period in the midregion of korea, the temperature was very low, which was caused by the presence of heavy and widespread clouds in that region during satellite image acquisition. however, very few clouds covers were found for the landsat-8 image acquisition for february 2020 for the italy areas. in almost all areas temperature were lower than 20°c except a few places where the temperature did not exceeded 25°c. therefore, interpretations from the figures for these regions should be guarded in order to avoid errors.the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 became a pandemic because of its global spread [45] . as the genetic architecture of sars-cov-2 was highly divergent from that of bufcov-hku26 j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f (figures 1 and 2 many of the scientists and pathologists revealed that high temperature and humidity able to j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f restrict the spread of covid-19 and spread of disease will be suppressed as the weather warms [61, 62] . this also supports our hypothesis. interestingly, coronaviruses that cause colds do tend to subside in warmer months. however, it is highly uncertain whether sars-cov-2 will behave the same way. current research by scientists is too early to predict how the virus will respond to changing weather [63].immunogenicity and epitope conservancy analyses of coronavirus proteins were performed to determine the potential b-cell epitopes that would interact efficiently with b lymphocytes to initiate the immune response against specific viral pathogens [64] . the study identified a total of 24 highly immunogenic b-cell epitopes from sars-cov-2 proteins (17 epitopes table 1 ). the antigenic sites of covid-19 were also crosschecked with other coronavirus-corresponding proteins ( table 3) respectively. this calculation agrees with the report of wang et al. [72] , who stated that the global case fatality was close to 3%. however, the global case fatalities of sars (9.60%) and j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f genomic data represent a key resource for testing hypotheses about how and when sars-cov-2 became established in different locations. for example, phylogenetic approaches may be able to distinguish community transmission from new introductions from travelers 2 , whether viral outbreaks were associated with multiple introductions 3 recent advances in virus sequencing and phylogenetics hold great promise for addressing key questions in infectious disease epidemiology and outbreak response 6 . there are limitations, however, to the insights that can be obtained from the wealth of sars-cov-2 genome data. the current sequence diversity is relatively limited because sars-cov-2 emerged only recently in late 2019 and because sars-cov-2 transmission outpaces the rate at which substitutions accumulate 4 . this implies that short-term transmission patterns may not leave a detectable footprint in virus genomes. in addition, large spatiotemporal biases exist in the available genome data. for instance, about 46 % of currently available genomes have been sampled from the uk whereas italy, having experienced a similar number of cases and likely an earlier epidemic onset, only represents 0.3% of the genome collection on gisaid. both low sequence diversity and sampling bias confound the interpretation of transmission patterns, and highly similar sars-cov-2 genomes from the same or different locations do not necessarily imply direct linkage.despite a relatively slow evolutionary rate, the 'phylodynamic threshold' for sars-cov-2 was reached relatively early 7 , meaning that sufficient divergence had accumulated over the sampling time range to infer time-calibrated phylogenies and the underlying transmission processes that generate such trees, including spatiotemporal spread. however, sampling bias presents a critical challenge for popular discrete trait ancestral reconstruction procedures 8,9 . although the modern phylodynamic framework includes other statistical approaches that are less sensitive to sampling bias e.g. [10] [11] [12] , computational complexity challenges their application to large data sets, in particular when insights are needed in short turnaround times. this explains the widespread adoption of ancestral reconstruction approaches that provide real-time tracking of pathogen evolution and spread 13 .when confronted with low diversity and sampling bias, evolutionary reconstructions may greatly benefit from integrating additional sources of information. bayesian phylodynamic approaches are particularly adept for this purpose 14 and phylogeographic methods in particular have been extended to take advantage of human transportation data as proxies of population-level connectivity between locations 15 . this approach has been utilized in a wide range of applications, including the identification of the key drivers of ebolavirus spread in west africa 16 . individual travel history of sampled patients also represents an important source of information that currently has not been used to its full potential in phylogeographic inference. to focus on the early stage of covid-19 spread, we analyzed sars-cov-2 genome sequences and metadata available in gisaid on march 10th 19 discrete trait phylogeographic inference attempts to reconstruct an ancestral location-transition history along a phylogeny based on the discrete states associated with the sampled sequences. in our bayesian approach, the phylogeny is treated as random which is critical to accommodate estimation uncertainty when confronted with sparse sequence information. here, we aim to augment these location-transition history reconstructions on random trees with travel history information obtained from (returning) travellers. when such information is available, the tip location state for a sequence can either be set to the location of sampling, as is done in the absence of such information, or the location from which the individual travelled (assuming that this was the location from which the infection was acquired). neither of these options is satisfactory: using the location of sampling ignores important information about the ancestral location of the sequence, whereas using the travel location together with the collection date represents a data mismatch and ignores the final transitions to the location of sampling. these events are particularly important when the infected traveller then produces a productive transmission chain in the sampling location.incorporating information about ancestral locations cannot be achieved simply through the parameterization of the discrete diffusion model, which follows a continuous-time markov chain (ctmc) process determined by relative transition rates between all pairs of locations that applies homogeneously (or time inhomogeneously 25 ) along the phylogeny. instead, we need to shape the realization of this process according to the travel histories by augmenting the phylogeny with ancestral nodes that are associated with a location state (but not with a known sequence) and hence enforce that ancestral location at a particular, possibly random point in the past of a lineage. further, the location state can also be ambiguous, allowing equal or weighted probability to be assigned to multiple possible locations 26 . we illustrate this procedure for an empirical example that includes 9 sars-cov-2 genomes in fig. 1 .: incorporating travel history data in phylogeographic reconstruction. panel a illustrates the concept of introducing ancestral nodes associated with locations from which travellers returned. the ancestral nodes are indicated by arrows for five cases relating them to the genomes sampled from the travellers. the ancestral nodes are introduced at different times in the ancestral path of each sampled genome. panels b, c and d represent the results from analyses using sampling location and travel history, sampling location only, and travel origin location respectively. the branch color reflects the modal state estimate at the child node. there is some topological variability but only involving nodes that are poorly supported.the empirical example includes two genomes from hubei, four from australia, and three fromitaly. travel history is available for five genomes (one sampled in italy and four in australia) and the same procedure is applied to the four genomes from travellers returning to australian from hubei, iran, southeast asia and hubei again (from top to bottom in fig. 1 a) .in subsequent panels, we compare a travel-aware reconstruction (b) to a reconstruction using we note that t i→j can be treated as a random variable in case the time of travelling to the sampling location is not known (with sufficient precision). we make use of this ability for the genomes associated with a travel location but without a clear travel time. in our bayesian inference, we specify normal prior distributions over t i→j informed by an estimate of time of infection and truncated to be positive (back-in-time) relative to sampling date. specifically, we use a mean of 10 days before sampling based on a mean incubation time of 5 days 27 and a constant ascertainment period of 5 days between symptom onset and testing 28 , and a standard deviation of 3 days to incorporate the uncertainty on the incubation time. finally, we indicate that not only information about the sampled traveller can be incorporated, but also about prior transmission history. we apply this for two cases in our data set. one of the genomes was sampled from a german patient who was infected after contact with someone who came fromshanghai. the person travelling from shanghai was assumed to be infected after being visited by her parents from wuhan a few days before she left. in this case, we incorporate wuhan (hubei) as an ancestral location with an associated time that accounts for the travel time fromshanghai with a number of additional days and associated uncertainty. another genome was obtained from a french person who had been in contact with a person who is believed to have contracted the virus at a conference in singapore 29 . in this case, we incorporate singapore as an ancestral location with a known travel time (supplementary table 1 ).to investigate how unsampled diversity may impact phylogeographic reconstructions, we include in our bayesian inference taxa that are associated with a location but not with observed sequence data. we identify undersampled locations by considering the ratio of available genomes to the cumulative number of cases for each location (obtained from our world in data, https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus-source-data ). to keep all available data, we opt not to downsample genomes, but to add a number of unsampled taxa to specific locations in order to achieve a minimal ratio of taxa (sampled and unsampled) to cumulative number of cases. in fig. 2 a, we plot the number of available genomes against the number of cases onmarch 10th 2020 on a log-log scale. in our case, we set the minimal ratio arbitrarily to 0.005.although higher ratios may be preferred, this comes at the expense of adding larger numbers of unsampled taxa and hence computationally more expensive bayesian analyses. our choice for the minimal ratio requires adding 458 taxa for 14 locations (colored symbols in fig. 2 ), so about we integrate over all possible phylogenetic placements of such taxa using standard markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) transition kernels. in the absence of sequence data, time of sampling represents an important source of information for the analysis in addition to sampling location. here, we use epidemiological data in order to estimate a probabilistic distribution for the sampling times of unsampled taxa. specifically, we follow grubaugh et al. 5 in estimating the number of prevalent infectious individuals on day t ( p t ) by multiplying the number of incident infections up to day t by the probability that an individual who became infectious on day i was still infectious on day t :where γ ( t-i ) is the cumulative distribution function of the infectious period. we also follow grubaugh et al. 5 we implement our approach to incorporate travel history in discrete phylogeographic inference in the beast framework (v.1.10.4 30 ). in this framework, we assume that discrete trait data x , in our case location data associated with both sampled and unsampled taxa, and aligned molecular sequence data y arise according to continuous-time markov (ctmc) chain processes on a random phylogeny f with the following model posterior distribution:where pr( x | f , t, ) and pr( y | f , ) represent the discrete trait likelihood and sequence likelihood respectively, t is the additional time information for the ancestral nodes, and characterize the discrete-trait and molecular sequence ctmc parameterizations along f respectively.likelihoods pr( x | f , t, ) and pr( y | f , ) are calculated using felsenstein's pruning algorithm 31 , a computation that is efficiently performed using the high-performance beagle library 32 . we for the sequence data, we use the hky nucleotide substitution ctmc model 33 https://github.com/beast-dev/beast-mcmc ) and associated r package constructs these estimates. we also visualize posterior expected markov jumps estimates between all locations using circular migration flow plots, which have been successfully used to visualize migration data 39 , including phylogeographic estimates 40 . when summarizing these jumps from analyses that include unsampled diversity, we ignore branches that only have unsampled taxa as descendants. we only plot jumps that have a posterior expectation larger than 0.75.to focus on the early dynamics of sars-cov-2 spread, we analyze a data set consisting of in our bayesian analysis of the complete data set, we model a discrete diffusion process between 44 locations: 29 countries and 15 locations within china, including 13 provinces, one municipality (beijing) and one special administrative area (hong kong). we fit a glm-parameterization of the discrete diffusion process and consider air travel data, within-continent geographic distances and an estimable asymmetry coefficient for transitions from and to hubei as covariates for the diffusion rates. in table 1 of what location data we use in the analyses, they consistently indicate that in this early stage, sars-cov-2 spread is shaped by air travel and not by geographic distance, and that there is strong asymmetric flow out of hubei. interestingly, this asymmetry is somewhat stronger for the analyses that incorporate travel locations compared to the analysis using only sampling locations. one explanation is that the majority of travellers were returning from hubei, and adding this information contributes appropriately to the intensity of outflux from hubei. we report posterior inclusion probabilities and posterior mean (95% highest probability density intervals) log conditional effect sizes for air travel, geographic distance and asymmetry out of hubei.as expected for a low degree of sequence variability over this limited time range, our bayesian phylogeographic reconstructions are burdened by a high degree of topological uncertainty. in fig. 4 , posterior support for the nodes in the mcc tree is represented by the size of the node circles, illustrating that only a limited number of clusters are reasonably well supported. this renders a single phylogenetic tree summary inadequate to interpret phylogeographic history.we side-step this problem by studying spatial trajectories that marginalize over phylogenetic variability, in the ancestral history of single taxa. in fig. 5 , we consider a case study involving the spatial path of a virus that was collected in switzerland in february 2020 (epi_isl_413021). the swiss virus is part of lineage b.1 (sw in fig.   4 ) and is positioned within a cluster of viruses primarily from europe that has been the subject of controversy. the basal clustering of a genome from the first detected case in germany led to speculation that the virus spread from germany to italy 41 . using the standard location of sampling ( fig. 5 a) , to further explore the sensitivity of phylogeographic analyses to sampling bias, we incorporate unsampled taxa in our reconstructions, in addition to travel history data. we add unsampled taxa for locations that are undersampled according to case counts (cfr. methods), in this case primarily for hubei ( n = 307), followed by italy ( n = 47), iran ( n = 40), and south korea ( n = 30).we specify a prior distribution over their tip ages ('sampling times') based on estimates of prevalent infections (cfr. methods). using this framework, we revisit the trajectory estimate for the swiss b.1 genome ( fig. 7 ) . in contrast to the reconstructions with no unsampled taxa ( fig.   5 ), we now mainly observe a direct transition from hubei to italy (posterior probability = 0.88),implying that a second introduction from hubei that is independent from the introduction into germany may have seeded the italian clade. this hypothesis arises from the inclusion of unsampled hubei taxa that now cluster between the german virus and the italian clade ( fig. 7 ) , even though the branch connecting the german genome to the italian clade only represents a single substitution. the many unsampled italian taxa that fall in this clade further reinforce its italian ancestry.markov jump trajectory plot as in fig. 5 for a swiss genome (epi_isl_413021) in lineage b1 and b1 subtree for the bayesian phylogeographic analysis incorporating travel data fig. 7 and unsampled diversity. dotted lines represent branches associated with unsampled taxa assigned to italy and hubei, china. the tip for the swiss genome corresponding to the trajectory is indicated with an arrow. because of the color similarity between italy and germany, the basal german virus is labeled. the value at the root represents the posterior location state probability.the inclusion of unsampled taxa also provides more resolution on the hubei ancestry of the iran-australia case study in lineage b.4 (epi_isl_412975). we estimate a similar trajectory as the analysis using travel history without unsampled taxa ( fig. 6 ), but with a more recent coalescence in hubei because of unsampled hubei taxa clustering basal to an iranian clade ( fig.   8 ). the genomes from four australian travellers returning from this country, one direct contact, another australian genome without travel history, as well as a genome from a traveller returning from iran to new zealand are effectively embedded in unsampled iranian diversity.the most basal virus in this clade is from a canadian traveller returning from iran. although the basal nature of this virus is not well supported, there is good posterior support for the monophyly of all the sampled genomes in this clade. notably, this virus was sampled before the first report of covid-19 in iran on february 19 th 43 , but our reconstruction indicates that considerable diversification, and hence transmission, already took place prior to this report. in addition to focusing on specific transmission patterns, we also summarize the overall dispersal dynamics in a way that marginalizes over plausible phylogenetic histories for the four different analyses we perform ( fig. 9 ). while introductions from hubei represent the dominant pattern when using sampling location only ( fig. 9 a) , this is far more pronounced for the other analyses. using sampling location suggests unrealistic dispersal from locations such as australia and the netherlands that largely disappear in the other analyses, specifically when using travel history data without or with unsampled diversity ( fig. 9 c & d) . in the travel-aware analyses, european countries experience more introductions from italy and to a lesser extent also more directly from hubei. as also illustrated by the specific examples ( fig. 5 & 6) , the considerable number of secondary transmissions from italy and iran is revealed by using travel history data;the substantial addition of unsampled taxa from these relatively undersampled locations does not further contribute to this pattern. however, adding unsampled diversity from hubei suggests that occasional introductions from other locations are more likely direct introductions from hubei, such as introductions from guangdong province to shandong province, southkorea and japan, and a supposedly canadian introduction in the us. the direction of the transitions are encoded both by the origin colour and by the gap between link and circle segment at the destination (migration into a location is associated with a larger gap than migration out of a location). as part of the supplementary information, we include the same figure but with a transparency for transitions from hubei to emphasize the 'secondary' dispersal dynamics.international travelers had a central role in the early global spread of the sars-cov-2 virus. to track whether covid cases were new imports or community transmission, detailed travel histories were collected from many of the early covid patients. to date, however, phylogeographic approaches using discrete trait reconstruction have not been able to fully incorporate travel history data. researchers had to select whether to assign a sample to the location of sampling, typically the home country, or to the location visited by the traveler.either way, half of the information was lost. during a period when there were major gaps in the availability of sars-cov-2 genomes from many key locations, losing half of the spatial information provided by travelers has been suboptimal. here, by developing a new phylogeographic approach that introduces ancestral nodes in the phylogeny that are associated with locations visited by travelers, we provide a method to formally recapture all the rich information provided by travelers. most importantly, we demonstrate that the travel-aware approach can dramatically improve phylogeographic inferences about the specific country-to-country paths followed by the sars-cov-2 virus during the early stages of global spread. as expected, the inclusion of travel history data is most informative when travelers are arriving from locations such as italy and iran that experienced early sars-cov-2 outbreaks, but for which few genome sequences were available, resulting in large gaps in the phylogeny.we are currently studying a pandemic as it unfolds, and as new sars-cov-2 sequences continue to be generated globally at an explosive pace, there will be ongoing opportunities to reassess the probability of conclusions drawn from earlier data sets. more genome data from hubei has already become available which will reduce the need for unsampled diversity from the pandemic origin in phylogeographic reconstructions. we have also observed that two genomes from iran are now available in gisaid that cluster with the genomes from australian travellers returning from this country (data not shown), which reinforces the iran-australia connection observed in our travel history reconstructions. we anticipate that the generation of additional data from italy will also support the spatial connections inferred here from traveler data. however, we intentionally tested the performance of our methods using an early sars-cov-2 data set that was heavily burdened by spatiotemporal sampling bias. it is possible that our methods could not account for all gaps in data at this stage, and further exploration is needed of how well our methods perform at different magnitudes of sampling gaps.we retrieved travel history data for about 20% of the early available genomes, but many more travel-based introductions may be undocumented. while such information is sometimes available in gisaid records, this is not commonly included metadata and there is otherwise no specific resource available to retrieve such information. this may at least partly be explained by concerns about the risk of patient identification. travel history data may be particularly important when analyzing low diversity data using bayesian joint inference of sequence and traits because sharing the same location state can contribute to the phylogenetic clustering of taxa. in general, it is crucial to consider the uncertainty of bayesian time-measured phylogenetic reconstructions because, even for sparse sequence information, a single tree sample (including the mcc tree) will appear highly resolved with branching structures that may not be supported by substitutions ( fig. 4 ) . however, this is only a single transmission hypothesis compatible with the data, while many other hypotheses will be plausible as should be reflected by the different topologies in the posterior and hence by low node support values. for this reason, we resorted to posterior summaries that focus on the location transition patterns in the ancestral history of single taxa or on markov jump estimates, both averaging over all plausible trees.while downsampling genomic data from locations in unbalanced data sets has become a common practice 15, 18 , we present here an alternative approach that adds unsampled taxa to assess the sensitivity of inferences to sampling bias. we emphasize that even though the inclusion of unsampled taxa is informed by epidemiological data, these unsampled taxa should never be considered as additional observations. the unsampled diversity reveals alternative hypotheses that may not be captured by the available genome sampling but are worth considering in the context of biased sampling. however, reconstructions using unsampled taxa do not provide evidence for any single hypothesis with the same weight as actual genomic data.we envision reconstructions built with unsampled taxa as being exploratory in nature, and most useful as added support for conclusions drawn independently from other analytical approaches, for example evolutionary simulations or epidemiological studies.it is important for future users of these methods to understand exactly how different kinds of empirical data are used to determine where unsampled taxa will attach to the phylogenetic backbone of sampled genomes. the first important aspect is the relative positioning in time of unsampled tips, which in our case is drawn from distribution curves of estimated prevalent infections over time. so, this together with the relative abundance of unsampled taxa by location is informed by epidemiological data. second, the locations of unsampled taxa will determine their clustering when jointly inferring the phylogeny based on sequences and discrete location traits. in this respect unsampled taxa will preferentially cluster with taxa representing the same locations, either sampled genomes or other unsampled ones. however, unsampled taxa can, and do in our experience, branch off lineages representing different location states. the relative preference for which location transitions this involves will be determined by the matrix of transition rates of the discrete trait ctmc, which in our case are informed by covariates such as air travel. this implies that in the sars-cov-2 analysis unsampled taxa can be positioned with taxa from countries that are highly connected by airline travel, given the importance of air travel in the early spread of the virus. finally, the branch lengths, or time it takes for unsampled taxa to find a common ancestor with other taxa, will be influenced by the coalescent prior. we opted for a simple exponential growth coalescent prior in our analyses, but more flexible tree priors are available that can also be informed by epidemiological data e.g. 44 .by formally accommodating the possibility of unsampled diversity in our phylogenetic reconstructions, we provide alternative scenarios for how sars-cov-2 spread globally and entered specific countries. most importantly, many early introductions in different locations were likely from hubei, in line with modelling estimates that point at the underdetection of exported covid-19 cases from wuhan 36 . in addition, our findings reinforce estimates shaped by travel history that point at early introductions into both italy and iran, two countries that are not well represented by genomic sampling, and subsequent transmission events from these countries to other locations. due to the low genomic variability of sars-cov-2, it may be more appropriate to refer to unsampled transmission chains rather than unsampled diversity because many unsampled taxa may represent highly similar or even identical genomes. with the large number of sars-cov-2 genomes now available, the question arises how scalable the incorporation of unsampled taxa will be. for computationally expensive bayesian inferences, the approach may need to go hand in hand with downsampling procedures or more detailed examination of specific sublineages. furthermore, as averaging over all plausible phylogenetic `placements' of large numbers of`volatile' unsampled taxa can be a challenging task, further developments are needed to make the estimation more efficient for larger scale datasets.we firmly acknowledge that many aspects of these analyses require further detailed examination and refinement in other pathogen systems with different types of data gaps and sampling biases. for example, we used an arbitrary cut-off for the ratio of available genomes to case counts in order to decide which locations required representation by unsampled taxa (without accounting for differences in reporting rates for case counts), so it would be useful to investigate how sensitive the reconstructions are with respect to such decisions. our spatial diffusion glm may benefit from 2020 travel data that are impacted by travel restrictions. the time dependency imposed by travel restrictions could potentially be modelled with an epoch version of the discrete trait ctmc 25 . this could also be important for the asymmetry factor we included for transitions from hubei as these will be severely impacted by the travel ban imposed on january 23 45 . finally, in addition to investigating the impact of model and data adjustments on empirical examples, simulation studies would greatly assist in evaluating the performance of the phylogeographic reconstructions in controlled scenarios.in conclusion, we demonstrate how travel history data can be formally integrated into discrete phylogeographic reconstructions and that this, together with accounting for unsampled diversity, can mitigate spatiotemporal sampling bias in reconstructions of the early spread of sars-cov-2. more research is needed on the specifications of such analyses and we hope that this work will stimulate developments to further integrate epidemiological information and other data sources into phylodynamic reconstructions.in late 2019, a novel positive sense rna virus, family coronaviridae, genus betacoronavirus and subgenus sarbecovirus, emerged in the human population as a result of cross-species transmission from an unknown host 1, 2 . the virus, sars-cov-2, began widespread circulation in the chinese city of wuhan in late december of 2019 with spread in other countries apparently beginning around mid-january 3, 4 .the first confirmed case of covid-19, the disease caused by sars-cov-2, in arizona was in late january 2020 from a student attending arizona state university who had travelled to china 5 . extensive contact tracing and isolation led to zero additional reported cases stemming from this original case (az1). there were no additional cases reported in arizona until march 3rd, when a travel-related case returned from europe and tested positive 6 . on march 6th, the first case of community transmission in arizona was announced 7 . on march 26th, the arizona department of health services (azdhs) updated the level of community transmission to "widespread." as of may 6th, there are ~9,707 confirmed positive cases in arizona and more than 426 deaths 8 , and the number of new cases per day in arizona continues to increase 9 . the navajo nation, located mostly in northeastern arizona (but also utah, colorado, and new mexico), at the time of writing has among the highest number of cases per capita in the us: approximately 850 confirmed cases per 100,000 individuals 10 . this is disproportionately high relative to the rest of arizona (approximately 130 confirmed cases per 100,000 individuals), and about 50% of the per capita cases seen in the hardest hit regions of the usa (areas of new york 11 ).given the scale of the pandemic, there is an urgent need to understand patterns of sars-cov-2 spread, including the relative roles of local transmission versus repeated travel-associated introductions, and the accumulation and spread of mutations that could affect the function of the virus, interfere with testing, or have antigenic effects that might impact vaccine efforts. viral genome sequencing has emerged as a key tool for addressing these questions. in order to assist with both local and global efforts to track the spread and evolution of this virus, we began intensive sequencing of viral genomes from across arizona and deposition of these sequences in the gisaid database, which makes them accessible to the research community for downstream analyses, notably including real-time pathogen tracking through nextstrain 12 .to better understand the evolution of the virus within the state of arizona we compared our sequences with publicly available sars-cov-2 genomes from across the world in a phylogenetic framework, and here we report our preliminary findings. specifically, we sought to answer 3 key questions regarding the circulation of the virus in arizona. first, although it appeared from epidemiological data that the first case of covid-19 in arizona did not lead to any additional cases, did cryptic transmission occur, similar to that proposed to have begun with wa1, the first diagnosed covid-19 patient in the u.s., who arrived in washington state from wuhan, china on january 15th, 2020 13 ? second, how many independent introductions contributed to the outbreak in arizona and what was the approximate timing of each event? third, are there any unique mutations present in arizona sequences that could have potential phenotypic effects or could interfere with diagnostic detection?as of april 15th, we have sequenced and assembled a total of 79 nearly complete sars-cov-2 genomes obtained from patients across arizona. these genomes were sequenced from nasopharyngeal swabs that were collected over a 28 day period from march 5th to april 2nd, 2020. this represents a sequencing effort of 4.9% of all reported cases in arizona as of april 2nd. this dataset includes at least one genome from 11 of the 15 arizona counties (supplementary table 3) . aside from az1, 3 sars-cov-2 genomes from arizona were sequenced by the cdc, which we do not include in any analyses. initial arizona case did not lead to sustained local transmission the first case of covid-19 in arizona (az1) was documented in late january 2020, and contact tracing suggested this initial case did not result in additional symptomatic infections within the state 5 . we sought to independently verify this conclusion using bayesian and maximum likelihood phylogenetic analyses to compare our 79 genomes to a representative subset of the sars-cov-2 genomes generated from around the world. the genomes used in this analysis were selected using a novel bioinformatics pipeline (see methods), which subsampled genomes uploaded to gisaid to reduce the size of the dataset while representing temporal, spatial, and genetic diversity of the full dataset. this resulted in a set of 384 sars-cov-2 genome sequences, including our 79 arizona genomes and 305 additional representatives (supplementary table 1) . a reduced version of this dataset, including 372 genomes with complete dating information, was used in the bayesian analysis.our phylogenetic analyses ( figure 1 and supplementary figure 1 ) indicated that the genome from az1 belonged to lineage a. although 9/79 (11.4%) of our genomes also clustered in lineage a, these genomes belonged to distinct sublineages (a.1, a.2 and a.3), and the az1 genome contained one derived substitution (c-to-t at nucleotide position 29,031) that we did not observe in any other arizona sequences. this substitution was, however, shared with 12 other genomes included in our analysis, all of which were sampled in china or japan. this is consistent with infection of az1 occurring during documented travel to china 5 .although our analyses cannot completely rule out the possibility of a cryptic transmission chain originating from this initial case, it is clear that the first documented introduction of sars-cov-2 to arizona did not play a substantial role in fueling the ongoing epidemic. rather, the majority of arizona cases are linked to later introduction events (see below). these results further demonstrate the power of public health contact tracing and self-isolation following a positive test for stemming the tide of infections moving forward.our phylogenetic analyses indicated that multiple distinct sars-cov-2 lineages co-circulated in az during march 2020. we detected 9 distinct lineages/sublineages in arizona between early march and early april (table 1 ). these lineages were not unique to az; they have all been documented in other parts of the usa, as well as in multiple countries around the world ( figure 3, supplementary figure 2 ). in fact, the geographic ubiquity of the major sars-cov-2 lineages, along with the common observation of identical virus genomes sampled in multiple us states, countries and continents, clearly demonstrates how frequently this virus has been moved between locales. given the timing and size of the az outbreak, relative to outbreaks in other locations (figure 3 ), we argue it is unlikely that any of these named lineages arose within arizona. therefore, the number of observed lineages (10 including az1) represents a conservative estimate for the number of independent introductions of sars-cov-2 into arizona.to estimate when community transmission of sars-cov-2 first began in arizona, we used our bayesian phylogenetic analysis to estimate dates for the most recent common ancestors (tmrca) of the arizona genomes within each of these lineages. in total, we sequenced ≥2 viral genomes from 5/10 of the observed lineages (which we name "major lineages"), and tmrca estimates using these genomes ( figure 2) suggest that, at the earliest, community transmission in arizona began around early february 2020. however, we view this as the most extreme estimate because many of these lineages likely represent multiple distinct introductions to arizona, rather than a single introduction followed by sustained community transmission. for example, b.1, the inferred oldest lineage containing arizona genomes, includes multiple well-supported clades (posterior probability ≥ 0.99, bootstrap ≥65), all of which have also been observed in several other us states and countries (supplementary figure 1) . therefore, there have almost certainly been multiple introductions of viruses from this lineage that have contributed to local transmission in arizona, and the early february tmrca likely predates actual community transmission within arizona..to determine the most likely source of the sars-cov-2 introductions to arizona, we examined the geographic distribution of sequences within each lineage ( figure 3 ). for this analysis, we considered the full collection of sars-cov-2 genomes available on gisaid (as of 4/16/2020). first, for each of the 5 major lineages, arizona sequences were always sampled after a sequence from that same lineage or sublineage had been sampled elsewhere. although sequencing efforts can influence this result, it appears unlikely that any of the major lineages emerged in arizona; rather, they were likely imported. second, there are very few sequences from asia clustered within each of the 5 major lineages. instead, it appears importation was largely driven by domestic travel (in the case of a.1, b.1.2, b.1.29), or perhaps imported from europe (b.1) or oceania (a.3), although both of these latter lineages have also been commonly observed elsewhere in the us. given the widespread distribution of these nearly identical genomes, it would be impossible to directly estimate the location of each of these importations beyond the continent level.the arizona sequences are largely represented by two lineages, a.1 and b.1. we focus the remaining results and discussion on these two lineages. a.1 was identified in washington state in late february and has since spread across the globe ( figure 3 ). it was previously proposed that the a.1 washington outbreak, announced on february 28th as the 2nd instance of community transmission in the united states 14,15 , is derived from the first washington case, a lineage a sequence, back in january 2020 13 . for the purposes of our discussion, we only focus on the a.1 sublineage, which, regardless of the ultimate source of a.1, had begun circulating in washington in the middle of february at the latest.we sequenced six genomes that are members of the a.1 clade from arizona; these were detected in 5 counties across arizona (table 1) . we infer that the mrca of these arizona sequences likely existed around feb 16th 2020 (95%hpd feb 9th -feb 23rd). if these six arizona genomes stem from a single introduction of the a.1 lineage, this tmrca estimate suggests the lineage was already present in arizona prior to when community transmission was announced in washington, on feb. 28th ( figure 2 ). however, it is possible, and even likely, that the six a.1 lineage genomes from arizona arose from multiple introductions into the state, given that the same lineage was being spread throughout the country 16 . although multiple introductions would push the tmrca estimate of the a.1 introduction to be more recent, we argue that it is possible a.1 was first imported near the dates inferred.the first a.1 arizona genome we sequenced was collected on march 5th from a person who was a household contact of another case, representing the first known community transmission event in arizona; the other individual tested positive on march 3rd and held a healthcare job in phoenix (their sars-cov-2 genome has not been sequenced) 17 . this implies the first community transmission subject was infected, sought testing and infected a close contact who we sampled. given the median incubation time of 5 days, 18 and assuming the healthcare worker was infected by someone traveling directly from washington with no additional transmission in between, that would place the time of importation to be ~feb. 28th. this falls outside our 95% hpd tmrca estimate of feb 23rd; however, this timeline makes it clear that even if multiple a.1 introductions caused the tmrca to be artificially early, it is not by more than a week or two.of the 79 genomes we have sequenced in arizona, 65 (82%) belong to the b.1 lineage (including sublineages b.1.2 and b.1.29), making b.1 the most abundant lineage in arizona (as it is globally) 19 . arizona sequences from this lineage were collected from march 11th to april 2nd, 2020 and were detected in samples from eight counties (table 1) . if these genomes all stemmed from a single introduction to arizona, we estimate an introduction around feb 7th, 2020 (95%hpd jan 24th -feb 15th). however, given the widespread distribution and frequency of this particular clade, both globally and nationally, as well as the lack of detected cases in arizona in february, it is very likely that multiple introductions of b.1 viruses have contributed to the . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . outbreak in arizona, in which case, the actual onset of community transmission for this lineage may be later than the tmrca estimate suggests.one of the substitutions that is present in all b.1 lineage viruses occured in the gene for the spike protein, and resulted in an aspartic acid to glycine substitution at residue 614 (d614g). based on viral rna quantifications and phylogenetic analyses 20 , it was recently suggested that this substitution may have increased the transmissibility of the virus. although the outbreak in arizona was already dominated by b.1 lineage viruses in early march 2020, we did see a gradual increase in the relative proportion of b.1 throughout march and into early april ( figure 4a ). we also compared qrt-pcr cycle threshold (ct) values for clinical samples with and without this substitution. our results show a similar trend to that reported from patients in sheffield, england 20 , with a lower mean ct (higher viral load) in samples containing the d614g substitution; however, this is not a statistically significant difference (p=0.85) with our current sample size ( figure 4b ). combined, these data, along with those published by other groups 20 ( https://github.com/blab/ncov-d614g ), are consistent with a replication and/or transmission advantage of viruses containing the d614g substitution. however, experimental studies are needed to validate this hypothesis. an alternative explanation is that the b.1 lineage has simply been increasing in frequency globally, due to chance events that led this lineage to dominate in early outbreaks (e.g., in italy), from which the virus has been spread widely throughout the world and has seeded outbreaks in many other locations.the b.1 lineage has also dominated the large outbreak in new york, and in some reports 21 , the b.1 lineage has been used as an indication of an epidemiological link to the new york outbreak. however, we would urge caution with this approach. based on ancestral state reconstructions, this lineage is predicted to have first emerged in asia and/or europe (nextstrain), and this lineage was observed in multiple european countries, including the large italian outbreak, before it was first documented in new york (nextstrain). in fact, just within arizona, we have documented at least two instances in which b.1 lineage viruses were imported directly to the us from europe. the second case of covid-19 in arizona was reported on march 3rd, from a traveler who returned from france on feb. 27th 22 . this individual self-reported being symptomatic on the plane back to phoenix, and went to multiple social gatherings before being officially diagnosed 23 . at one of these social events, at least one other individual was infected 24 . although we did not sequence the sars-cov-2 genome from this individual, cdc deposited this sequence into gisaid ( epi_isl_420784 ) , and we confirmed it belonged to the b.1 lineage (data not shown). we also have records shared to us by the coconino health and human service department that one of the b.1 genomes we sequenced from coconino county came from an individual who had recently traveled to rome, italy, and who presumably got infected there. thus, although it is tempting to speculate that most of the b.1 infections across the us came from the ny outbreak, we show at least two confirmed instances of direct importation of b.1 into arizona from europe.like all rna viruses, sars-cov-2 accumulates mutations over time, some of which may impact virulence, replication and intervention strategies, and some of which have no functional, clinical or antigenic importance. we identified non-synonymous mutations in coding sequences of sars-cov-2 genomes from arizona ( figure 5, supplementary table 2 ). these include mutations in the spike protein, nonstructural proteins (nsp) involved in rna synthesis, nucleocapsid protein, and the putative orf10. several of these mutations have also been reported as being associated with sars-cov-2 sequences from europe 25 . below, we hypothesize about potential phenotypic impacts of these substitutions; however, it is important to note that experimental studies need to be conducted to test these hypotheses, and the vast majority of substitutions that occur during viral replication will not have a significant impact on virulence or transmissibility.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. to identify if any mutations could affect the specificity of currently used qrt-pcr assays, an in silico approach was employed. a screen of 12 current primer/probe sets (supplementary table 4 ) demonstrates that 7 assays yield no false negatives based on exact primer/probe matches. several of the primers/probes align with stretches of "n" characters in individual genomes and the amplification potential is therefore ambiguous. interestingly, the cdc ncov_n2 assay demonstrates mismatches in 6 of the genomes screened in this study, including one genome from arizona (tg271862, cochise county).the sars-cov-2 spike (s) protein mediates receptor binding and cell entry, and is the primary target of neutralizing antibodies 26 . mutations in the spike protein may have implications for viral entry and recognition by the immune system. we found several mutations in the spike protein gene, including two epidemiologically linked isolates (tgen-cov-az-wmts-tg268282 and tgen-cov-az-wmts-tg271435) harboring an alanine to valine substitution at spike amino acid residue 475 (a475v, nt position 22986) in the receptor binding domain (rbd). structural studies indicate that a475 interacts with s19 of ace2 27,28 .during replication of the sars-cov-2 rna genome, rna synthesis is driven by the key component nsp12 rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) in complex with nsp7 and nsp8 29, 30 . studies of sars-cov replication demonstrate that nsp14 regulates replication fidelity through its 3'-to-5' exonuclease activity 31, 32 . mutations in nsp7, nsp8, nsp12, and nsp14 may therefore have an effect on viral rna synthesis and susceptibility to antiviral treatments such as remdesivir 33 . we identified several non-synonymous mutations in nsp7 residue 25 (s → l) and 26 (s → f), but none in nsp8 ( figure 5b ). one of the nsp12 mutations at residue 323 (p → l) identified in 69 az sequences was previously associated with sars-cov-2 sequences from europe 25 . we did not find nsp12 mutations at sites predicted to be the contact interface with remdesivir 33 . finally, the 2 isolates with nsp14 mutation at residue 233 (f → l) were the same sequences harboring the spike rbd a475v mutation.the nucleocapsid (n) protein encapsidates the genomic rna and is a target for diagnostic and therapeutic applications 34 . the n protein is also associated with replication-transcription complexes and facilitates template switching during viral subgenomic mrna synthesis 35 . n is expressed at high levels during early stages of replication and, like the s protein, is also a major immunogenic target of antibodies 36 . five az sequences had a triple nucleotide substitution (ggg → aac) that resulted in a tandem amino acid change in the n protein at residues 203 and 204 (rg → kr). over the relatively short time-frame of sars-cov-2 evolution, these tandem substitutions are relatively uncommon 25 .orf10 is a short putative protein of unknown function, predicted in the 3' end of the sars-cov-2 genome, which is conserved in the closely-related bat and pangolin coronavirus sequences ( figure 5c ). we identified a 2-nucleotide insertion in orf10 from two az sequences that result in a premature stop codon and early truncation of orf10. a similar truncation is present in the sars-cov genome due to the presence of an upstream stop codon. this may indicate a region of the virus genome with relaxed evolutionary constraints, consistent with a report that did not detect subgenomic orf10 mrna 37 .. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.08.20095935 doi: medrxiv preprintbased on our phylogenetic analysis, it is clear that the ongoing covid-19 outbreak in arizona has been fueled by multiple distinct introductions of sars-cov-2 to the state. we estimate a minimum of 9 over the course of february and march. by estimating the timing of introductions, we find no evidence for cryptic community transmission in arizona prior to late january. rather, our analyses indicate that community transmission likely did not occur within arizona until at least early-to mid-february when viruses from lineages b.1 and a.1 may have been introduced. it appears that most of the introductions of sars-cov-2 to arizona have had domestic origins, in line with reports from other states 16 ; however, there have also been instances of arizona cases linked to international travel, and these have likely also contributed to the local outbreak. a number of non-synonymous mutations were identified in the arizona isolates, including within regions of the receptor-binding domain of the spike protein and non-structural proteins involved in the rna synthesis complex. the functional consequences of these mutations are unknown, highlighting the need for mechanistic studies. our phylodynamic tracing provides unique epidemiological insights into the origins and transmission of sars-cov-2 in arizona.any sequence positions mentioned in this work refer to genbank sequence nc_045512.2, a genome isolated and sequenced from wuhan early in the pandemic.tgen north genome sequencing rna was extracted from specimen transport medium with the quick viral rna kit (zymo research). total rna sequencing libraries were prepared with the smart-seq® stranded kit (takara) or the ovation rna-seq system (nugen). libraries were sequenced on a nextseq (high output kit, illumina). viral genome consensus sequences for each sample were constructed using tgen's amplicon sequencing analysis pipeline (asap, https://github.com/tgennorth/asap) which consists of mapping the reads to a reference genome (hcov-19/usa/az1/2020|epi_isl_406223 38 ) and analyzing the alignment pileup position by position to determine coverage depth, coverage breadth and the consensus sequence. positions covered by fewer than 10 reads were considered a gap in coverage and were converted to ns, consensus sequences were saved and used for further analysis when they had >90% breadth of coverage and >30x average depth of coverage.following sample collection, the nasopharyngeal swab was soaked in trizol (thermofisher) and removed. total rna was then extracted from 400ul of trizol with the direct-zol rna isolation kit (zymo research) following the manufacturer's instructions. rna was eluted in 30ul of nuclease-free water.we used primers and methods from the artic consortium 39 with the following modifications. cdna synthesis was performed with goscript (promega ) using 10ul of rna in a final volume of 20ul following manufacturer's instructions. next, a multiplex pcr amplifying overlapping 400bp amplicons was done with the v2 set of primers designed by the artic group. we used 2.5ul of cdna in each 25ul reaction with the q5 hot start high-fidelity dna polymerase (neb), with 2 separate reactions containing each of the . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . non-overlapping primer pools. we used an initial denaturation step of 98°c for 30 seconds and then 35 cycles at 98°c for 10 seconds, 65°c for 2 minutes.the reactions were pooled together, and visualized on a 2% agarose gel to confirm successful amplification. amplicons were then cleaned with a 1:1 mixture of ampure xp magnetic beads (beckman coulter). the mixture was incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature and then placed on a magnetic rack until all the beads were pulled out of solution. the remaining liquid was pulled off and discarded. next, 200ul of 80% etoh was used twice to wash the bead mixture. the beads were allowed to dry and re-suspended in 30ul of water. following a 5 minute incubation the tube was placed back on a magnetic rack until the beads were pulled out of the solution. the 30ul of cleaned amplicons was transferred to a fresh tube.the remainder of the protocol was identical to the artic protocol which includes end-repair, ligation of oxford nanopore sequencing adapters, and additional cleaning steps using the ampure xp beads. the final prepared library was loaded onto a flongle inserted into a minion sequencer. sequence data were collected for 12 hours. in order to remove the sequencing adapter and primer sequence we trimmed the first 40bp off of the reads. reads were then aligned to a sars-cov-2 reference sequence (mn908947) using geneious prime (biomatters inc.). a consensus sequence was generated from these reads for sections that contained >40x coverage with ns placed at sites with lower coverage.arizona state university genome sequencing sars-cov-2 genomes were sequenced from nasopharyngeal swabs as previously described 40 . briefly, total nucleic acid was extracted using the biomérieux emag platform. rna was subjected to ribo-zero gold depletion, truseq rna library preparation, and sequenced on illumina nextseq (2x76). sequencing reads were quality filtered with bbtools (bbmap -bushnell b. -sourceforge.net/projects/bbmap/) and mapped to a sars-cov-2 reference genome (mn908947).sequences included in the analyses presented here were derived from gisaid (accessed on april 16th, 2020), ncbi genbank, and sequences generated by our teams at northern arizona university and tgen north (n=75), arizona state university (n=3), and university of arizona (n=1) (collectively referred to as the "arizona sequences"). to support efficient bayesian phylogenetic analysis of this large number of sequences, we developed a novel protocol and software for sampling sequences from gisaid across time of sequence acquisition, geographic source of sequence, and sars-cov-2 diversity. the software developed for this workflow is available at https://github.com/caporaso-lab/az-covid-1 , and our application of this workflow is detailed in our supplementary methods. this protocol works as follows:1. download sars-cov-2 sequences from gisaid (9230 at time of download) 2. clean-up and filter gisaid sequences (8659 sequences remained after these filters) a. specific steps were: i. filter sequences that contain spaces (spaces are non-iupac characters 41 ) -this resulted in 408 sequences being discarded. ii.remove any gap ("-") characters (sequences are unaligned, so should not contain gaps) iii.filter sequences that are composed of >10% n characters -this resulted in 163 sequences being discarded. iv.replace all spaces in sequence header lines with underscores . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. .compile initial sequence collection containing arizona sequences, reference sequence from ncbi genbank (nc_045512.2),seven randomly sampled sequences per week from gisaid, wa1 ( mn985325.1), and az1 (mn997409). 4. we then searched all of gisaid against the sequence collection compiled in step 3 using vsearch's usearch_global option, and identified sequences that most closely matched the arizona sequences, to ensure that we were including the closest relatives of arizona sequences to contextualize clades containing arizona sequences 42 . the collection of best hits was sampled to result in a geographically dispersed collection of sequence sources. those sequences were added to the sequence collection from step 3, and ensure that monophylies of arizona sequences are not artifacts of our sequence sampling approach. 5. all gisaid sequences that were not clustered by the previous step were clustered with vsearch's cluster_fast option at 99.9% percent identity. cluster centroid sequences were added to the sequence collection generated in step 4. this ensured that a divergent collection of the sars-cov-2 genomes was represented in our data set. 6. an initial alignment was constructed with mafft followed by the construction of a neighbor joining tree.several sequences that were suspected of being low quality at this stage, including both gisaid and arizona sequences, were removed from the sequence collection.the sequences resulting from this workflow were used as the starting point for all downstream analyses. maximum-likelihood phylogenies were generated using raxml-ng v0.5.1b 43 with the gtr+g4 model, as indicated by a substitution model selection analysis carried out in iqtree, with 20 distinct starting trees and 100 bootstrap replicates. lineage assignment for all arizona sequences was performed with the software pangolin, which is a real time dynamic tool for assigning lineages to sars-cov-2 sequences based on shared mutations and phylogenetic support 44 .we employed a bayesian molecular clock method implemented in the beast v1.10.4 45 software package to estimate the divergence times for the total sars-cov-2 dataset as well as several arizona-specific lineages, and overall evolutionary rates. to compare how different model combinations impact results, we carried out two sets of analyses with the uncorrelated lognormal (ucln) 46 clock model combined with either the exponential or bayesian skygrid demographic 47 models. four chains of each model combination were run for 100,000,000 generations and sampled every 10,000 generations. for both model combinations, we found convergence within and among chains using tracer v1.6. logcombiner was used to merge the four different chains of each model combination, after discarding the first 10% as burn in (10,000,000 generations per chain), and then resampling every 40,000 generations. the two resulting files were input to treeannotator to produce maximum clade credibility trees with median height estimates. baltic ( https://github.com/evogytis/baltic ) was used for visualizing trees and for parsing tmrcas from the trees sampled during the beast analysis.the in silico pcr screen was performed with an in silico pcr script ( https://github.com/tgennorth/vipr ) using published primers and probes (supplementary table 4 ). positives were identified by exact nucleotide matches of both primers and probe. mishits were manually identified through visual inspection of the primer/probe alignments. if a primer/probe aligned against a genome with an "n" character, the hit was considered as ambiguous. the arizona sars-cov-2 isolates were aligned against reference genome az1 (genbank accession mn997409, gisaid accession epi_isl_406223) and non-synonymous variants in the coding sequences were called by geneious prime (2020.0.5).. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.08.20095935 doi: medrxiv preprint tables and figures   figure 1. bayesian maximum clade credibility time-calibrated phylogeny inferred from 372 sars-cov-2 genomes, including 80 from arizona and 292 representatives from around the world. tips are colored by origin of sequence, and major lineages assigned by pangolin with more than 2 sequence representatives in arizona are indicated by vertical bars. all nodes with posterior probabilities >0.9 are colored black. the tree was visualized with a custom python script that utilized the software package baltic ( https://github.com/evogytis/baltic ).. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.08.20095935 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 2 . posterior density estimates of tmrcas for arizona genomes that belong to 5 major lineages/sublineages. posterior density estimates were parsed from 9001 trees sampled from 4 independent mcmc chains, following burn-in removal. hatch marks indicate regions outside of the 95% highest posterior density (hpd).. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.08.20095935 doi: medrxiv preprintboth panels were generated using the 79 arizona genomes we report here. plots of abundance over time were generated using a window size of 1 week and a step size of 2 days.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.08.20095935 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.08.20095935 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.08.20095935 doi: medrxiv preprintabstract bat coronaviruses (cov) are putative precursors of the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) cov and other cov that crossed the species barrier from zoonotic reservoirs into the human population. to determine the presence and distribution of cov in iberian bats, 576 individuals of 26 different bat species were captured in 13 locations in spain. we report for the first time the presence of 14 coronaviruses in 9 iberian bat species. phylogenetic analysis of a conserved cov genome region (rdrp gene) shows a wide diversity and distribution of alpha and betacoronavirus in spain. interestingly, although some of these viruses are related to other european batcov, or to asian cov, some of the viruses found in spain cluster in new groups of a and b cov.the emergence of infectious diseases is a major threat to global public health in this century (who, world health report http://www.who.int/whr/previous/en/index.html) and many of these new infectious human diseases are caused by viruses emerging from wildlife. in the last 50 years, more than 30 new infectious human diseases have been identified (who, world health report http://www.who.int/whr/previous/en/index.html) including the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars). the aetiological agent of this disease was identified as a previously unknown coronavirus (sars-cov) [1] and batcov are putative precursors of sars-cov [2] . the outbreak of sars-cov and subsequent identification of two additional human coronaviruses (hcov-nl63 [3] and hcov-hku1 [4] ) has drawn human and animal health attention to coronavirinae subfamily, that includes three genera, alphacoronavirus (a cov), betacoronavirus (b cov) and gammacoronavirus (c cov), replacing the classical groups 1, 2 and 3 [5] (http://talk.ictvonline.org/ media/g/vertebrate-2008/default.aspx).the relevance and possible re-emergence of the pandemic sars-cov and other emerging viruses of zoonotic origin have activated surveillance systems of hazard agents in wild animals, including bats. as a result of these studies, bats have been described as putative reservoirs for some emerging viruses affecting humans [6] . batcov are putative precursors of cov affecting humans and mammals [7, 8] , including sars-cov [2] and other cov that crossed the species barrier from zoonotic reservoirs into the human population [9] . in fact, association of some of these cov to certain bat species has been suggested [10, 11] , reinforcing the notion that there may be a relationship between some batcov and their hosts. nowadays the presence of cov has been shown in bats in china [12, 13] , north and south america [14] [15] [16] [17] , africa [18] and a number of regions in europe [11, [19] [20] [21] but not the iberian peninsula (spain and portugal), which is a bridge for european and african bat populations [22] . thus, surveillance of wildlife reservoirs of putative zoonotic cov is necessary, not only to unveil the ecology of these viruses, but also to permit early detection of viruses that might pose a threat to human health.to determine the presence and distribution of putative zoonotic cov in iberian bats, 576 individuals from 26 bat species were captured and sampled in 13 different locations throughout spain during 2004-2007 (fig. 1) . these samples were collected in the context of bat rhabdoviruses and lyssaviruses surveillance program in spain. most of the sampled bat species are also distributed across europe, but eptesicus isabellinus is a meridional serotine bat restricted to north africa and the iberian peninsula [23] , and myotis escalerai is endemic in the iberian peninsula. bats were caught with mist nets mainly as they left diurnal roost and by hand with polyethylene butterfly nets within roosts. oro-pharyngeal swabs (n=390) between 2004 and 2007 as well as faecal samples from individual bats (n=216) in 2007 were taken before bats were released (table 1) .oro-pharyngeal swabs collected between 2004 and 2006 were preserved in 1 ml of lysis buffer (4 m guscn (sigma), os% n-lauroyl sarcosine (sigma), 1 mm dithiothreitol (dtt, sigma), 25 mm sodium citrate and 20 pg/tube glycogen (boehringer mannheim). oro-pharyngeal swabs and faeces collected in 2007 were preserved in both 1 ml of lysis buffer and 1 ml of viral transport medium (vtm) (eagle's minimal essential medium (emem) supplemented with 10 ui/ml of penicillin, 10 lg/ml of streptomycin, 160 lg/ml of gentamicin, 50 ui/ml of mycostatin and 1% of bovine serum albumin). all samples were frozen at -80°c before sending them to the rabies reference laboratory at the centro nacional de microbiología, isciii in madrid. faecal samples were clarified by centrifugation. total nucleic acid was extracted from a 200 ll aliquot of each specimen for pcr assays and the rest were stored to -80°c in two different aliquots. final pellets were always resuspended to 55 ll of water.a pan-coronavirus nested pcr was designed in the rdrp gene. a total of 5 ll of extracted rna was added to 45 ll of reaction mixture of onestep rt-pcr kit (qiagen, valencia, ca, usa) containing 200 lm dntps and 60 pmol of generic cov-specific degenerated primers (forward 5 0 -caratgaatytiaartaygc-3 0 and reverse 5 0 -tgytgwgarcaaaaytcrtg-3 0 ) and following manufacturer indications. amplifications were carried out into thin-walled reaction tubes (sorenson, bioscience, ut) in a ptc-200 (peltier thermal cycler, mj research, watertown, ma). nested pcr amplifications were performed using 2 ll of first amplification product and 48 ll of reaction mixture containing 60 mm tris-hcl (ph 8.5), 15 mm (nh4) 2 so 4 , 200 lm dntps (amersham pharmacia biotech, piscataway, nj), 3 mm mgcl 2 , 35 pmol of generic cov-specific degenerated primers (forward 5 0 -atgggwtgggaytaycciaartg-3 0 and reverse 5 0 -acrttrttytgrwarta-3 0 ) and 1.25 u amplitaq dna polymerase (perkin-elmer cetus, norwalk). amplification product size of 512 nt was visualized by agarose gel electrophoresis and sequenced directly in both directions using an automated abi prism 377 model sequencer. for phylogeny reconstruction, consensus sequences were aligned together with others obtained from public genomic databases using the program clustal x (version 1.83) ( table 2) . a bayesian phylogenetic inference was obtained using mr bayes version 3.1 [24] with random starting trees without constraints. for the analyses gtr substitution model, gamma estimation and two simultaneous runs of 10 7 generations were done, each with four markov chains, and the trees were sampled every 100 generations. amino acid identity was calculated with mega 4 using the pairwise deletion option. the alignment comprised the same 396 bp of the rdrp gene used for the phylogenetic reconstruction.a total of 26 out of the 30 known bat species known for iberian peninsula were screened for cov and 14 samples taken from 9 bat species, all included in the family vespertilionidae, were positive for cov rna (tables 1  and 2 ). twelve of them were found within faecal samples (5.5%) of 7 different bat species in 6 locations and two were obtained in oral samples (0.5%) of 2 other different species in the same location (table 1 ). in view of these results, it is not surprising that the presence of cov rna is significantly more frequent in faeces than in oral cavity [25] . most of the cov rna sequences found in faecal samples (83%) correspond to a cov, the remaining two belonging to b cov. all cov rnas from oral samples (100%) were found to contain viral rna sequences corresponding to a cov. in agreement with all previous studies [7] , none of the coronavirus detected in spanish bats belong to group c.the phylogenetic analysis of spanish batcov was performed using 396nt out of the 512 nt rt-pcr amplified fragments. 116nt fragment information was lost to allowed us include more sequences from other european countries and other continents deposited in genbank to perform a meaningful analysis. this small part of the rdrp gene has been previously used, and sufficiently represents the full gene information, for phylogenetic analysis of batcov [11, 14, 20] the phylogenetic reconstruction showed 6 different lineages of spanish batcov (fig. 2) . batcov a and b were closely related to other a batcov found in china [12] , although they appeared to display certain genetic differentiation (fig. 2) . myotis daubentonii-associated cov h, and pipistrellus-associated cov k, clustered respectively with lineages 4 and 3 of a cov previously described in germany and are hosted by the same bat species or genera [11] (fig. 2) . batcov l was closely table 2 . positive samples described in this work are shown in shaded rectangles and ovals. the new alpha and betacoronavirus groups described in this work are shown in shaded ovals. amino acid identity was calculated with mega 4 using the pairwise deletion option. the alignment comprised the same 396 bp of the rdrp gene used for the phylogenetic reconstruction. amino acid identities across 132 amino acids are indicated next to the brackets that links every spanish batcov to the phylogenetic neighbours related to cluster hku7 described in china [10] . batcov c, d, e, f, g and i belonged to the same lineage and showed an intriguing new independent cluster (significant posterior probability = 0.95) including batcov i 0 (fig. 2 ). in addition, batcov j and m were genetically related to b cov, although they did not really associate with any of their previously described linages. sequences corresponding to two different groups of cov were found in the same bat species (hypsugo savii) as it was also found for other bat species elsewhere [12] . spanish batcov described here were also classified calculating amino acid distances of these viruses from phylogenetic neighbours and related reference species [21] . amino acid distance criteria recently described for separating rdrp grouping units (rgu) were adopted [21] . interestingly, the amino acid distance criteria ([4.8% for alphacoronavirus and [6.3% for betacoronavirus) reinforced the presence of the new group of alphacoronaviruses mentioned above including spanish batcov c, d, e, f, g and i; and additionally showed four new tentative groups (fig. 2) . batcov a and b were included in a new alphacoronavirus group and batcov i 0 constituted another independent alphacoronavirus group. batcov j, and m represented two new betacoronavirus groups and batcov h, k and l remained as part of several established species (fig. 2) . it has been previously suggested that some cov associate to certain bat species [10, 11] . however, we found that different bat species from the same colony or location harbour cov of the same genetic lineage (batcov a and b; g and i), indicating a greater diversity and higher complexity than previously described for the ecology of batcov. similar exceptions were found in china and south america [12, 16, 26] and could also be observed with australian batcov (fig. 2 and table 2 ).in conclusion, previous studies showed the presence of batcov in europe. however, to our knowledge, this is the first report describing the presence of cov rna in iberian bat species. phylogenetic data indicate high diversity, wide distribution and complex ecology of cov in bats captured in diverse spanish locations. the sequences reported herein provide new insights into the diversity of coronaviruses and describe new phylogenetic linages that appear to diverge from all genotypes previously detected in other european locations. future studies should clarify whether such apparently high diversity reflects the bio-geographical peculiarities of the iberian peninsula or not. this study contributes with a new dataset to the global surveillance of emerging batcov with pathogenic potential in humans. our data reinforce the notion that the ecology and transmission of cov in bat reservoirs is far from being completely understood and that more studies will be necessary to evaluate the magnitude of the potential threat that these viruses pose to human health.covs are positive-sense, single-strand rna viruses with a likely ancient origin, and hcovs repeatedly emerged during the past 1000 years (box 3). all covs have nonsegmented genomes that share a similar organization. about two thirds of the genome consists of two large overlapping open reading frames (orf1a and orf1b; see glossary), that are translated into the pp1a and pp1ab polyproteins. these are processed to generate 16 nonstructural proteins (nsp1 to 16) . the remaining portion of the genome includes orfs for the structural proteins: spike (s), trends human coronaviruses (hcovs) are zoonotic pathogens with large and complex genomes. some hcov accessory proteins were acquired from host genes, and some were lost or split during hcov evolution. most likely sars-cov orf8 became dispensable during the shift to the human/civet host.hcov spike proteins adapted to use diverse cellular receptors. this occurred by divergence followed, in some cases, by convergent evolution to bind the same receptor.recombination and positive selection shaped the diversity of cov genomes, especially the s gene. positive selection in the s gene of mers-cov and related covs mainly acted on the heptad repeats.in mers-cov and other lineage c beta-covs, positive selection targeted the nonstructural components, particularly orf1a. most adaptive events occurred in nsp3, which acts as a viral protease and contributes to suppression of interferon responses. envelope (e), membrane (m) and nucleoprotein (n). a variable number of accessory proteins are also encoded by distinct viruses ( figure 1b ).among rna viruses, covs have exceptionally long genomes (up to 32 kb). genome expansion in covs is believed to be at least partially mediated by increased replication fidelity. although estimates of the mutation rate for covs differ, possibly depending on the phase of cov adaptation to novel hosts, several studies have shown that these viruses may possess an unusually high replication fidelity [6] [7] [8] . indeed, a major step that allowed genome expansion in covs and, more generally, in nidovirales, was the acquisition of a set of rna-processing enzymes that improved the low fidelity of rna replication [9] . these enzymes include an rna 3 0to-5 0 exoribonuclease (exon) and possibly an endoribonuclease (nendou) [9] . additional evidence, though, suggests that features distinct from replication fidelity underlie genome expansion in nidovirales. these include a peculiar genome organization [9] and a processive replication complex [10] .importantly, cov genome expansion allowed the acquisition and maintenance of genes encoding diverse accessory proteins that may promote virus adaptation to specific hosts and often contribute to the suppression of immune responses, as well as to virulence. accessory proteins differ in number and sequence even among covs belonging to the same lineage ( figure 1b) , raising interesting questions about their origin and evolution.the acquisition (or loss) of novel protein-coding genes has the potential to drastically modify viral phenotypes. thus, tracing these gain/loss events may identify important turning points in viral evolution.among sars-cov accessory proteins, the origin of orf8 has remained mysterious for a while, as sars-cov-related (sarsr) bat viruses were isolated but found to encode divergent orf8 proteins (amino acid identity with sars-cov orf8 around 33%) [11] [12] [13] . very recently, sarsr-batcovs from rhinolophus sinicus (rs) and rhinolophus ferrumequinum (rf) were isolated glossary dn: the observed number of nonsynonymous substitutions per nonsynonymous site. ds: the observed number of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site. hemagglutinin-esterases (hes): a family of viral proteins that mediate binding to o-acetylated sialic acids. homology: the relationship between elements (e.g., genes, proteins) deriving from a common ancestor. lectins: a group of proteins with carbohydrate recognition activity. lectins are categorized in many distinct families depending on structural and functional properties. maximum likelihood (ml): is a statistical method for estimating population parameters from a data sample. given one or more unknown parameters and a sample data, the ml estimates of the parameters are the values maximizing the probability of obtaining the observed data. open reading frame (orf): the part of a reading frame that contains no stop codons. an orf is a continuous stretch of nucleotide triplets that have the potential to code for a protein or a peptide. phosphodiesterases (pdes): are enzymes that break a phosphodiester bond. pdes belonging to the 2h family are characterized by two h-f-[s/t]-f motifs (where f is a hydrophobic residue) separated by an average of 80 residues. positive selection: the accumulation of favorable amino acid-replacing substitutions, which results in more nonsynonymous changes than expected under neutrality (dn/ds>1). purifying selection: the elimination of deleterious amino acid-replacing substitutions, which results in fewer nonsynonymous changes than expected under neutrality (dn/ds < 1) (it is also referred to as negative selection). viroporins: hydrophobic viral proteins that can promote the formation of channels following insertion into the host cell membrane and oligomerization. box 1. molecular evolution in viruses: general concepts rna viruses are rapidly evolving pathogens that can accumulate considerable genetic diversity in relatively short time periods. this is mostly due to their high nucleotide mutation rates (but see text for covs). the diversity of extant viral sequences can be analyzed to construct phylogenetic relationships among species/strains and to infer the underlying evolutionary patterns. in the presence of recombination a single phylogenetic tree is unable to describe the evolution of homologous sequences. because recombination is common in many viruses, including hcovs, the evolution of viral genomes is best modeled by several phylogenies, one for each nonrecombinant fragment (box 2). by reassorting mutations, recombination has the potential to generate novel viral phenotypes. thus, not only recombination is of interest per se, but failure to account for its presence can distort phylogeny-based analyses, including estimates of natural selection [66] . natural selection acts pervasively on viral sequences. when coding regions are concerned, natural selection is commonly estimated in terms of ω (also referred to as dn/ds)that is, the observed number of nonsynonymous differences per nonsynonymous site (dn) over the observed number of synonymous differences per synonymous site (ds). under neutral evolution, ω is expected to be equal to 1, as the rate at which amino acid substitutions accumulate is similar to the rate for synonymous changes. due to the fact that essential protein domains can often tolerate only minor sequence changes, most amino acid replacements are eliminated by selection; this generates ω values <1, a situation referred to as negative (or purifying) selection. nevertheless, amino acid replacements can be advantageous for a virus in terms, for example, of host adaptation or immune evasion: in this case ω values can be higher than 1 (positive selection). thus, evaluation of how ω varies from site to site or from branch to branch in a phylogeny is commonly used to describe selective events. some possible caveats should nevertheless be kept in mind. (i) the saturation of substitution rates (especially ds) may occur and affect evolutionary inference when fast-evolving sequences are analyzed (see box 3 for an example, and box 2 for methods to overcome this problem). (ii) in viral genomes synonymous substitutions are not always neutral; this may be due to the presence of overlapping reading frames, conserved rna secondary structures, packaging signals, and other functional elements (box 3). (iii) a relaxation in the intensity of both negative and positive selection may occasionally occur (box 2 and figure 2a ). covs that infect nonhuman mammals are included only if they are mentioned in the text for comparative purposes. (a) the phylogenetic tree of complete genome sequences of hcovs and selected mammalian covs was obtained with raxml 8.2.4 [68] . numbers indicate bootstrap support. covs are colored according to [14, 15] . analysis of the orf8 region revealed high sequence identity with civet/human sars-cov. two groups came to the conclusion that recombination within sarsr-rs-covs or between sarsr-rs-covs and sarsr-rf-covs led to the acquisition of an orf8 closely related to that of civet/human sars-cov and ultimately originated the virus responsible for the human epidemic [14, 15] . interestingly, lau and coworkers also reported that the orf8 region has a dn/ ds = 3.5 in sars-covs isolated from humans (but not in sarsr-batcovs), indicating the action of positive selection (box 1) [14] . this finding is interesting per se and becomes even more important considering that, early in the human epidemic, sars-covs acquired a signature 29nucleotide deletion which split orf8 into two functional orfs (orf8a and b) [16] . these findings suggest that rapid evolution of orf8 might facilitate host shifts [14] . this possibility is, however, questioned by the presence of additional sars-cov human isolates that carry independent and larger deletions in the orf8 region [16] . thus, an alternative explanation box 2 phylogenetic tree construction distance-based and character-based approaches can be used in phylogenetic tree reconstruction. distance-based methods measure pairwise differences among sequences and generate the tree from the resultant distance matrix (e.g., upgma, neighbour joining). character-based methods evaluate all possible trees and estimate the one that best fits the data. this approach includes maximum likelihood (ml) and bayesian methods (e.g., phyml [67] , raxml [68] , mrbayes [69] ).the location of recombination breakpoints can be detected using phylogenetic incongruence among segments in a sequence alignment (e.g., gard [70] ) or by evaluating the distribution of nucleotide substitution along genomic regions (e.g., recco [71] ). a common approach is to use different methodologies to identify breakpoint locations and contributing sequences (e.g., rdp [72] ).positive selection is usually estimated based on ω variation across sites and/or lineages (box 1). a common approach is to compare ml models that allow or not a class of codons in the alignment to evolve with ω > 1 (e.g., the 'site models' in paml [73] ) likelihood ratio tests are then applied to determine whether the neutral model can be rejected in favor of the positive selection model. alternatively, branch-site models can be applied to detect episodic positive selection on specific branches of the phylogeny. different methods allow to test a priori whether a branch is under selection [74, 75] or to model different evolutionary scenarios for each branch [76] . when evolutionary analysis is focused on recent timescales, selection may not have yet fixed the advantageous mutations or removed the deleterious ones. one possibility is to compare the distribution of nonsynonymous and synonymous polymorphisms in a specific lineage with the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous fixed differences between lineages/species. the mcdonald-kreitman test [77] has been widely applied for this purpose.when selection is relaxed, smaller ω values tend toward 1, whereas ω values higher than 1 decrease. this phenomenon can be confused with episodic selection. specific methods allow one to infer whether a branch in the phylogeny is under positive or relaxed selection [18] .subsitution rate saturation saturation of substitution rates can be a serious issue for deep tree branches. nonetheless, branch-site methods are relatively insensitive to biases introduced by ds saturation, and can be applied to the analysis of distantly related species [78] . alternatively, specific indexes have been developed to detect substitution saturation [79] ; in the presence of ds saturation, third-codon positions can be removed to obtain reliable phylogenies.regions with an excess of synonymous constraint can be identified using a recently developed sliding-window ml-based method [80] .genus and lineage. information about origin, intermediate host, and clinical presentation is reported for the six hcovs [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] 89 ]. data about case fatality rate were derived from the world health organization website (http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/mers-cov/; http://www.who.int/csr/sars/country/table2004_04_21/en/). (b) cov genome organization is schematically reported together with information on receptor/coreceptor usage. virus names are colored according to their genus or lineage, as in (a). only orfs mentioned in the text are colored or shaded. empty boxes represent accessory orfs that are not described in the text.for these findings is that the activity of orf8 became dispensable in the human host. if this were the case, relaxed purifying selection rather than positive selection might be responsible for the high dn/ds. to disentangle these alternative possibilities we analyzed orf8 in human and civet viruses that carry an intact gene, as well as in bat viruses. although we confirmed that dn/ds is well above 1 for human/civet sars-cov orf8, we detected no evidence of positive selection using the m7/m8 'site models' from paml (box 2) or with parris (partitioning approach for robust inference of selection) [17] (figure 2a) . instead, we obtained evidence that relaxation of natural selection [18] in orf8 accompanied the shift from bats to civets/humans (figure 2a) . these results suggest no major adaptive role for orf8 during the human sars-cov epidemic and support the view that orf8 is dispensable for virulence and transmission at least in the human/civet host.a similar gene loss from the genome of a bat-derived ancestor occurred during the evolution of hcov-229e. covs closely related to hcov-229e were recently isolated from african hipposiderid bats [19] , and a cov belonging to the same species as hcov-229e had been described in captive alpacas suffering from an acute respiratory syndrome [20, 21] (figure 1a ). analysis of these viral genomes indicated that, compared to hcov-229e, they carry an additional orf at the genomic 3' end [20] ( figure 1b ). this orf, which is designated orf8 but shares no box 3 coronaviruses are classified into four distinct genera (alpha, beta, gamma, and delta) [81] ; alpha-covs and beta-covs circulate in mammalian hosts, whereas gamma-covs and delta-covs mainly infect birds [82] . an analysis of the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) gene in 43 covs provided a first estimate of around 10 000 years ago for the time of the most recent common ancestor (tmrca) of the four genera [83] . this result was questioned on the basis of observations suggesting a longstanding interaction between covs and their hosts [82] . thus, wertheim and coworkers hypothesized that natural selection, in particular negative selection, resulted in a bias of the tmrca estimate [82] . indeed, strong negative selection can result in the saturation of substitutions at synonymous sites and consequently in underestimation of branch lengths in a phylogeny. to overcome this issue, the authors applied a branch-site test (see box 1) [76] to estimate branch lengths while taking into account the effect of different selective pressures among lineages in the cov phylogeny [82] . their findings placed the separation of the four cov genera around 300 million years ago, highlighting the importance of evolutionary models in molecular clock dating. interestingly, this tmrca is consistent with the separation time between mammals and aves [84] , suggesting a coevolutionary relationship between coronavirus and their hosts. however, the dating estimates obtained for closely related viruses by wertheim and coworkers were in agreement with previous studies, suggesting that the action of natural selection is not biasing the estimation of more recent divergence times. although most hcovs were identified only recently, molecular clock analyses indicate that some of these viruses diverged from closely related covs hundreds of years ago. in particular, the emergence of hcov-nl63 and hcov-229e has been roughly estimated around 500-800 and 200 years ago, respectively [85, 86] . hcov-oc43 is thought to have shared a common ancestor with bcov around 120 years ago [87] . as for sars-cov and mers-cov, molecular dating studies estimated that they diverged from bat covs in the last three decades [14, 88] . finally, the mrca of hcov-hku1 extant lineages was estimated to have existed in the 1950s [60] . clearly, these dates should be regarded as estimates and confidence intervals are often wide. a timeline for the emergence of hcovs is depicted in figure i .hcov-229eesɵmates of the divergence ɵme between human/civet sars -cov and the closest sarsr -batcov strains range from 4 to 17 years before the sars epidemic (2002)the mrca for hcov-nl63 and arcov.2 (appalachian ridge cov) was predicted to have existed ∼56 0 to 820 years agohcov-oc43 emerged roughly 120 years ago from bcov homology with the homonymous sars-cov gene, has unknown function and shows limited similarities to any other cov gene [20] . we analyzed the sequences of recently identified alpha-covs from camels [22] and found that orf8 is encoded by these viruses, as well ( figure 1b) . thus, it is presently unknown whether the loss of orf8 conferred some advantage during the host shift to humans or, as in the case of orf8 in sars-cov, it became dispensable in the human host.another interesting feature of some covs is that they encode phosphodiesterases (pdes) ( figure 1b) . these viral enzymes cleave 2',5'-oligoadenylate, the product of oas proteins, to prevent activation of the cellular endoribonuclease rnase l and consequently block interferon (ifn)-induced antiviral responses [23] . the pde activity in the mouse hepatitis virus (mhv) ns2a protein is critical for hepatovirulence [23] . hcov-oc43, as well as other lineage a nonhuman beta-covs, encode ns2a proteins that are characterized by a high degree of sequence similarity to the mhv pde ( figure 1b) figure 2b ). akap7 and the viral pdes display structural homology ( figure 2b ), and murine akap7 can complement an inactive mhv ns2a gene [25] . from an evolutionary standpoint, these observations suggest that: (i) beta-covs and rotaviruses have independently acquired pde activities; and (ii) akap7 served as the source gene in both viral genera ( figure 2b ). more recently, a pde activity was also discovered in the ns4b protein of mers-cov ( figure 1b) and other lineage c beta-covs [26]. similar to those in lineage a beta-covs and rotavirus, ns4b belongs to the 2h-phosphoesterase family and displays a predicted structure homologous to akap7 [26] ( figure 2b ). it remains to be determined whether ns4b was acquired by capturing a vertebrate akap7, but the observation that distinct viruses acquired, most likely independently, a pde activity underscores the importance of these enzymes for viral fitness.it was recently proposed that covs (and other viruses) stole additional genes from their hosts [27] . hemagglutinin-esterases (hes) are encoded by lineage a beta-covs (e.g., hcov-hku1 and hcov-oc43) ( figure 1b) , as well as influenza c virus and toroviruses. structural analysis suggested that these viral enzymes derive from an ancestral host lectin, although it is unclear whether acquisition occurred in an ancestral virus followed by speciation or multiple times [27] . incidentally, the n-terminal domain of the cov spike protein is also believed to derive from a cellular lectin [28] . unlike the influenza virus c enzyme, cov hes lack membrane-fusion activity and are accessory to the spike protein by serving primarily as receptor-destroying enzymes (rde)that is, they aid viral detachment from carbohydrates present on infected cells [29, 30] . in fact, hes are present only in the genome of lineage a beta-covs, most of which use sialic acids as coreceptors [1] ( figure 1b) . these observations suggest that sialic acid-binding spike proteins coevolved with he genes serving as rdes. this hypothesis is supported by the observation that the mhv spike protein evolved from an ancestral sugar-binding preference to a protein-binding mode and that several mhv strains lost expression of he [27, 28] ( figure 1b) .finally, it is important to notice that artificial selection can lead to unintended changes in viral genomes. such changes most likely result from passages in culture that, on one hand, relieve the virus from pressures exerted in vivo (e.g., by the host immune system) and, on the other hand, derive from viral adaptation to the in vitro system. an example of these effects is the loss of a fulllength orf4 in the hcov-229e prototype strain which, due to a two-nucleotide deletion, has a split gene, encoding two proteins (orf4a and orf4b) [31, 32] ( figure 1b) . conversely, clinical isolates display a full-length orf4 sequence [32] . an intact orf4 is also observed in bat and camel viruses related to hcov-229e [19, 22] , whereas the alpaca alpha-cov displays a onenucleotide insertion, resulting in a frameshift [20] ( figure 1b) . the availability of only a single alpaca cov genome makes it impossible to determine whether the inserted sequence is representative of the alpaca cov population or, else, if it represents a sequencing error.overall, these observations suggest that loss of full-length orf4 is a result of passaging in cell culture, a process that often generates attenuated viruses. an interesting finding on the role of orf4a came from the observation that its protein product regulates virus production in vitro by functioning as a viroporin [33] . most likely, the same function is performed by the full-length orf4 as well.viroporins were also detected in sars-cov, hcov-oc43, and hcov-nl63 [34, 35] ( figure 1b ). as expected, given the relatedness of the two viruses, the proteins from hcov-nl63 and hcov-229e share substantial sequence similarity. limited similarity is also observed with the sars-cov protein, especially in the first and second transmembrane regions, suggesting either a common origin or independent acquisition followed by convergent optimization of residues in the transmembrane helices ( figure 2c) . conversely, the hcov-oc43 protein (encoded by orf5, originally denoted ns12.9) is unrelated to the other cov viroporins, both in terms of sequence and of domain topology [34] ( figure 2c) . a protein homologous to the hcov-oc43 viroporin is instead encoded by mhv (accessory protein ns5a) and functions as an antagonist of ifninduced antiviral responses [34, 36] . whether the hcov-oc43 viroporin has the same ifnantagonizing activity remains to be investigated; however, mutant viruses lacking orf5 display growth defects in vitro and in vivo, as well as reduced virulence in mice [34] . interestingly, the viroporins from sars-cov, hcov-nl63, and hcov-229e can complement the viroporindefective mutant hcov-oc43 in vitro [34] . thus, the conserved function of cov viroporins was most likely attained by convergent evolution for acquisition of unrelated genes.clearly, cov genomes do not only evolve by gene gains and losses, but also via subtler changes that modify protein sequences, and recombination has an important role in reassorting variants.several excellent reviews have focused on the evolutionary history of sars-cov genomes in terms of recombination and natural selection [37] [38] [39] ; hereafter, sars-cov will be mentioned only to draw comparisons with other covs.from an evolutionary standpoint, nonstructural proteins have attracted less attention than the structural components. this is likely due to the fact that proteins exposed on the virus surface represent the preferential targets of the host immune response. thus, analyzing and describing their variability and evolutionary dynamics has a clear relevance for the development of preventive strategies (e.g., vaccines) and of treatment options (e.g., administration of neutralizing antibodies). moreover, structural proteins, and the s protein in particular, determine the first and essential steps in infection and most likely represent the major determinants of host and tissue tropism.in covs, the s protein includes two functionally distinct units: the s1 region contains an nterminal domain (ntd) and the receptor-binding domain (rbd, also referred to as c-terminal domain or ctd), whereas the s2 region includes the fusion peptide, two heptad repeats (hr1 and hr2), and the transmembrane region ( figure 3a ) [38] . a striking feature of hcov spike proteins is that they have adapted to use diverse cellular receptors and there is no congruence in the phylogeny of hcov and their receptor usage. in fact, closely related viruses may use different receptors ( figure 1b) . for instance, hcov-229e uses aminopeptidase n (anpep), whereas hcov-nl63 exploits ace2, this latter representing the receptor for the relatively divergent sars-cov ( figure 1b) . it is presently unclear how these binding specificities evolved. the latest developments on this topic and, more generally, on the evolution of structural and nonstructural proteins are detailed below for the five known hcovs.the evolutionary analysis of mers-cov is a rapidly moving field, as sequences from the latest phases of the epidemic have just become available. analysis of an ever increasing number of viral sequences of both mers-cov and of related beta-covs revealed that genetic variability in the s gene was shaped by recombination and positive selection. in fact, both ancient and recent intraspike recombination events were described [22, 40, 41] . interestingly, recombination events with breakpoints within the s gene occurred in camels in saudi arabia and originated the mers-cov lineage that spread to south korea.analysis of positive selection of mers-cov spike genes indicated that several adaptive variants arose in mers-cov and in phylogenetically related covs [42] . contrary to common expectation and to what happened during the sars-cov host shift to humans, positive selection did not target the rbd. in fact, most adaptive substitutions were detected in the region encompassing the heptad repeats, regions of central importance for virus cell entry ( figure 3a ) [42, 43] . in other covs, variants in the heptad repeats were previously shown to affect host or tissue tropism [44] [45] [46] . interestingly, during the south korean outbreak, mers-covs that carry point mutations in the spike protein rbd emerged and rapidly spread [47] . these viruses showed decreased binding to the cellular receptor [47] ( figure 3a ). because several immune epitopes are located in the rbd, these findings point to the possibility that mers-cov is evolving to avoid the binding of neutralizing antibodies, resulting in a trade-off with receptor-binding affinity [47] . if this were the case, the phases of mers-cov adaptation to humans may have consisted of initial events that modulated host tropism through changes in the heptad repeats followed by the emergence of virus variants that escape immune responses. in mers-cov and other lineage c beta-covs, positive selection also targeted the nonstructural components, particularly orf1a [48] . most adaptive events occurred in nsp3, a multifunctional protein which acts as a viral protease and contributes to the suppression of interferon responses through its deubiquitinating and dei-sgylating activities [49] . selection in nsp3 is ongoing among mers-cov isolated from humans and camels [48] . in analogy to the s protein, though, no major selective event was found to be associated with camel-to-human transmission, although a positively selected change (r911c) in nsp3 was observed among human-derived viruses alone, suggesting that viral adaptation to our species represented the underlying pressure [48] .a recent analysis indicated that hcov-229e may have recombined with the alpaca alpha-cov virus within the s gene, as also demonstrated by the distinct phylogenetic trees for the s1 and s2 regions [19] . also, hcov-229e acquired a deletion in the s gene compared to bat viruses [19] . recent sequencing of several of such viruses showed that this deletion is also present in the alpaca cov s gene and in camel-derived alpha-covs [22] . this finding is particularly interesting because deletions in the ntd are associated with changes in tissue tropism in tgev (transmissible gastroenteritis virus): in this porcine virus the spike has dual tropism for the respiratory and intestinal tracts, but the n-terminally deleted variants from prcv (porcine respiratory coronavirus) only infect the respiratory tract [50, 51] . in chiroptera, covs are mainly restricted to the gastrointestinal tract, whereas in humans and camelids, the upper and lower respiratory airways are infected. it will be important to determine whether the s gene deletion in hcov-229e and camelid alphacovs is indeed responsible for a change in tissue tropism.hcov-nl63 recombination contributed to shaping the diversity of the s gene among hcov-nl63 viruses. recombination between an ancestral hcov-nl63 virus and the related pedv was also detected in the m gene that, in its 3 0 portion, is more similar to pedv than to hcov-229e [52] . like sars-cov, hcov-nl63 uses its rbd to bind ace2. the binding site on the cellular receptor is the same for the two viruses but the rdbs show no sequence similarity. interestingly, the rbds of sars-cov and hcov-nl63 do not display any structural similarity either: hcov-nl63 contacts ace2 with three discontinuous beta-loops, whereas sars-cov binds the receptor through a continuous subdomain [53] (figure 3b ). these observations suggest that the two viruses independently acquired the ability to bind the same ace2 region via convergent evolution or that they shared an ace2-binding ancestor long ago. strikingly, tgev, which is phylogenetically related to hcov-nl63, uses two regions corresponding to the hcov-nl63 beta-loops to bind a distinct cellular receptor, anpep ( figure 1b , figure 3b ) [54] . finally, hcov-229e, sharing sequence homology with hcov-nl63 and tgev ( figure 1a) , binds anpep, but engages a region distinct from that bound by tgev [55] . overall, these data highlight the extraordinary plasticity of cov rbds, and their complex evolutionary dynamics whereby divergent evolution can be followed by convergent adaptation to the same receptor. this complexity is further expanded by the ability of some covs to use other cellular attachment molecules to complement the function of the rbd. indeed, the s protein of hcov-nl63 exploits heparan sulfate proteoglycans to adhere to host cells [56] . interestingly, a similar ability to bind heparan sulfate can be gained by mhv with relatively few in vitro-acquired mutations in the s protein [57] . in line with the view that heparan sulfate is an aspecific receptor, the mutant mhv viruses display expanded host tropism [57] , highlighting the potential relevance of combinatorial receptor usage or receptor shifts for interspecies transmission.hcov-oc43 recombination seems to be rampant in hcov-oc43 viruses and contributed to originate the a to e viral genotypes, as well as viruses that do not belong to these major genotypes [58] [59] [60] . to our knowledge, no study has analyzed the fitness of recombinant viruses or, more generally, of viruses belonging to distinct genotypes. nonetheless, two reports indicated that genotype d has become predominant in the east asian population [58, 59] . whether this is due to population acquired immunity against the older a and b genotypes or to viral features unrelated to antigenicity remains to be determined.the active recombination in hcov-oc43 suggests that inference of natural selection is best performed by analysis of sequences belonging to the same genotype. in one such analysis, positive selection was found to act on the s gene of genotype d viruses [61] . interestingly, several positively selected sites with high posterior probability of positive selection are located in the ntd, which is involved in the binding of sialic acids.a positively selected site was located in the ctd, a region that has unclear function in the hcov-oc43 s protein, as no known protein receptor has been identified to date [61] . however, recent data from hku1 suggest that, by analogy, a protein receptor for hcov-oc43 may exist [62] (see below).the structure of the s protein of hku1 was recently solved; the glycan-binding site is located in the ntd and is conserved with bovine coronavirus (bcov) s1 [63] . nonetheless, antibodies against the ctd, but not those against the ntd, block hku1 infection of human trachealbronchial epithelial cells, suggesting that the ctd is the major rbd, and that a protein receptor for hku1 exists [62] . in analogy to hcov-nl63, glycans may mediate only the initial attachment to the host cells.a recent survey of hku1 clinical isolates from different geographic origins indicated that most viruses from colorado form a subclade in the hku1 phylogeny and carry three distinctive substitutions in the s protein within the ntd, ctd, and close to the s1/s2 cleavage site (w197f, f613y, and h716d, respectively) [64] . it will be interesting to assess whether these differences are functional and derive from a selective process.thanks to high-throughput techniques, a large number of complete cov genomes have become available to the scientific community, and many more will be coming in the near future. field studies have contributed enormously to widen our knowledge on the diversity of covs hosted by different vertebrates, and epidemiological surveys have provided cov sequences from distinct geographic areas and associated with different disease phenotypes. in parallel, resources have been created to store and mine these data (e.g., the virus pathogen database and analysis resource, vipr [65] ). these advances have allowed tracing the evolutionary history of the large and complex cov genomes to an unprecedented detail. the emerging picture indicates that cov genomes display high plasticity in terms of gene content and recombination. the long cov genome expands the sequence space available for adaptive mutation, and the spike protein can adapt with relative ease to exploit different cellular receptors. these features are likely to underlie the alarming propensity of covs for host jumps. despite these advances, major challenges remain (see outstanding questions). efforts to underscore the viral genetic determinants that favor interspecies transmission should be pursued as an effective strategy to prevent or prepare for future hcov emergence. can evolutionary information be applied to develop tools to predict which viruses have greater zoonotic potential and may result in the next epidemic?