the world health organization (who) used for the first time the term novel coronavirus in reference to a coronavirus that affected the lower respiratory tract of patients with pneumonia in wuhan, china on december 29, 2019. who has stated that the official name for the novel coronavirus is covid-19, coronavirus disease 2019, while the reference name for the virus is severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [1] . who considers essential for the fight against the spread of sars-cov-2 to increase the scientific knowledge about the disease and to develop and test new diagnostic methods for the virus, in order to carry out screenings in the population. in fact, all countries that have made extensive use of diagnostic tests for the entire population, regardless of the presence of symptoms, have achieved a drastic drop in infection and in the spread of infection. to date, the only tool officially recognized by the italian ministry of health for the diagnosis of sars-cov-2 virus infection is real time rt-pcr method on samples obtained by bronchoscopy, blood or feces . this diagnostic method has limitations related to the cost of reagents and the time required for the complete analysis along with an unacceptably large number of false negatives [2] . therefore, there is an urgent need to develop accurate, rapid and inexpensive methods to be combined with epidemiological, radiological [4, 5] and clinical data [6] in order to enhance rt-pcr potential to identify infected as well as asymptomatic carriers to prevent virus transmission and assure timely treatment [3] .a total of 739 volunteers participated in the study: 496 (67.1%) healthcare workers, 123 (16.7%) administrative workers and 120 (16.2%) patients. all subjects were asymptomatic when tested. by gender, there were 297 males (40.2%) and 442 females (59.8%). the mean age was 42.9 years old, while the median age was 38 years old. the study was conducted performing prima lab sa covid-19 igg/igm rapid test, a qualitative membrane-based immunoassay for the detection of igg and igm antibodies to covid-19 in whole blood, serum or plasma samples. all tests have been carried out by a nurse taking approximately 20μl of capillary blood with a sterile lancet, pipetting it into the cassette port and adding two drops of diluent to drive capillary action along the strip. the entire rapid test took about 10 minutes. a total of 844 covid-19 igg/igm rapid tests were performed. 104 subjects repeated the covid-19 igg/igm rapid test twice on the same day. the second test has been performed by the same nurse puncturing a different finger with a new sterile lancet.given the limitations imposed by the local authorities on the availability of rt-pcr swabs, we had to rely on self reported information provided by each volunteers. a total of 149 of 739 subjects reported that they had previously undergone a rt-pcr nasopharyngeal swabs. (table 3) . the data obtained show a covid-19 igg/igm rapid test technical reproducibility of 93-96%. this result suggests accuracy is lower than assumed. prima lab sa claims an accuracy for the covid-19 igg/igm rapid test of 92.9% for igm and 98.6% for igg, a specificity of 96% for igm and 98% for igg and a sensitivity of 85% for igm and 100% for igg respectively. according to our data, sensitivity and specificity estimated by the manufacturer should be reduced by a 7-4% factor, corresponding to the reproducibility error highlighted by the analysis. technical reproducibility discrepancy between reliable and unreliable covid-19 igg/igm rapid tests results, suggests only reliable results should be considered true. moreover, every test should be performed at least twice and only the double check results should be considered as correct, in order to get an accurate result. recent studies -provided by the producer's instructions -have shown qualitative membrane-based immunoassay tests are affected by a sensibility and specificity variation for both igg and igm antibodies caused by the time between symptoms onset and test performance. the technical reproducibility results obtained in this study should be further investigated in correlation with symptoms onset, in order to evaluate if the technical reproducibility percentage gets better 16-20 days after the symptoms confirming that this can be considered the best moment for using the covid-19 igg/igm rapid test.invalid results were observed for 7/844, or 0.83% of measurements. prima lab sa states insufficient sample volume, incorrect procedural techniques or hematocrit level not falling between 25% and 65% are the most likely reasons for a missing control line.covid-19 igg/igm rapid test results were compared to rt-pcr for 138 subjects with an observed agreement of 90.58% between the two techniques. in literature it is known sars-cov-2 should be detectable by rt-pcr from 14 days prior to 14 days after symptom onset, with a peak at seven days from symptoms appearance [7] . anti-covid-19 antibodies production is expected to start 3-6 days after symptom onset for igm and 14-21 days for igg, respectively [8] . this means igm immunoglobulins should be detectable in the first stage of the disease, when the subject is positive to pcr swab, while igg immunoglobulins should be detectable in the last stage of disease when the subject become negative to pcr swab. since the rapid test is most likely to produce negative results in the early stages of infection, it is possible that the 10/90 (11.1%) negative subjects with a positive rt-pcr that sars-cov-2 was detectable but antibodies seroconversion has not started yet. two out of three (66,6%) negative values on igm and one out of three negatives on igm/igg (33.3%) with a negative rt-pcr could be explained as false igm positive give the low igm sensitivity of about 85%. overall, we found that the rapid test appears to be a valid method for detecting both negative sars-cov-2 and positive igg patients. on the contrary, the rapid test does not appear to be as effective for the detection of positive or negative igm subjects and, therefore it should not be performed unless it is followed by rt-pcr.at the beginning of the covid-19 pandemic virtually no information and protocols were available for the clinic management of suspected sars-cov-2 patients, but very quickly a number of serological tests became available on the market with the promise to identify people who had or had had the disease. given the difficulty in securing an adequate supply of rt-pcr kits, we at the centro medico santagostino decided to test a qualitative serological test, the prima lab sa covid-19 igg/igm rapid test, to assess the efficacy and the weaknesses of rapid tests. over a period of ten weeks, we performed 844 covid-19 igg/igm rapid tests on 739 volunteers, a convenient sample with no pretense to be representative of the underlying italian population. the data collected suggests the test has a technical reproducibility of 93-96%, a technical failure of 0,83% +/-1.4% and an agreement with rt-pcr of 90,58% +/-2.6%. the covid-19 igg/igm rapid test represents a low-cost and easily applicable tool in detecting sars-cov-2 diffusion in the general population with the capability to identify quite reliably subjects who have been or have not been exposed to the virus in the recent or distant past, as suggested by the presence or absence of specific igg. our data suggest that the test is unlikely to provide adequate information regarding the most recent or current exposure to the virus given the evident unreliability of igm antibodies detection, which must be conformed by a rt-pcr test.rt-pcr. an immunochromatography-based covid-19 immunoglobulin g (igg)/immunoglobulin m (igm) rapid test on the sera of the study population was applied to measure the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (ppv), negative predictive value (npv), and receiver operating characteristic (roc) curve compared to rt-pcr, with a 95% confidence interval (ci). igm or igg antibodies were detected in 65 subjects (sars-cov-2). 2 the disease is also referred to as coronavirus disease 2019 . 3 the global mortality rate of covid-19 was reported to range from 1.5% to 3.6%. 4 currently, the diagnosis of covid-19 has been confirmed using next-generation sequencing or real-time reverse baseline characteristics of the study population were described at and headache in positive covid-19 group was higher than that of the negative group (p = .009, p < .001, p < .001, and p = .031, respectively).in the analysis of immmunochromatography for covid -19, there were no subjects in the rt-pcr positive group and two subjects (2.5%)in the rt-pcr negative group who only produced the igm antibody (table 2 ). in addition, 19 patients ( figure 1a) . a gradual decrease in npv of either igm or igg positivity from 99.9% to 95.3% was observed with increasing from 1% to 50% disease prevalence ( figure 1b the who announced that chinese authorities had identified a novel type of coronavirus on 7 january 2020. 9 presently, rt-pcr, a nucleic acid amplification test (naat), has been routinely used to detect covid-19 infection in many countries around the world. 1, 2, 5, 6 in this study, we assessed the diagnostic value of a new immunochromatography assay to detect igm and igg antibodies for however, there are some limitations or weaknesses in the areas of confirmation of covid-19 diagnosis by rt-pcr testing alone, such as the inability to distinguish virus viability and production of indeterminate or false-negative results due to low numbers of target cells in specimens, although rt-pcr remains a powerful technique for microbial diagnostics. 14 laboratory assays such as elisa and immunochromatography that use serum or blood sampled from suspected or established patients with covid-19 infection have been proposed to overcome or supplement these limitations.one study using in-house anti-sarsr-cov igg and igm elisa to target the n gene showed that the igm antibody level increased rapidly in the early stages of covid-19 infection and then decreased in the later stages. 13 furthermore, the igg antibody was insignificantly expressed in the early stages of infection but increased rapidly in the later stages. interestingly, titers of both igm and igg antibodies in covid-19 patients were significantly higher than those assessed in healthy subjects. infections have been reported to be reactivated in patients and confirmed by rt-pcr testing. 15 therefore, serial quantitative results using elisa may help not only confirm the diagnosis but also predict the clinical course of a patient.immunochromatography is another diagnostic alternative that has been proposed to detect covid-19 infection. this technique was developed in the late 1960s to detect antigens in the blood and has recently been used as a rapid diagnostic method for various viral infections, such as norovirus and influenza. 16, 17 the benefits or advantages of immunochromatography include its ability to be performed at bedside without special laboratory equipment, its ease of performance, its simple interpretation, and its rapid time to produce results, which may compare favorably to other diagnostic tools, such as rt-pcr and elisa methods. there are some limitations to this study. first, it was not possible to observe changes in antibodies from the time of patient diagnosis to the time of participation in the study because this study was conducted in a cross-sectional manner. second, the quantitative titer for each antibody expressed in the test kit could not be confirmed and is, therefore, a methodological limitation of immunochromatography.third, it may be difficult to fully represent the diagnostic values, especially the sensitivity and specificity, of the diagnostic kit due to the small size of the study population.in conclusion, immunochromatography demonstrated higher into an epidemic that quickly spread all over china and to more than 20 other countries. 6 it has been listed as a public health emergency of international concern. 7 the outbreak of this disease has caused the chinese government to take drastic measures to contain the outbreak, including the quarantine of millions of residents in wuhan and other affected cities. countrywide interventions include delaying the resumption of workplaces, and encouraging citizens to stay and work from home, and so on.however, these efforts are limited by one hard problem: how to differentiate the covid-19 cases from the healthy. for confirmed covid-19 cases, reported common clinical symptoms include fever, cough, myalgia, or fatigue. 8 yet these symptoms are not unique features of covid-19 because these symptoms are similar to that of other virus-infected diseases such as influenza. 9 currently, virus nucleic acid real-time polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), ct imaging, and some hematology parameters are the primary tools for clinical diagnosis of the infection. 10 therefore, there is an urgent need for a rapid, simple to use, sensitive, and accurate test to quickly identify infected patients of sars-cov-2 to prevent virus transmission and to assure timely treatment of patients.testing of specific antibodies of sars-cov-2 in patient blood is a good choice for rapid, simple, highly sensitive diagnosis of covid-19.it is widely accepted that immunoglobulin m (igm) provides the first line of defense during viral infections, before the generation of adaptive, high-affinity igg responses that are important for long term immunity and immunological memory. 12 it was reported that after sars infection, igm antibody could be detected in patient blood after 3 to 6 days and igg could be detected after 8 days. 13, 14 since covid-19 belongs to the same large family of viruses as those that cause the mers and sars outbreak, we assume its antibody generation process is similar, and detection of the igg and igm antibody against sars-cov-2 will be an indication of infection. several different designs of antigen were tested and optimized.eventually, mk201027 was picked into the testing product. bovine serum albumin (bsa), and goat anti-human igg and igm antibodies, rabbit igg, and goat anti-rabbit igg antibodies were obtained from sigma-aldrich. forty-nanometer gold nanoparticle (aunp) colloids, nc membrane, and plastic pad were obtained from shanghai kinbio inc, the glass fiber conjugate pad was obtained from whatman. the phosphate-buffered saline (pbs) was purchased from sigma-aldrich. to prepare the aunp conjugate, sars-cov-2 recombinant protein dissolved in pbs (1 mg/ml) was added to the mixture of 1 ml aunp colloid (40 nm in diameter, od = 1) and 0.1 ml of borate buffer (0.1 m, ph 8.5). after incubation for 30 minutes at room temperature, 0.1 ml of 10 mg/ml bsa in pbs was added to the solution to block the aunp surface. after incubation for 15 minutes at room temperature, the mixture was centrifuged at 10 000 rpm and 4°c for 20 minutes. the supernatant was discarded, and 1 ml of 1 mg/ml bsa in pbs was added to the aunp conjugate to be resuspended.the centrifugation and suspension processes were repeated twice, and the final suspension solution was pbs. the aunp-rabbit igg conjugates were prepared and purified by the same procedure.the main body of the test strip consists of five parts, including plastic backing, sample pad, conjugate pad, absorbent pad, and nc membrane. every component of the strip should be given a pretreatment described as follows: the nc membrane was attached to a plastic backing layer for cutting and handling. the anti-human-igm, antihuman-igg and anti-rabbit-igg were immobilized at test m, g, and control line (c line),respectively. conjugate pad was sprayed with mixture of aunp-covid-19 recombinant antigen conjugate and aunprabbit-igg. sample pad was pretreated with bsa (3%, w/v) andtween-20 (0.5%, w/v) before use.the patients were recruited who conform to the diagnostic criteria of a suspected case of covid-19 according to the guidelines of diagnosis and treatment of covid-19 15 including typical epidemiological history and clinical characteristics. these samples were collected from various hospitals and cdc testing laboratories (total eight) at six different provinces of china. the tests were conducted at the sites by clinical staff who followed the test procedure described in the product inserts. the respiratory tract specimen, including pharyngeal swab and sputum, was used to confirm covid-19 cases, and the blood, including serum and plasma, was used to test the igm and igg antibody.before testing, the pouched device was opened immediately before use. when refrigerated blood samples were used for the test, they were warmed to room temperature (15°c-30°c). during testing, 20 μl whole blood sample (or 10 μl of serum/plasma samples) was pipetted into the sample port followed by adding two to three drops (70-100 μl) of dilution buffer (10 mm pbs buffer) to drive capillary action along the strip. the entire test took about 15 minutes to finish. the rapid sars-cov-2 igg-igm combined antibody test kits were tested at eight hospitals and chinese cdc laboratories in different provinces, with a total of 397 clinical positive and 128 clinical negative patient blood samples. the test data was collected and analyzed. the specificity and sensitivity of the rapid test kits were calculated according to the following formulas:specificity % 100 true negative true negative false positive ,sensitivity % 100 true positive true positive false negative . is conjugated to colloidal gold nanoparticles and sprayed on conjugation pads. the aunp-rabbit igg conjugates were also sprayed on conjugation pads for binding to anti-rabbit igg antibody which is immobilized on the control line ( figure 1a ).when testing, 10 to 15 μl specimen is added into the sample port followed by the addition of sample dilution buffer. the mechanism of the assay is based on the hydration and transport of reagents as they interact with the specimen across the strip via chromatographic lateral flow ( figure 1a ). as the specimen flows li et al. 3.3 | sars-cov-2 igg-igm combined antibody test in different types of blood samplesthe above results have verified the sensitivity and specificity of kit detection in un-inactivated vein blood. however, it is more convenient to collect fingerstick blood outside hospitals and clinics.to achieve a simpler operating process, we tested the performance of sars-cov-2 igg-igm combined antibody kit with peripheral blood.patient fingerstick blood and vein blood and plasma from the same patient were tested. as shown in table 3 to make the kit suitable for different stages of the disease, we developed an igg-igm combined antibody test for covid-19 infection ( figure 1 ). it was also been confirmed that the detection sensibility was higher in igg-igm combined antibody test than in individual igg or igm antibody test (table 1) . therefore, we more recommend the no publication on them. we believe the good test products will be used in clinical sites and the information will emerge. we will carry out comparison studies later.certainly, this test cannot confirm virus presence, only provide evidence of recent infection, but it provides important immunological evidence for physicians to make the correct diagnosis along with other tests and to start treatment of patients.in addition, possible cross-reactivity with other coronaviruses and flu viruses were not studied, and the change level of antibody was not compared in the different stages of sars-cov-2 infection. we believe the combination of nucleic acid rt-pcr and the igm-igg antibody test can provide more accurate sars-cov-2 infection diagnosis.we developed a rapid sars-cov-2 igg-igm combined antibody test using lateral flow immune assay techniques. it takes less than 15 minutes to generate results and determine whether there is a recent sars-cov-2 infection. it is easy to use, and no additional equipment is required. results from this study demonstrated that this test is sensitive and specific. this rapid test has great potential benefits for the fast screening of sars-cov-2 infections, and it has already generated tremendous interest and increased clinical uses after a short time testing in chinese hospitals.acute respiratory disease (ard) accounts for a large proportion of all acute morbidities, as well as mortalities, worldwide, among which acute viral respiratory tract infection is the leading cause (appropriate 80%). 1 the major viral pathogens include influenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), coronavirus, adenovirus, and rhinovirus. in children below the age of five, the combined global mortality of only influenza and rsv reaches 300 000 deaths eachyear. 2 other respiratory viruses, such as adenovirus and rhinovirus, are associated with lower mortality, but significant morbidity, causing a huge economic burden. 3 the highly pathogenic emerging and reemerging coronaviruses that may cause epidemics or pandemics, was released on january 10, 2020 (http://virological.org/t/initialgenome-release-of-novel-coronavirus/319?from=groupmessage&isap pinstalled=0), which is more than 82% identical to those of sars-cov and bat sars-like coronavirus (sl-cov). 4 accurate and fast diagnosis of the causative viral pathogens is important to select the appropriate treatment, save people's lives, stop the epidemics, and reduce unnecessary use of antibiotics. all viruses mentioned above can cause both upper and lower respiratory tract infections, as well as overlapping clinical presentations, making it difficult for physicians to distinguish the causative agents without a solid laboratory analysis. conventional diagnostic methods, such as viral culture and direct/indirect immunofluorescence assay (ifa), are time-consuming and labor intensive with limited sensitivity. rapid and accurate diagnosis of respiratory viruses can help in epidemiologic monitoring, along with taking effective prevention steps and implementing appropriate antiviral therapies. over the past decades, an evolution in viral diagnostic testing has been seen, all the way from conventional approaches to rapid antigen detection. more recently, highly sensitive nucleic acid amplification tests (naat) and point-of-care tests (poct) have been developed. 2 in this review, we describe various approaches currently available, or under development, for diagnosis of common respiratory virus infections in humans. it is anticipated that these data will assist clinical laboratories to rapidly and accurately diagnose respiratory viruses, thus providing physicians with essential information for timely and appropriate treatment of patients. the commonly used diagnostic approaches for influenza virus, rsv, coronavirus, adenovirus, and rhinovirus are summarized in table 1 and described in detail in the following review. 15 the immunofluorescence assay can rapidly detect rsv antigens using a fluorescence-tagged primary or secondary antibody. also, this assay is more sensitive than rt-pct. by probing f and g proteins with qds, confocal microscopy could detect the progression of rsv infection in the hep-2 cell line, and this method was found to be more sensitive compared to rt-pcr. 18 lateral flow immunoassay (lfia) is another rapid rsv detection method based on an immunochromatographic technique using the samples of nasal washes or aspirates. many lfia kits are now available in the market, such as bd directigen ez rsv, binax now rsv, rsv respi-strip, remel xpect, and quicklab rsv test. [19] [20] [21] the sensitivity and specificity of the abovementioned kits are normally higher than 90% and 95%, but they differ by manufacturer.the pcr method is based on the nested rt-pcr technique involving the outer and inner primers designed from the f gene of rsv-a or -b.this method has been developed in both circle time and operability in adult infections. 22 therefore, it can be used to detect samples with low viral titers and sensitively perform identification using antigenbased detection approaches. suggesting the greater accuracy and sensitivity of the taqman pcr assay. 24 in addition, locked nucleic acid (lna)-based one-tube nested real-time (otnrt)-pcr is an assay with very high sensitivity and low incidence of cross-contamination for detection of rsv. 25 29 therefore, the overall sensitivity and specificity of the above six rrt-pcr kits are sufficient for diagnosing mers-cov infection.in the rt-lamp assay, two primer sets were constructed with one set targeting the n gene and one set targeting the orf1a gene.both sets have shown high efficiency in amplifying target sequences derived from different mers-cov strains with no cross-reactivity observed with other respiratory viruses. 31 the isolation of adenovirus after growth in cell culture and its immunological detection are generally thought to be the "gold serotypes by amplification and sequencing of the amplification elements on l1 and l2. 37 shimada studied a more conservative hexon gene on hvr, which can type 44 serotypes, but it is limited to the hadv serotypes that can lead to corneal conjunctivitis. 38 realtime pcr is a sensitive and quantitative technique to diagnose hadv infections. a real-time pcr with consensus primer and probe for a conserved region of the hexon gene has been designed to detect 51prototypes. the sensitivity of the assay is ≤15 copies per run, and the linear range of quantitation was 1.5 × 10 1 to 1.5 × 10 8 copies/run. 39 the realstar adenovirus pcr kit 1.0 is a real-time pcr-based diagnostic test for in vitro detection and quantification of hadvspecific dna. its sensitivity is 1.09 copies/μl (95%, 0.62-3.08 copies/μl), and it has no cross-reactivity against 35 human viral pathogens. compared with the realstar adenovirus pcr kit, the inhouse qpcr assay is more sensitive and reliable for the detection and quantification of hadv-specific dna. the performance characteristics of this in-house qpcr have been evaluated against the realstar adenovirus pcr kit, using 122 clinical specimens and 18 proficiency samples. 35 in this study, the in-house hadv qpcr assay detected six hadv species a to f, except species g. using the realstar adenovirus pcr kit as the reference, the sensitivity and specificity are 98.1%and 100%, respectively, for the in-house qpcr assay, and the correlation of the two assays is quite good (r 2 = 0.984). furthermore, the in-house qpcr assay has a linear range up to 9 log10 copies/m, and the %cv values suggested quite low intra-/inter-assay variations.picornaviridae genus enterovirus, which has been classified into 3 species (a to c) with over 160 serotypes. [64] [65] [66] [67] rvs are small singlestranded rna viruses with an icosahedral symmetrical capsid. 68 rvs are the most frequent cause of respiratory tract infections in both children and adults. rv-a and rv-c are common rv species causing lower airway illness, wheezing and acute asthma, and they can lead to more severe symptoms than rv-b in children. 67, 69 culture isolation of virus combined with acid stabilization test is a classic method for rv diagnosis. however, this assay is timeconsuming and laborious, limiting its value for clinical treatment.human rv antibodies can be detected by immunological methods, such as the complement fixation test (cft), hi test, if, and elisa.however, owing to the lack of suitable cross-reactive antigens to cover a large number of rv serotypes, the application of these methods is greatly limited. in contrast, the one-step, real-time pcr assay detects rvs by using a sequence detection system. this assay improves workflow, reduces preparation time, and eliminates crosscontamination that might be introduced during cdna transfer from the reverse transcription reaction into the pcr reaction step. 40 seminested rt-pcr assay is based on an extremely sensitive pcr to detect airborne rvs, which has a limit of detection (lod) of approximately 0.8 median tissue culture infectious dose (tcid 50 ). 41 the one-step panenterhino/ge/08 real-time rt-rcr assay has been developed and validated by using an internal extraction control and serial dilutions of an in vitro-transcribed rhinovirus rna reference standard. 42 the lod and limit of quantification (loq) of this assay are 3.10 log copies/ml and 4.10 log copies/ml, respectively. the linearity is conserved from 4.10 to 9.10 log copies/ml, and intraassay reproducibility is r 2 = 0.999. 42 with the rapid development of zhang et al.wgs technology, more and more laboratories may perform wgs on human rv isolates clinically. with the discovery of hrv-c, the data volume of whole-genome hrv sequencing has been increased and improved significantly. this will help researchers and clinicians to understand the evolutionary and recombination of rv, 43 which may improve diagnosis.although single respiratory viruses can be detected in patients with symptoms, other respiratory viruses may also exist simultaneously.children, especially those under 5 years of age, present with a higher frequency of coinfections. [70] [71] [72] multiplex assays that contain more than one viral gene target in a single tube have the advantage of rapid detection of several potential viral pathogens simultaneously. the specificity of the test was about 92.9% to 100%. the sensitivity for piv3, hmpv, piv1 and bov was reported to be 73.1%, 70%, 66 .7%, and 55.6%, respectively, but the sensitivity for flua, env, oc43, rsv and h1n1 was relatively low. 78 the filmarray multiplex pcr system is a multiplex pcr panel that can be used to detect 17 viruses, including rsv-a and rsv-b, and 2 bacteria. this platform requires 2 minutes of hands-on time for sample preparation and about 1 hour for device running time. the testing platform integrates cell lysis reagents, dna/rna extraction reagents, purification reagents, amplification reagents, and also detection reagents into one pouch. 79 after finishing the run, software analyses were performed, and the test results were presented in anintegrated table that includes all tested pathogens. 79 the studies have revealed the sensitivity to be 86.4% for rsv-a and 100% for rsv-b, and the specificity was 100% for rsv-a and rsv-b compared to a combination reference of esensor, xtag, and a laboratorydeveloped test. 78 the sensitivity and specificity were 100% and 99.5% compared to the prodesse assay. 79 infectious diseases are still a major threat in the world today 1 . the diagnosis and real-time tracking of both emerging 2 and re-emerging infectious diseases must be reliable, fast, and affordable. healthcare systems use different approaches to make infectious diseases diagnoses, such as clinical assessment (signs and symptoms), microscopy, microbiological cultures, radiology, molecular techniques -classical or real-time polymerase chain reaction (pcr), genome sequencing (detection presence of nucleic acid), serology (detection of the pathogens or host antibodies), artificial intelligence and machine learning 3 . in modern medical diagnostics, whole or targeted genome sequencing or detection technologies are indispensable. in the event of novel pathogens, such as coronavirus, these technologies offer the shortest turnaround time (tat) for results to be reported. coupling comprehensive clinical evaluation, triaging, genomic-based diagnostics, and epidemiology to innovative digital disease detection raises the possibility of an open, global, pathogen surveillance system.in the current case of the coronavirus global pandemic 2019, healthcare systems have the challenge of massive testing, isolating (quarantine) those suspected of being exposed to the virus, re-testing (at the end of the viral incubation period), treating and managing those who turn out to be positive, as well as real-time tracing of their contacts. the diagnosis of a novel infectious disease such as covid-19 furthermore presents a challenge of studying and understanding its pathogenesis before developing rapid test assays to be used to subsequently diagnose cases as the disease continues to infect more people. in the development of such a test, aspects such as sensitivity, specificity, false positive and false negative rates of a diagnostic test have to be meticulously considered. as this is a great undertaking requiring high scientific expertise, laboratory and financial resources, some nations especially low-income settings have had to rely on such support from developed nations to make modifications at a country level so that they reach their healthcare needs 4 .the current covid-19 outbreak has confronted scientists with an unprecedented infectious disease challenge that demands the highest level of sharing of infectious disease-related information as such infectious disease outbreaks are becoming less confined by geographical or climatic boundaries 5,6 . data sharing ensures that other nations use available facts and minimize wastage of time and resources. another lesson learnt from this pandemic is that nations should also end secrecy in public health decision-making especially amidst suspected disease outbreaks and promote global cooperation 5 . globally, governments should be ready to share outbreak information on acquisition, transmission, and treatment as well as make efforts to fight the spreading of 'fake news' related to outbreaks. nations with networks of high-containment biological laboratories must guarantee safety of all agents in their custody to prevent their potential deployment as bioweapons.this review briefly describes the currently available testing approaches, as well as selected two easy to use point-of-care test assays, including the xpert ® xpress sars-cov-2 and abbott id covid-19 tests, for diagnosis of novel covid-19 infection. at the date of this publication, the us food and drug administration (fda) has granted emergency use authorizations clearance for 32 tests, as seen in table 1 . a routinely updated list of fda approved tests can be accessed here.the manifestation of the covid-19 infection is highly nonspecific and presents respiratory symptoms, fever, cough, dyspnoea, and viral pneumonia 7 . thus, diagnostic tests specific to this infection are urgently required to confirm suspected cases, screen patients, and conduct virus surveillance. in this scenario, a rapid, robust, and cost-efficient device that can be used anywhere and which does not necessarily require a trained technician to operate 8 (i.e. at point-of-care) is crucial and urgently needed for the detection of covid-19 9 . several assays that detect sars-cov-2 have been developed so far, including rapid igm-igg combined antibody test for coronavirus (raybiotech life), 2019-ncov igg/igm antibody detection kit (mybiosource, inc.), qsars-cov-2 igg/igm rapid test (cellex, inc.), aries sars-cov-2 assay (luminex corporation), sgti-flex covid-19 igm/igg (sugentech, inc), while still under development is the ultrasensitive, rapid, portable coronavirus sars-cov-2 nucleic acid sequence detection system that uses nanobiosensor-based aptamer technology 10 are currently under development. these are both in-house and commercially available. some assays detect only the novel form of virus and some may also detect other viral strains (e.g. sars-cov) that are genetically similar to sars-cov-2 11 . more about status of evaluation of sars-cov-2 molecular diagnostics tests can be found here and here. this includes the viral molecular target utilised in the test, country of manufacturer and its regulatory status.emerging and re-emerging pathogens are global challenges for public health 12,13 . laboratory biosafety requirements related to covid-19 virus include the availability of biosafety requirements for viral cultures and further manipulations. the world health organisation (who) recommends that all procedures must be performed based on risk assessment and only by highly trained personnel with demonstrated capability in strict observance to all relevant protocols at all times 14 . non-propagative diagnostic laboratory work, such as viral genome sequencing and nucleic acid amplification tests, must be conducted at containment facilities and procedures equivalent to biosafety level 2 (bsl-2) while propagative work that involves coronavirus culture, isolation, animal inoculation or neutralization assays must be done at a high-biocontainment laboratory with inward directional airflow (minimum bsl-3) 14 . viral cultures are not recommended for routine diagnosis and must be carried in a minimum of bsl-3 facility or bsl-4 14 . however, sars-cov-2 virus isolation in cell cultures is critical to obtain isolates for characterization and to support the development of vaccines, therapeutic agents 15 and new or better diagnostic tests. in addition to virological culture, serological tests are currently under development and these could enable diagnosis of covid-19 especially in patients for whom acute and convalescent paired samples are available. these are drawn approximately 2 weeks apart to monitor any significant changes in antibody titers of the patients. however, development of these types of tests is currently challenging due to a lack of knowledge about the antibody response elicited from the sars-cov-2 infection in humans, including the question concerning the antigenic differences between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov 19 .in addition, these serological tests may face a challenge of crossreactivity with other coronaviruses 18 . however, the fda has offered emergency use authorization of the first antibody-based test for covid-19 that detects antibodies in the one's blood, rather than for the virus in the nose or throat samples. this test is only done at certified laboratories and even though it takes 15 to 20 minutes to get a result after sample collection, it is not a bedside test 20 .point-of-care testing means that results are delivered to patients in the patient care setting, such as hospitals, urgent care centers and medical emergency rooms, instead of samples being sent to a testing laboratory. real-time pcr, also known as quantitative pcr, is commonly used in molecular point-of-care testing. it can amplify more than one genomic target and in the case of covid-19 and these can be orf1ab of coronaviruses occupy about two thirds of their genomes. it encodes the replicase polyprotein and is translated from orf1a and orf1b, e-gene (envelope protein) and n-gene (the nucleocapsid protein) 21 and rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) that is an essential viral enzyme, which replicates positive-strand rna viral genome. for more specificity, some molecular diagnostic assays amplify more than one molecular target in the virus to minimize chances of all three targets mutating and hence being missed by the diagnostic test 21 . during the development of disease testing assays, us manufacturers can apply for emergency clinical use authorization from fda, and in the european union manufacturers can obtain "conformité européene" which literally means "european conformity", marking them for in vitro diagnostic use. 30 . in addition, the above two covid-19 molecular diagnostic tests are designed for near patient testing in a variety of healthcare environments using a range of sample types such as throat, nasal, nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs and this facilitates effective patient management.as the number of confirmed cases of covid-19 rises rapidly throughout the world, more and more nations continue to require reliable testing. a rapid, inexpensive, and easy-to-use point-of-care diagnostic device integrated with a smartphone could reduce transportation needs, lower the risk of spreading infection, alleviate the strain on the healthcare system, and mitigate the cost of testing for both individuals and governments 31 . unfortunately, scaling up production of available covid-19 diagnostics, as well as personal protective equipment, remain an ongoing challenge in the fight against this disease. a list of other diagnostics under development and testing are listed here 32 . the who prequalification team activated the emergency use listing (eul) for candidates in vitro diagnostics to detect sars-cov-2. there is currently a total of 30 different diagnostic tests at the time of this publication 33 . since sars-cov-2 diagnostics development and approval are rapidly changing, this information is updated weekly at the who portal. as governments around the world are being encouraged by who to rapidly test a very large percentage of their populations to fight coronavirus 34 , these tests will be critical in meeting this demand.following the emergence of sars-cov-2, genomic analyses continue to play a key role in the public health response by informing the design of appropriate molecular diagnostics and corroborating epidemiological efforts to trace contacts 35 .in order to better understand the spread of this pandemic and design better interventions, whole genome sequencing of the virus from a range of clinical presentations of the disease in different parts of the world must occur (figure 1 ). it has been suggested from rapid data sharing using publicly available sequence data platforms that this pandemic was a point-source outbreak 35, 36 . therefore, researchers need more data from the whole genomes of sars-cov-2 including viral transcriptome 37 . all these have the potential to reveal further insights into the biology of this emergent pathogen 35 . nanopore minion sequencing technology has been used to sequence sars-cov-2 genomes 38, 39 . many of these genomes have been successfully uploaded to global initiative on sharing all influenza data -gisaid by the who reference laboratories globally and nextstrain. other public repositories that have a number of these sequences are genbank and the sequence read archive of the us national center for biotechnology.currently with more than 2.6 million infected individuals in 185 sovereign states and 183,000 deaths globally 40 at the time of writing, the covid-19 pandemic may see deployment of covid-19 rapid non-invasive point-of-care tests at civil airports and national borders to screen individuals and avoid imported cases of the infection. this would be similar to mitigation of aircraft hijackings and in-flight sabotage using mandatory civil aviation security procedures, including strict security screening for passengers and baggage at all commercial airports 41 . currently, screening for covid-19 is performed by checking for high fever in individuals coming through airports and border controls using thermal screening guns. a nanosensor diagnostic platform is in development to test for this virus, which will replace thermal screening guns and be more specific. this technology, which will be in the form of a hand-held device, promises to give results specific for this virus within one minute, by detecting the nucleocapsid protein specific for this virus using nanosensor and aptamer technology 21 .to minimise the current covid-19 pandemic related pressure on health systems globally, especially arising from ramping up testing capacity quickly, readily accessible, cheap, easy to use and interpret point-of-care diagnostic tests with high sensitivity must be developed, produced and distributed widely.no data is associated with this article. t he identification by u.s. public health officials of presumptive covid-19 cases believed to be due to community transmission of this infection brings into sharp focus the importance of the laboratory diagnosis of infection caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) . the current recommendations for laboratory diagnosis of covid-19 from the cdc are that clinicians coordinate this testing with local public health authorities and/or the cdc. the preferred testing method is the real-time reverse transcription-pcr (rt-pcr) test (6) (7) (8) similar to that developed for the diagnosis of sars-cov (9, 10) . viral cultures are not recommended. this commentary addresses current issues for the laboratory diagnosis of covid-19 that must be understood by clinicians, clinical microbiology laboratories, and public health authorities.preanalytical issues. (i) initial respiratory tract specimen collection for diagnosis and screening of patients with covid-19 pneumonia. within 5 to 6 days of the onset of symptoms, patients with covid-19 have demonstrated high viral loads in their upper and lower respiratory tracts (11) (12) (13) (14) . a nasopharyngeal (np) swab and/or an oropharyngeal (op) swab are often recommended for screening or diagnosis of early infection (9, 12, 15) . a single np swab has become the preferred swab as it is tolerated better by the patient and is safer to the operator. np swabs have an inherent quality control in that they usually reach the correct area to be tested in the nasal cavity. wang et al. have just reported that op swabs (n ϭ 398) were used much more frequently than nasal swabs (n ϭ 8) in china during the covid-19 outbreak; however, the sars-cov-2 rna was detected in only 32% of op swabs, which was significantly lower than the level in nasal swabs (63%) (16) . while collection/testing of both nasal and op swabs, either as independent specimens or together within a single aliquot of viral transport medium, might be an attractive option under normal circumstances, institutions must also consider the potential stress that this pandemic places on national/international supply chains. in this light, another excellent reason to limit testing with np swabs is to prolong supplies of flocked swabs and/or transport media. however, as we understand more about respiratory and oral contact routes of transmission, we may learn that patients with pharyngitis as a dominant initial presenting symptom can be adequately sampled via the op route.in order to properly obtain an np swab specimen, the swab must be inserted deeply into the nasal cavity. patients will likely flinch, but that means the swab has hit the target. swabs should be kept in place for 10 s while being twirled three times. swabs should have flocked nontoxic synthetic fibers, such as polyester, as well as synthetic nylon handles (17) . collecting an np/op swab specimen may carry a theoretical risk of transmitting sars-cov-2, particularly if airborne transmission is demonstrated as the investigation of the covid-19 outbreak continues (18) . if personal protective equipment (ppe) cannot be utilized due to scarcity of such ppe, other means of collecting upper respiratory tract specimens will be needed (18) . one alternative option for collecting an upper respiratory tract specimen to evaluate patients with suspected covid-19 pneumonia is a self-collected saliva specimen (19) (20) (21) (22) . should the supply of swabs become scarce, other nonflocked swabs and transport media have been cleared equivalently by the food and drug administration (fda) under an emergency use authorization (eua), but head-to-head comparisons are lacking currently.after collection, swabs should be placed in viral (universal) transport medium for rapid transportation to the clinical microbiology laboratory, ideally under refrigerated conditions (17) . it should be noted, however, that in some cases, saliva/nps/ops may miss early infection and that in later infection, the main site of replication may have shifted to the low respiratory tract. repeated testing or obtaining lower respiratory tract specimens may be required. moreover, other respiratory viral pathogens such as influenza and respiratory syncytial viruses must be ruled out. in many ways, covid-19 highlights the key difference between analytic and clinical sensitivities, that is, the ability of an assay to detect a pathogen when it is present in a clinical specimen versus the ability of a test to identify a patient's overall infected status. the latter, of course, reflects various other factors that include the specimen site and method of collection, in conjunction with the burden of organism as a function of anatomic location, disease severity, and time symptomatic (and variability of these factors from individual to individual). repeated testing may be particularly important if a patient has a clinical picture of viral pneumonia, a potential exposure history, and/or radiographic findings (chest computed tomography [ct] or magnetic resonance imaging [mri] scan) consistent with covid-19 pneumonia. equally challenging are how the results of a single undetected result should impact decisions regarding patient quarantine and social distancing, in particular when the patients themselves are health care providers (including clinical laboratory staff). serology, as discussed in the postanalytical section, may assist in such situations.(ii) late detection and monitoring of patients with severe covid-19 pneumonia. ideally, sputum sampling or bronchoalveolar lavage should be used for collecting lower respiratory tract specimens as they have yielded the highest viral loads for the diagnosis of covid-19 (18, 23) . a recent study revealed that samples bronchoalveolar lavage (bal) fluid yielded the highest sars-cov-2 rna rate although this study did not compare/evaluate results from np swabs (16) . patients who present with severe pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome may require emergent intubation as well as respiratory isolation in a negative-pressure room. if possible, a lower respiratory tract sputum specimen should be collected during the intubation procedure. alternatively, sputum and/or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid specimens can be collected after intubation (9, 11).however, some patients with covid-19 pneumonia have demonstrated high viral rna loads of sars-cov-2 in fecal material (24, 25) as well as delayed shedding from the respiratory tract (4, 18) late in their clinical course. enteric involvement previously has been seen in patients with severe novel coronavirus infections (9, (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) (31) (32) . in four such studies, sars coronavirus was isolated from stool cultures (26, 28, 31) . in another study, sars coronavirus was demonstrated inside enterocytes by electron microscopy (30) . thus, aside from direct respiratory sampling, the preferred method for detecting sars-cov-2 in advanced covid-19 cases may be a rectal swab and real-time rt-pcr (9, (26) (27) (28) (30) (31) (32) .(iii) safety measures for specimen processing for pcr processing and testing. processing of respiratory specimens should be done in a class ii biological safety cabinet (6, 9, 10) , although some laboratories would argue that biosafety level three (bsl-3) work procedures should be used and that the safety cabinet should be in a negative-pressure room within the laboratory such as that used for mycobacterial cultures. for nucleic acid extraction before real-time rt-pcr is performed, the specimen should be transferred to lysis buffer under this bsl-2 cabinet. the lysis buffer should contain a guanidinium-based inactivating agent as well as a nondenaturing detergent. indeed, the buffers included in common commercial extraction platforms, such as the biomérieux easymag or qiagen ez1, do contain guanidium/detergents and are able to inactivate any viable coronavirus (33) (34) (35) . similarly, universal transport medium that includes guanidinium salt is available from merlin biomedical (xiamen, china) (http:// www.chinamerlin.com/en/index.php?pϭproducts_show&idϭ166&s_idϭ&c_idϭ68& lanmuϭ2). because this test is a reverse transcription method, the saliva/swabs used to collect the clinical specimens should be quickly added to lysis buffer to disinfect the specimen as well as to stop degradation of the coronavirus rna (6, 9, 10) . the clinical specimens/swabs should not be heated to 56°c for 30 min as evidence suggests that this process may also degrade the coronavirus rna even as it inactivates viable coronavirus (9, 36) .moreover, self-enclosed systems integrating nucleic acid extraction, amplification, and detection such as id now (abbott, san diego, ca) (37, 38) , cobas liat (roche molecular systems, pleasanton, ca), and genexpert (cepheid, sunnyvale, ca) (39), when available and meeting local regulatory requirements for sars-cov-2 testing, will be very useful. once the clinical specimen in viral transport medium is transferred into a cartridge in a class ii biosafety cabinet, the cartridge is sealed. many of these random-access sealed devices are suitable for point-of-care testing for local hospitals and clinics without biosafety cabinets. in this situation, the specimen collector in appropriate protective gear (splash guard/goggles, mask, gloves, and disposable laboratory coat) could directly transfer the specimen into detection cartridges at bedside or in a location without a class ii biosafety cabinet, and the closed cartridge could be safely placed on an instrument for testing. however, spills of transport solution during transfer to these cartridge-based tests should be avoided, and if they occur, decontamination should be performed as appropriate.analytical issues. (i) assay selection. immunoassays have been developed for rapid detection of sars-cov-2 antigens or antibodies. these rapid point-of-care immunoassays are generally lateral flow assays, but high-throughput immunoanalyzer versions are also in development for population-level screening. such lateral flow assays have been developed for detecting antigens such as the sars-cov-2 virus or for detecting antibodies (igm and igg) against covid-19.rapid antigen lateral flow assays would theoretically provide the advantage of a fast time to result and low-cost detection of sars-cov-2 but are likely to suffer from poor sensitivity early in infection, based on the experience with this method for influenza (flu) viruses (40) (41) (42) (43) (44) . monoclonal antibodies specifically against sars-cov-2 have been under development, and several rapid antigen assays are being developed (45) . there is concern that, given the variability of viral loads in covid-19 patients, antigen detection may miss cases due to low infectious burden or sampling variability.serology measures the host response to infection and is an indirect measure of infection that is best utilized retrospectively. serological methods are rapidly being developed and have proven to be useful in confirming past covid-19 (25) . serology previously has had an important role in the epidemiology of sars (46) and other coronavirus outbreaks (47) . rapid lateral flow assays for both igm and igg antibodies undoubtably will play an important role in the covid-19 outbreak and should allow the burden of infection, the role of asymptomatic infections, the basic reproduction number, and the overall mortality to be determined. however, igm responses are notoriously nonspecific, and given the weeks required to develop specific igg responses, serology detection is not likely to play a role in active case management except to diagnose/confirm late covid-19 cases or to determine the immunity of health care workers as the outbreak progresses. cell culture is not recommended for diagnostic purposes.(ii) assay selection for molecular detection of sars-cov-2. random-amplification deep-sequencing methods played a major role in the initial identification of sars-cov-2 (48) (49) (50) (51) (52) . deep sequencing molecular methods such as next-generation sequencing and metagenomic next-generation sequencing will continue to be needed to determine future mutations of sars-cov-2 but are currently impractical for diagnosing covid-19. most of the molecular diagnostics being developed for the diagnosis of covid-19 involve real-time rt-pcr assays, including those from the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention (53), charité institute of virology in berlin, germany (7, 54) , and hong kong university (21, 55) . other molecular methods are being developed and evaluated worldwide and include loop-mediated isothermal amplification, multiplex isothermal amplification followed by microarray detection, and crispr (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats)-based assays (56) .(iii) target selection for real-time rt-pcr assays. a real-time rt-pcr method is recommended for molecular testing (6, (8) (9) (10) . a major advantage of real-time rt-pcr assays is that amplification and analysis are done simultaneously in a closed system to minimize false-positive results associated with amplification product contamination. there are a number of coronaviruses that cause respiratory and intestinal infections in humans (8, 57) . among these coronaviruses are a group of sars-like bat coronaviruses, including both sars-cov and sars-cov-2, that comprise a unique clade under the subgenus sarbecovirus (57, 58) . coronaviruses have a number of molecular targets within their positive-sense, single-stranded rna genome that can be used for pcr assays (6, 7, 57, 58) . these include genes encoding structural proteins, including envelope glycoproteins spike (s), envelope (e), transmembrane (m), helicase (hel), and nucleocapsid (n) (57) (58) (59) . in addition to the genes that encode structural proteins, there are species-specific accessory genes that are required for viral replication. these include rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), hemagglutinin-esterase (he), and open reading frame 1a (orf1a) and orf1b (7, 53-55, 57, 58) . in the united states, the cdc recommends two nucleocapsid protein targets (n1 and n2) (53) while who recommends first-line screening with an e gene assay followed by a confirmatory assay using the rdrp gene (7). chan et al. have just developed and compared the performance of three novel real-time rt-pcr assays targeting the rdrp/hel, s, and n genes of sars-cov-2. among them, the covid-19-rdrp/hel assay had the lowest limit of detection in vitro and higher sensitivity and specificity (59) . however, it is likely that well-optimized targets will arise from a number of viral genomic locations since assay performance is usually dictated by the reagent design, not the target itself, since the viral genes are present in equal copy numbers.to avoid potential cross-reaction with other endemic coronaviruses as well as potential genetic drift of sars-cov-2, at least two molecular targets should be included in the assay. various investigators in different countries have used a number of these molecular targets for real-time rt-pcr assays. in the united states, the cdc has selected two loci in the nucleocapsid gene as the two-target assay appears to be performing well (53) . one study utilized two sequence regions (open reading frame 1b and a nucleocapsid protein) that are highly conserved among sarbecoviruses for initial real-time rt-pcr testing (6) . another study in hong kong, china, used two targets for its rt-pcr assay; the first used the nucleocapsid for screening followed by confirmation by the open reading frame 1b (55) . in germany, two molecular targets (envelope and rna-dependent rna polymerase) have been selected (7) . in china, at the time of manuscript preparation, several molecular devices had received urgent approval (8) . to date, there has been no indication that any one of the sequence regions used offers a unique advantage for clinical diagnostic testing. however, the ideal design would include at least one conserved region and one specific region to mitigate against the effects of genetic drift, especially as the virus evolves within new populations.in the united states, regulatory issues have complicated the development and implementation of laboratory-developed molecular tests for the diagnosis of covid-19. on 29 february 2020, the fda issued new guidance for laboratories to be able to develop and implement covid-19 molecular diagnostic tests prior to obtaining eua. laboratories are required to submit an eau to the fda within 15 business days after validation. moreover, the validation must include the specimen types (e.g., nasopharyngeal, oropharyngeal, or saliva) that are to be used clinically. although these new regulatory burdens did not prohibit the development of molecular laboratory testing for the diagnosis of covid-19, they did create a lot of extra work. at the time of writing, the u.s. fda had granted quite a few euas (https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/emergency -situations-medical-devices/emergency-use-authorizations#coronavirus2019; accessed 28 march 2020).postanalytical issues. (i) interpretation of molecular results. in the united states, initially if both of two targets in the cdc assay (nucleocapsid proteins n1 and n2) test positive, a case is considered to be laboratory confirmed (53) . a cycle threshold (c t ) value of less than 40 is defined as a positive test, while a c t value of 40 or more is defined as a negative test. a c t value of ͻ40 for only one of the two nucleocapsid protein (n1 and n2) is defined as indeterminant and requires confirmation by retesting (53) . currently, in china for the assays with three targets, positives for two or more targets are considered positive (60) . although some correlations have been revealed, viral loads determined by real-time rt-pcr assays should not be used yet to indicate covid-19 severity or to monitor therapeutic response (11-13, 61, 62) . however, low c t values indicating high viral loads may be used as an indication of transmissibility (18, 63) .(ii) test of cure and test of infectivity. monitoring patients with resolution of covid-19 pneumonia may also be important in terms of when they should be released from isolation and discharged. if discharged patients are still shedding viable coronavirus, they are likely to infect other people (27) . therefore, self-quarantine for up to 1 month has been recommended in some cases. np and op swabs may not be sufficient for either test of cure or test of infectivity (64) , but this needs further investigation. one approach to test of cure has been to demonstrate two consecutive negative real-time rt-pcr tests from rectal swabs; this suggestion is based on the fact that sars-cov-1 was cultured from stool during the 2002-2003 sars outbreak (26, 28, 31) , and sars-cov-2 has been cultured from stool during the covid-19 outbreak (16) . thus, a rectal swab that is positive by real-time pcr testing suggests that this patient may be shedding viable sars-cov-2 in their stools, thereby remaining infectious (16, (24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (30) (31) (32) . however, a very recent study on 20 serial covid-19 patients indicated that infectious virus was not isolated from stool samples in spite of high virus rna concentrations (14) . the correlation of rt-pcr positivity in stool with recovery of live virus from the same samples remains to be fully investigated.(iii) serology of covid-19. members of the coronavirus family have four structural proteins: the spike (s), membrane (m]), envelope (e), and nucleocapsid (n) proteins. two of these proteins appear to be important antigenic sites for the development of serological assays to detect covid-19. serological methods have focused on detecting serum antibodies against s proteins from the coronavirus spike (47) . the coronavirus envelope spike is responsible for receptor binding and fusion and determines host tropism and transmission capability (57, 58) . s proteins are determined by the s gene and are functionally divided into two subunits (s1 and s2). the s1 domain is responsible for receptor binding while the s2 domain is responsible for fusion. sars-cov and sars-cov-2 bind to human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, which is found on human respiratory cells, renal cells, and gastrointestinal cells (57, 65, 66) . the other protein that appears to be an important antigenic site for the development of serological assays to detect covid-19 is the n protein, which is a structural component of the helical nucleocapsid. the n protein plays an important role in viral pathogenesis, replication, and rna packaging. antibodies to the n protein are frequently detected in covid-19 patients (67, 68) , suggesting that the n protein may be one of the immunodominant antigens in the early diagnosis of covid-19 (69) .as mentioned above, rapid lateral flow assays for antibodies (igm and igg) produced during covid-19 have been developed (70) . seroconversion occurred after 7 days of symptomatic infection in 50% of patients (14 days in all) but was not followed by a rapid decline in viral load (14) . serological methods, when available, will play an important role in the epidemiology of covid-19 and in determining the immune status of asymptomatic patients but are unlikely to play any role in screening or for the diagnosis of early infections (14, 67, 68) . however, serology may be useful for confirming the diagnosis of covid-19 (25) .concluding remarks. the ongoing, unprecedented outbreak of covid-19 globally has emphasized the importance of the laboratory diagnosis of human coronavirus infections in order to limit the spread as well as to appropriately treat those patients who have a serious infection. this commentary has addressed current issues regarding such testing for sars-cov-2. for example, an np rather than op swab is recommended for early diagnosis or screening because it provides higher diagnostic yields, is better tolerated by the patient, and is safer for the operator. an np swab can be combined with an op swab to increase sensitivity but requires twice the number of swabs. should the np swabs become scarce, self-collected saliva or nasal washes could be used as an alternative specimen type for epidemiological screening and for the "worried well," who are asymptomatic persons with no exposure history who wish to be tested just to be sure they are not infected. np swabs would then be reserved for hospitalized patients; those who test negative may need deep sputum or bal fluid samples collected. the importance of repeated testing or the use of bronchoscopy in patients with severe illness should the first screening test be negative must be understood. the role of rectal swabs in testing patients with late infection or as a test of infectivity/cure is currently not well studied but needs urgent attention. equally unappreciated is the need for broad screening/testing with molecular testing and/or serological testing in order to determine the true mortality rate as well as other epidemiological markers. finally, the importance of rapid development of integrated, random-access, point-ofcare molecular devices for the accurate diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infections cannot be overemphasized. these short-turnaround-time (stat) tests will be very important for real-time patient management and infection control decisions, especially when other less infectious forms of pneumonia are present and respiratory isolate resources are scarce. these assays are safe, simple, and fast and can be used in local clinics and hospitals that already have the needed instruments and that are responsible for identifying and treating such patients.since its first appearance in 2012, the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) has affected more than 25 countries in four continents with more than 1300 cases and a high fatality rate of more than 30% 1 . a novel lineage c betacoronavirus, mers coronavirus (mers-cov), has been confirmed to be the etiological agent 2,3 . human dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (hdpp4) was found to be the cellular receptor for mers-cov 4 . subsequent detection of mers-cov and its antibodies in dromedaries in various countries in the middle east and north africa have implied that these animals are probably the reservoir for mers-cov [5] [6] [7] . other lineage c betacoronaviruses in bats [e.g., tylonycteris bat cov hku4 (ty-batcov-hku4), pipistrellus bat cov hku5 (pi-batcov-hku5)] and hedgehogs were found to be closely related to mers-cov 8,9 . so far, detection of mers-cov and discoveries of its closely related covs are most efficiently achieved through rt-pcr. although rt-pcr is highly sensitive, its turnaround-time is about 4 h and the test requires expensive equipment, stringent laboratory set-up and personal attention to prevent laboratory pcr product cross contamination which may lead to false-positive results. recently, we have developed a monoclonal antibodybased rapid nucleocapsid protein detection assay for onsite diagnosis of mers-cov, which can be finished in 30 min 10 . this rapid test is highly specific for mers-cov for human and dromedary samples, as samples containing other human covs (hcov-oc43, hcov-229e, hcov-nl63, and hcov-hku1) or dromedary cov uae-hku23 all showed negative results. however, these human and dromedary covs are all non-lineage c betacoronaviruses. it is not known if the nucleocapsid protein of lineage c betacoronaviruses other than mers-cov may cross-react with that of mers-cov. we hypothesize that such cross-reactivity may occur and the rapid test can pick up lineage c betacoronaviruses closely related to mers-cov; and hence would be useful for the discovery of mers-cov ancestors. to test this hypothesis, we examined the usefulness of this rapid test to detect four alphacoronaviruses and four lineage b, c and d betacoronaviruses that we previously discovered in alimentary samples of bats 8, [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] . the differential positive rate of detecting lineage c betacoronaviruses that showed different relatedness to mers-cov was also discussed. cloning and purification of (his) 6 -tagged recombinant nucleocapsid protein of ty-batcov-hku4cloning and purification of the (his) 6 -tagged recombinant nucleocapsid protein of ty-batcov-hku4 was performed using a protocol we described previously 17, 18 . to produce a plasmid for protein purification, primers (5′-act cgc tag cat ggc aac tcc tgc tgca cct-3′ and 5′-tca tgc tag ctc aag cct ctg aat cga agg taa-3′) were used to amplify the gene encoding the nucleocapsid protein of ty-batcov-hku4 strain sm2a by rt-pcr. the sequence coding for amino acid residues 1 to 423 of the nucleocapsid protein was amplified and cloned into the nhei site of expression vector pet-28b(+) (novagen, merck millipore, billerica, ma, usa) in frame and upstream of the series of six histidine residues. the recombinant nucleocapsid protein was expressed and purified using ni-nta affinity chromatograph column (qiagen, hilden, germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions.the rapid mers-cov nucleocapsid protein detection assay, in the format of a lateral flow immunoassay, was performed as described previously 10 , using lfia test strip (millipore, bedford, ma, usa) and two highly specific my-batcov-hku6 7 0miniopterus pusillus mi-batcov-hku8 8 0rousettus leschenaultii ro-batcov-hku9 9 0hipposideros pomona hi-batcov-hku10 20 0 monoclonal antibodies against the mers-cov recombinant nucleocapsid protein (md3e9 for coating and md8b6 for conjugating). testing was carried out by mixing 380 µl of each sample (originally collected by mixing a fecal swab with 1 ml virus transport medium) with 20 µl of lysis buffer for 10 s at room temperature. then, 80 µl of the pre-treated sample was transferred by pipette into the sample well of the test card slowly at room temperature. the results are read visually in 30 min. the result is considered negative when the control line is positive but the test line negative and considered positive when both the control and test lines are positive. if the control line is negative, the test is considered invalid.viral loads of ty-batcov-hku4 and pi-batcov-hku5 were performed by quantitative real-time rt-pcr as described previously 10, 19 . rna was amplified in a light-cycler instrument with superscript iii platinum one-step quantitative rt-pcr system (invitrogen, san diego, ca, usa) using forward primer 5′-cgg aaa atc aac acc ggt aat ggt-3′, reverse primer 5′-tag cct ctg gtc cag tcc ca-3′ and probe 5′-(fam)-tta aac aat tgg cyc cca gat ggt tct tct act aca-(bhq-1)-3′ for ty-batcov-hku4 and forward primer 5′-ccc aga cct gcc cct aat ac-3′, reverse primer 5′-aag agg ctg ctt acc gtg ct-3′ and probe 5′-(fam)-cac tgt ctc atg gtt cac ggg cct tac-(ibfq)-3′ for pi-batcov-hku5. for quantitative analysis, a reference standard was prepared using the pcrii-topo vector (invitrogen, san diego, ca, usa) containing the target sequence. calibration curve was generated by serial 10-fold dilutions equivalent to 10 2 -10 9 copies per reaction mixture parallel with test samples.phylogenetic tree was constructed using n gene with the maximum likelihood method based on substitution model of whelan and goldman model with gamma distribution (wag+g) by mega 6.0. the best-fit substitution model was selected using mega 6.0.the rapid mers-cov nucleocapsid protein detection assay was tested positive in 24 (88.9%) of the 27 table 1 ). there was significantly more ty-batcov-hku4 rna-positive alimentary samples than pi-batcov-hku5 rna-positive alimentary samples that were tested positive by the rapid mers-cov nucleocapsid protein detection assay (p < 0.001 by chisquare test). the rapid mers-cov nucleocapsid protein detection assay was tested negative in all 51 alimentary samples rna-positive for alphacoronaviruses and 32 alimentary samples rna-positive for lineage b and lineage d betacoronaviruses ( table 1) .the purified recombinant nucleocapsid protein of a ty-batcov-hku4 strain (sm2a) of which the sample showed positive result was tested positive (fig. 1b) , and three ty-batcov-hku4 rna-negative alimentary samples of tylonycteris pachypus and three pi-batcov-hku5 rna-negative alimentary samples of pipistrellus abramus were tested negative (fig. 1a) , by the rapid test, confirming that the positive results were due to the nucleocapsid protein of the cov, but not other ingredients or chemicals in the alimentary samples of the bats. for the recombinant nucleocapsid protein of ty-batcov-hku4 strain sm2a, the detection limit was 0.6 µg of protein.the median (range) viral loads of the 27 ty-batcov-hku4 and 21 pi-batcov-hku5 positive alimentary samples were 4.08 × 10 8 (8.91 × 10 6 -6.31 × 10 10 ) copies/g and 7.01 × 10 6 (1.24 × 10 5 -2.68 × 10 8 ) copies/g respectively (table 2 ). no significant difference was observed between the viral loads of ty-batcov-hku4/pi-batcov-hku5 rna-positive alimentary samples that were tested positive and negative by the rapid mers-cov nucleocapsid protein detection assay (mann-witney u test).in the phylogenetic tree constructed using the amino acid sequences of the nucleocapsid protein of mers-cov, ty-batcov-hku4 and pi-batcov-hku5, it was observed that the nucleocapsid protein of mers-cov is more closely related to that of ty-batcov-hku4 than pi-batcov-hku5 (fig. 2 ).the rapid mers-cov nucleocapsid protein detection assay is able to rapidly detect lineage c betacoronaviruses in bats and other potential animal reservoir. two years ago, we developed a monoclonal antibodies-based mers-cov nucleocapsid protein capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay using two mers-cov nucleocapsid protein specific monoclonal antibodies 20 . the two monoclonal antibodies reacted with the nucleocapsid 20 . subsequently, using the format of a lateral flow immunoassay, we further developed a rapid mers-cov nucleocapsid protein detection assay 10 . both the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and rapid assay showed high specificity for mers-cov in human and dromedary samples, as all the respiratory and alimentary samples that contained alphacoronaviruses and lineage a and b betacoronaviruses of human and dromedary origins, with comparable viral load ranges to those samples that contained ty-batcov-hku4 and pi-batcov-hku5 (data not shown), were tested negative by both assays 10, 20 .in this study, we demonstrated and exploited the relative non-specificity of the rapid assay to detect ty-batcov-hku4 and pi-batcov-hku5, lineage c bat betacoronaviruses closely related to mers-cov. the rapid mers-cov nucleocapsid protein detection assay detected significantly more ty-batcov-hku4 than pi-batcov-hku5. previous studies have shown that the receptor binding domain of the spike protein in ty-batcov-hku4 but not pi-batcov-hku5 is able to bind hdpp4 21, 22 . moreover, pseudotyped virus embedding the spike protein of ty-batcov-hku4 but not pi-batcov-hku5 can use hdpp4 as a receptor for infecting cells 21, 22 . furthermore, phylogenetic analysis showed that the s protein of mers-cov is more closely related to that of ty-batcov-hku4 than pi-batcov-hku5 (fig. 2 ) and the receptor binding domain of pi-batcov-hku5 has deletions compared to those of mers-cov and ty-batcov-hku4 21 . as for the target nucleocapsid protein which the monoclonal antibodies of the rapid assay in the present study captured, phylogenetic analysis based on amino acid sequence comparison also showed that the nucleocapsid protein of mers-cov is more closely related to that of ty-batcov-hku4 than pi-batcov-hku5 (fig. 2) . this may explain why the rapid test is able to pick up almost 90% of ty-batcov-hku4, but only about 20% of pi-batcov-hku5, indicating that antigenically the epitopes on the nucleocapsid protein of ty-batcov-hku4 more readily cross-react with the corresponding ones on the nucleocapsid protein of mers-cov than pi-batcov-hku5. this is also in line with the results of multiple alignments for the amino acid sequences of the mers-cov, ty-batcov-hku4, and pi-batcov-hku5 nucleocapsid proteins. by comparing the variable sites of the three viruses, it was found that 44 residues were identical between mers-cov and ty-batcov-hku4 but not pi-batcov-hku5, while only 22 residues were identical between mers-cov and pi-batcov-hku5 but not ty-batcov-hku4 (fig. 3) . based on the results, we speculate that whether a specific ty-batcov-hku4 or pi-batcov-hku5 strain can be picked up by the rapid test depends more on the sequence of the epitopes recognized by the monoclonal antibodies than the viral load of the sample, as high viral load samples (e.g., sm6a) could be tested negative while low viral load samples (e.g., wlp31a) could be tested positive (table 2) . this rapid mers-cov nucleocapsid protein detection assay will facilitate rapid on-site mass screening of bat samples for ancestors of mers-cov that are closely related to mers-cov. so far, detection of mers-cov ancestors was performed by collection of animal samples, mostly from the middle east and north africa, transporting them to laboratories in developed countries, and viral rna detection by quantitative real-time rt-pcr or metagenomics technologies 23, 24 . such viral studies were seldom performed in the field or laboratories in the middle east where resources and expertize could be limited. moreover, it is expensive and labor-intensive to perform these nucleic detection assays for screening thousands of bat samples from diverse species which may be needed to pick up just a dozen of positive samples in surveillance studies. compared to quantitative real-time rt-pcr and metagenomics, the cost of the present rapid assay is much lower. it also does not require expertize on molecular technology and the expensive set-up for molecular studies, which may not be present in most clinical laboratories in the middle east. where specimen transport in hot climate is often a problem in the middle east and north africa, this userfriendly rapid test is suitable for testing a large number of bat samples at the study field. if a particular sample is positive, the investigator can easily collect more samples from the particular bat species for further studies. on the other hand, if a certain sample is negative, the bat can be released back to the wild. such strategies would be extremely useful for tracking the transmission patterns of mers-cov and its close ancestors in different bat species across different countries. it is notable that although the rapid test is able to pick up 88.9% of ty-batcov-hku4 (a lineage c betacoronavirus which can bind and utilize hdpp4), it can only detect 19% of pi-batcov-hku5 (a lineage c betacoronavirus which cannot bind and utilize hdpp4). this limitation renders this rapid test mainly suitable for on-site mass screening for ancestors of mers-cov that are more closely related to mers-cov. application of this rapid antigen assay for large number of samples at the field, coupled with confirmation by rt-pcr in more equipped laboratories, may speed up and allow more cost-effective surveillance studies for animal ancestors of mers-cov. red color shows the amino acid residues that were identical between the nucleocapsid proteins of mers-cov and ty-batcov-hku4 but not with that of pi-batcov-hku5. blue color shows the amino acid residues that were identical between nucleocapsid proteins of mers-cov and pi-batcov-hku5 but not with that of ty-batcov-hku4since the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) emerged at the end of 2019 in wuhan, china, it has rapidly progressed to a pandemic status and has caused tremendous repercussions on human health and life. 1, 2 as a newly emerged virus is normally assigned to a species based on its phylogeny and taxonomy, 3, 4 the causative pathogen of covid-19 was officially named as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). 2 sars-cov-2 has been found to be closely related to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), which was identified in 2003. both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 may have originated from bats and have evolved to be capable of human-to-human transmission through accumulation of genetic mutations. 5 while facing an emerging infectious disease, rapid identification of the causative microorganism and analysis of its genome composition helps in the development of diagnostic tests, therapeutic drugs, and vaccines required to contain the spread of the disease and to mitigate the impact of the disease. it is especially true for a viral disease with high transmissibility, pathogenicity, and virulence, as observed in the current covid-19 pandemic. viral culture, a gold standard for diagnosis of viral infections, is a time-consuming method and can only be performed in a high biosafety level laboratory specifically designed for handling biohazardous pathogens. real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr) assay, used for amplification and detection of specific viral nucleic acid sequences within few hours, has been an important and irreplaceable diagnostic tool in recent years. however, rrt-pcr assay remains labor-intensive and expertise-dependent and is only available in hospitals with a qualified microbiology laboratory. 6, 7 the surge capacity of rrt-pcr assay has been limited by the mass influx of patients with covid-19 due to the large-scale community outbreak of the disease. in addition, the site of specimen collection, technique, and timing of the disease course significantly affect the sensitivity and specificity of the rrt-pcr assay in the diagnosis of covid-19. thus, a simple, easy-to-use, and accurate diagnostic tool is needed to supplement the diagnosis of covid-19 to improve patient outcome, resource allocation, and infection control interventions.serological tests based on point-of-care (poc) lateral flow immunoassays (lfias) have been developed to detect anti-sars-cov-2 antibodies simultaneously or separately for the diagnosis of covid-19. [8] [9] [10] compared to rrt-pcr, serological tests have the advantage of decreased technical requirement, short turnaround time, affordability, lower sampling and specimen preparation risk, and higher detection sensitivity and specificity. serological testing is therefore an important diagnostic tool 8 and can be used as an adjuvant to rrt-pcr for mass screening, clinical diagnosis, and epidemiological study of covid-19.many rapid serological tests targeting anti-sars-cov-2 immunoglobulin a (iga), immunoglobulin m (igm), or immunoglobulin g (igg) antibodies have been applied for clinical use in many countries. 8, 9 however, the usefulness of these poc rapid serological tests based on lateral flow immunoassays (lfias) has not been elaborately studied. therefore, the primary goal of this study was to evaluate and compare the usefulness of four poc antibody rapid tests in the diagnosis of covid-19 infection based on different time courses of the disease. further, we hypothesized that there might exist a difference in dynamic antibody response between patients with covid-19 at different levels of severity. therefore, the second goal of this study was to test our hypothesis by comparing the difference in time from symptom onset to seroconversion between patients with covid-19 with and without pneumonia.in taiwan, samples from patients who meet the reporting criteria of covid-19 have to be submitted to virology laboratories validated and contracted by the centers for diseases control and prevention of taiwan (taiwan cdc) for sars-cov-2 rrt-pcr testing. 11 the samples include oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal swabs, oral gargling, and sputum. three sets of primers and probes targeting sars-cov-2 envelope (e), nucleocapsid (n), and rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) genes are used. in addition to sars-cov-2 rt-pcr testing, all respiratory samples are simultaneously evaluated for the presence of influenza a/b viruses using rt-pcr. if the results are negative for both sars-cov-2 and influenza a/b viruses, an additional sars-cov-2 rrt-pcr test for another respiratory sample from the suspected covid patient is performed. [12] [13] [14] all rrt-pcr confirmed patients with covid-19 have to be reported to the national health command center (nhcc) and are mandatorily hospitalized in a negative-pressure isolation room to prevent the spread of sars-cov-2 in the community. as of may 2, 2020, taiwan has maintained a record of limited community transmission of covid-19 and has 432 confirmed cases. 15 our hospital, national taiwan university (ntuh), a 2,500-bed teaching hospital in northern taiwan, admitted a total of 16 rrt-pcr-positive and nhcc-confirmed patients with covid-19 between january 23, 2020 and april 25, 2020. this retrospective and observational study was undertaken at ntuh where all the 16 rrt-pcr confirmed patients with covid-19 were enrolled. this study was approved by the institutional review board of the hospital (ntuh202003004rind) and the requirement for informed consent from each patient was waived.we used the residual blood samples collected from attending physicians providing regular medical care. all blood samples were collected on the date of venipuncture. if multiple blood samples were collected from a patient with covid-19 on the same day, only one sample was used for antibody rapid testing. the serum samples collected from the study patients were stored at -20ºc before use.frozen samples were stored until further analysis with only a single freeze-thaw cycle.in addition, 58 control serum samples collected from 58 hospitalized patients (median duration from symptom onset, 13 days; range, 1-59 days) with respiratory tract infection or fever but two negative results of sars-cov-2 rrt-pcr test were evaluated to validate the performance of the assay. none of these cases were confirmed to be positive for covid-19 by rrt-pcr during or after hospitalization. patient data including sex, age, date of symptom onset, date of hospitalization, requirement of intensive care unit admission (icu), and date of icu admission were retrieved from electronic medical records. we also recorded the results of sars-cov-2 rrt-pcr test performed using respiratory tract specimens collected on the same day as blood samples. all the 16 confirmed covid-19 patients had at least 2 chest roentgenographic survey during hospitalization. all of the chest roentgenograms were reviewed. presence of pneumonia in chest roentgenogram of all confirmed patients with covid-19 was judged by two investigators independently (wu jl and tseng wp). if there was discrepancy in the interpretation of initial chest roentgenogram, a third investigator's (chen sy) opinion was sought to reach final consensus. for the 58 covid-19-negative cases, opd follow-up records and laboratory study results for infection etiology were further collected. to validate the accuracy of the four poc rapid tests in detecting anti-sars-cov-2 antibodies, serial plasma samples from one covid-19-positive patient with prolonged airway viral shedding were simultaneously tested for anti-nucleocapsid antibody using western blot (wb) method as previously described. 12, 21 definitions seroconversion was defined as the earliest date on which a positive anti-sars-cov-2 antibody response was detected in a serum sample using a specific poc rapid test. time to seroconversion detection was defined as the duration from the date of symptom onset to the date of seroconversion. diagnostic sensitivity of a poc rapid test was defined as the percentage of serum samples from confirmed patients with covid-19 found to be positive for antibodies against sars-cov-2. diagnostic specificity of a poc rapid test was defined as the percentage of serum samples from control patients found to be negative for antibodies against sars-cov-2.we calculated means and standard deviations (sds) for age variables and percentages for categorical variables. the cumulative probabilities of detection of seroconversion for a specific rapid test were obtained using kaplan-meier method.the difference in the cumulative probability of detection of seroconversion between the four antibody rapid tests was evaluated using the log rank test. further, the difference in cumulative probability of detection of seroconversion between patients with covid-19 with and without pneumonia was investigated using the log rank test.all the 16 confirmed patients with covid-19 had at least two (range 2-14, median 5) positive rrt-pcr results performed using either throat or lower respiratory specimens. the mean age was 45.6 years (standard deviation sd, 15.5 years) and was higher for male patients than for female patients (mean ± sd, 54.0 ± 11.4 vs. 34.9 ± 13.8, p = .009). nine (56.3%) of the 16 patients with covid-19 were men. one three patients required intensive care and one of them received extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support.serial plasma samples from one patient with covid-19 were simultaneously tested for anti-nucleocapsid antibody using wb method on days 1-5, 7, 9-11, 14-18, and 21 after symptom onset. 21 the anti-nucleocapsid antibody was persistently detected from day 10 onwards by wb method. the serum samples obtained after 8, 14, 30, 33, 35 days of symptom onset from the same patient were evaluated using the four poc rapid tests. the antibody response was found to be negative in sample obtained on day 8 but positive in samples obtained on day 14 and beyond using all the four rapid tests, which was consistent with the results obtained by wb method. 21 the antibody responses at different time points during the disease course after symptom onset were further evaluated using the found rapid tests (fig. 1) .anti-sars-cov-2 antibody was detected in 100% serum samples collected after 3 weeks of symptom onset (n = 30) using all the four rapid tests (fig. 1(a), 1 the results of rrt-pcr performed for detection of sars-cov-2 in respiratory tract specimens were positive in 93 (93.9%) of the 99 blood samples collecting date.the respiratory tract specimens obtained from 16 patients with covid-19 remained sars-cov-2 rrt-pcr positive irrespective of the positive anti-sars-cov-2 antibody response detected in blood samples. for the 11 patients who had 3 sequential negative rrt-pcr results and were discharged from hospital isolation, the average duration of persistent positive rrt-pcr results after seroconversion was 16.8 ± 12.9 days (range, 7-53 days; median, 14 days). to date, only two studies have investigated the usefulness of poc antibody rapid tests in the diagnosis of covid-19. the studies reported variable results for diagnostic sensitivity (83% -97.5%) and specificity (87%-100%). 8, 22 in this study, the overall diagnostic sensitivity ranged from 69.7% to 75.8% and specificity was consistently 100% for the four poc antibody rapid tests. the performance was lower than observed in previous two studies. however, the time point of serum sample collection is crucial for the evaluation of the diagnostic performance of these poc rapid tests targeting host immune responsive antibodies. studies have shown an increase in serum antibody levels against nucleocapsid protein (np) or surface spike protein receptor binding domain (rbd) in samples from patients with covid-19 obtained after 10-17 days of symptom onset and analyzed using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (elisa) or magnetic chemiluminescence enzyme immunoassay (mclia). [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] in the current study, the diagnostic sensitivity was high and increased to more than 87% between 15-21 days after symptom onset and reached to 100% after 3 weeks of symptom onset for all four poc antibody rapid tests. our study has provided further supportive evidence with a detail chronological analysis and has validated this observation to poc antibody rapid tests based on lfia.combining the results of our and previous studies, diagnosis of covid-19 infection with serological responsive antibodies is most valuable after 2 weeks of symptom onset. furthermore, a poc rapid test detecting igm separately from igg antibodies against sars-cov-2 did not add an early and overall diagnostic value compared a poc rapid test detecting total or mixed igg and igm antibodies. a similar result was also observed in studies by to et al. and long et al., which showed an earlier onset and higher overall seroconversion rate of anti-np igg than anti-np igm antibody among patients with covid-19. 23, 26 it was observed that anti-sars-cov-2-np or anti-sars-cov-2-rbd igg levels correlated with virus neutralization titer. the viral load also seemed to be related inversely to serum antibody response. 23, 24 therefore, presence of virus-specific antibodies is expected to be associated with rapid virus eradication and clinical improvement. however, prolonged viral shedding with a median duration of up to 14 days after seroconversion was observed in the current study. we also found that the 10 this study has several limitations. first, this was a single-center study. thus, generalization of our findings requires further confirmation. second, inadequate case number might have failed to demonstrate the statistical difference in the diagnostic performance between different poc antibody rapid tests. third, nine serum samples collected before march 1 (seven from the first and two from the second enrolled patient with covid-19) were stored at -20ºc for more than 9 days before testing them for antibody response. 20 two of the nine samples were negative for antibody response in all four poc rapid tests. the two samples had been obtained after days 2 and 7 of symptom onset. we could not exclude the possibility of false negative results for these two serum samples due to prolonged storage. fourth, laboratory tests for other concomitant respiratory tract viral pathogens, especially other coronaviruses, were inadequate in this retrospective study. therefore, we could not exclude the possibility of co-infection in our patients with covid-19. cross reactivity with non-sars-cov-2 coronaviruses by the four poc rapid antibody tests was not well investigated (table 1) . fifth, pneumonia diagnosis of the covid-19 patients was primarily based on chest roentgenogram in this study. because plain chest roentgenogram is less sensitive than computed tomography scan in detecting parenchymal change of viral pneumonia, we could not exclude the possibility of misclassification of a covid-19 pneumonia patient with subclinical pulmonary infiltration to non-pneumonia patient. finally, as a non-protocolized retrospective study, serum samples tested in different post-symptom stages were not consistent; therefore, this study is subject to information bias in both clinical and laboratory data.because of above limitations, findings in the current study need to be further confirmed in a prospectively recruited, adequately powered diagnostic accuracy study.in conclusion, serological testing may be a useful diagnostic tool in addition to rrt-pcr for the diagnosis of patients with covid-19. in this study, the detection sensitivity of poc rapid tests corresponded with the antibody dynamics and reached 100% after 3 weeks of symptom onset. covid-19 patients complicated with pneumonia exhibited earlier seroconversion than those without pneumonia. however, the presence of anti-sars-cov-2 antibodies neither indicated the rapid eradication of the virus nor provided immune protection from disease deterioration. our study findings provide supportive evidence for the appropriate application and interpretation of poc antibody tests in the diagnosis and management of patients with covid-19. diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of the four point-of-care antibody rapid tests after symptom onset respiratory tract infections are a leading cause of hospital admission, morbidity, and mortality [1] [2] [3] [4] . at presentation, etiological agents of the respiratory tract infection cannot be identified solely based on clinical signs and symptoms. therefore, and awaiting microbiological confirmation, empirical antibiotic and antiviral treatment is initiated based on severity score and the influenza season [5] . since only a minority of the infections is being caused by bacteria, this empiric antibiotic treatment approach is redundant and can lead to an increase in antibiotic resistance. moreover, empiric isolation precautions are installed to protect other patients and healthcare workers from a possible (viral) infection. altogether, there is a need for rapid identification or exclusion of a viral respiratory tract infection to reduce inappropriate (unnecessary) hospital hygienic interventions and focus (shorten) antibacterial/antiviral treatment.currently, the diagnosis of respiratory infections is usually based on (a combination of) molecular amplification methods and bacterial culture. in our laboratory, laboratory-developed real-time polymerase chain reaction (pcr) multiplex assays (ldt) are used that show excellent sensitivity and specificity. however, this approach is limited by the number of targets per multiplex reaction and the need for batch-wise testing. the assays are performed once daily, with a time to result of approximately 20 h.recently, the respiratory pathogen (rp) panel of genmark diagnostics (carlsbad, ca, usa) has become available for the detection of an extensive panel of respiratory pathogens (21 respiratory viruses, three bacterial species; see the methods section) using esensor technology [6] . this test is a cartridge-based molecular assay to be used on the eplex® platform with a time to result of approximately 90 min that showed a concordance of > 97% compared to ldt [7] . hypothetically, eplex® rp panel testing represents a considerable reduction in time to diagnosis, as compared to ldt, which could have significant clinical benefits. in this paper, a pilot study is reported that analyzed the implications of using the eplex® rp panel for the detection of respiratory infections compared to ldt regarding time to result, isolation precautions, and antibacterial/antiviral therapy.this prospective, single-center study in the leiden university medical center (lumc) included patients from january to march 2017. patients with symptoms of an acute respiratory infection were included upon request of the physician of the acute ward, intensive care unit, and pediatric department. specimens included were obtained during weekdays and tested with both the rp panel and ldt after consulting the microbiologist. information regarding baseline characteristics, infection parameters, admittance, isolation, and treatment was obtained from the electronic patient records. additional information about cultures was retrieved from the laboratory information system (glims, mips, belgium). the medical ethics review committee of the lumc approved the study.the primary endpoint of this study was the time to result of the eplex® rp panel compared to ldt.the eplex® rp panel was offered as a pilot to elevate the pressure on droplet isolation rooms; thus, isolation was discontinued based on the eplex® rp panel results. due to the pilot nature of this study, antibacterial and antiviral treatment were not adjusted based on the eplex® rp panel results; therefore, only the theoretical time reduction in treatment was calculated using the time to results of the eplex® rp panel and ldt. secondary outcome measures were the reduction of isolation days based on the eplex® rp panel ahead of ldt results, the theoretical reduction in hours in oseltamivir and atypical pneumonias treatment calculated with the time to results of ldt and the eplex® rp panel, and possible additional diagnosis found with the eplex® rp panel.ldt viral testing and testing for mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydia pneumoniae, and chlamydia psittaci was performed the same day on all samples that arrived at the laboratory before 8:15 a.m. samples arriving at the laboratory before 3:30 p.m. were tested for legionella pneumophila and bordetella parapertussis the following day. these assays were performed daily from monday till friday and on request on weekend days. the viral respiratory panel of ldt consists of adenovirus, bocavirus, coronavirus 229e, coronavirus hku1, coronavirus nl63, coronavirus oc43, influenza a, influenza b, human metapneumovirus, parainfluenza 1-4 (differentiation with differently labeled probes), respiratory syncytial virus, and rhinovirus. in addition, testing for bacterial pathogens could be requested: legionella species, legionella pneumophila, mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydia pneumoniae, chlamydia psittaci, bordetella pertussis, and bordetella parapertussis.all sputa samples were 1:5 diluted in phosphate-buffered saline (pbs) and homogenized by bead-beating prior to extraction. then, 200 μl of each respiratory sample was used to extract 100 μl total nucleic acids using the total nucleic acid extraction kit on the magna pure lc system (roche diagnostics). nucleic acid amplification and detection by real-time pcr was performed on a bio-rad cfx96 thermocycler, using primers, probes, and conditions as described previously [8] [9] [10] . for the detection of mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydia pneumoniae, and chlamydia psittaci the b-cap assay (biolegio, nijmegen, the netherlands) developed for the bd-max system was used by testing 200 μl of each respiratory sample according to the manufacturer's instructions [11] . ldt results were reported in the electronic patient record. the time to result for the ldt was calculated as the time from receipt of the sample in the laboratory to the time results were available in the electronic patient record.specimens for diagnosis using the ce-ivd cleared rp panel were accepted on weekdays between 8:15 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and tested during the day, as soon as possible. the eplex® rp panel was not offered during the weekend, while treatment was not adjusted based on the results. the rp panel as used in the study was able to detect adenovirus, bocavirus, coronavirus 229e, coronavirus hku1, coronavirus nl63, coronavirus oc43, influenza a h1, influenza a 2009 h1n1, influenza a h3, influenza b, metapneumovirus, middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus, parainfluenza 1-4, respiratory syncytial virus a and b, rhinovirus/enterovirus, bordetella pertussis, legionella pneumophila, and mycoplasma pneumoniae. as with ldt, sputa samples were diluted in an 1:5 dilution using pbs. according to the manufacturer's instructions, 200 μl of the respiratory sample was pipetted in a buffer tube and, after vortexing, transferred to the eplex cartridge and, subsequently, to the eplex tower. if the test gave an invalid result, the run was repeated. results were reported by telephone to the requesting physician, since the results were not reported in the electronic patient record. the time to result was calculated as the time from receipt of the sample to the time results were reported by telephone.the time to result was compared with the wilcoxon signedrank test, using ibm spss statistics version 23 software for windows. a p-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.between january and march 2017, 64 patients were included with symptoms of acute respiratory infection, whose characteristics are summarized in table 1 . a total of 68 samples were tested, comprising 40 throat swabs, 13 sputum samples, 11 nasal lavages, and four nasopharyngeal swabs. thirty-four tested positive for a respiratory pathogen in one or both assays. six samples failed in the eplex® rp panel, of which two gave a valid result upon retesting. the other four were not retested, two because of insufficient remaining sample volume. the failed samples, if not retested, were excluded from further analysis, leaving 64 samples of 61 patients for further analysis. none of the samples failed in the ldt.of the 64 samples, 31 tested positive for a total of 37 pathogens with ldt or the eplex® rp panel ( table 2) . using ldt, 30 tested positive and 34 negative, whereas this was 29 and 35 using the eplex® rp panel. as shown in table 3 , a discordant result was found in five samples.in three patients, different sample types were tested (table 4) . from the first, a sputum and a throat swab were collected, of which only the first tested ldt positive for influenza a. the second tested rhinovirus positive in a nasal lavage, with ldt only, and negative in sputum. of the third patient, a sputum and a throat swab were tested, of which only the sputum tested coronavirus 229e positive. in the two remaining samples, there was a delay in requesting and authorization of the test subsequently. in the eplex® rp panel, four samples had a time to result of more than 18 h. two of these samples were already at the laboratory for several hours before the eplex® rp panel testing was requested, while the testing of two samples was requested after 3:00 p.m. and, therefore, performed the next day (one due to failure of the initial sample).of the 61 patients included in the analysis, 60 were admitted to the hospital at the time respiratory testing was requested. fifty-one of these hospitalized patients were isolated while awaiting test results, whereas nine patients were not admitted in isolation. in these cases, isolation was not installed mainly because of low clinical suspicion of a pathogen requiring isolation. one of these nine patients needed isolation, since the eplex® rp panel tested positive for influenza a (3 days ahead of ldt).the tests showed that 19 out of 51 patients admitted in isolation had a respiratory pathogen requiring isolation. of the remaining 32 patients, one died before test results became available and, for one patient, the duration of isolation was unknown, leaving 30 patients for further analysis. in 14 of these, isolation was discontinued based on the eplex® rp panel results ahead of the ldt results. this resulted in a total reduction of 21 isolation days, with a median reduction of 2 days (range 1-4 days) per patient. in eight of the remaining patients, isolation was discontinued when the ldt results became available. in the other eight patients, of which three were children, isolation was not withdrawn at the moment ldt results were reported.a total of 50 out of the 61 patients received antiviral or antibacterial treatment during hospitalization. oseltamivir treatment was initiated in 19 patients awaiting test results, of which five tested positive for influenza a. in the 14 influenza eplex® rp panel negative patients, oseltamivir could have been stopped approximately one day earlier (median of 22.59 h, range 5.33-72.03) based on the eplex® rp results compared to ldt (table 6 ). of the total of 11 patients who tested influenza positive, the remaining six did not receive oseltamivir at the time of diagnosis. in one patient, oseltamivir treatment was started as soon as the eplex® rp panel showed influenza a, one day prior to the ldt results, and one patient started when ldt was positive. four patients did not receive any antiviral treatment, of which two were already dismissed at the time of definite ldt diagnosis. awaiting test results, 19 patients received antibiotic treatment for bacteria causing atypical pneumonias. in none of these patients, either the eplex® rp panel or ldt (eight were tested) was positive for bordetella pertussis, legionella pneumophila, and mycoplasma pneumoniae. in theory, in these 19 patients, a median duration of 23.35 h (range 0.43-75.28) antibiotic treatment for atypical pneumonia could have been saved, if treatment was stopped when the eplex® rp panel tested negative.of the 61 patients, two tested positive by the eplex® rp panel for a bacterial agent, one bordetella pertussis and one mycoplasma pneumoniae. in both patients, testing for these pathogens was not requested by the clinician and, as a consequence, not included in the routine diagnostic ldt workflow. the positive eplex® rp panel results were confirmed by ldt with quantification cycle (cq) values of 25.6 and 34.6 for b. pertussis and m. pneumoniae, respectively. ldt for atypical bacterial pathogens (mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydia pneumoniae, chlamydia psittaci) was requested in only 16 patients. legionella ldt was requested in only ten patients.as hypothesized, diagnosis with the eplex® rp assay significantly reduced the time to result (median 23.34 h) as compared to batch-wise ldt. consequently, a total of 21 isolation days were saved and three days of influenza a exposure prevented. unnecessary oseltamivir treatment could have been shortened at least 20 h in 14 patients and antibiotic treatment for atypical pneumonias by a median of 23.35 h in 19 patients. proper therapeutic and isolation measurements could be installed in two patients for bacterial pathogens based on eplex® rp panel detection that were not considered by the treating physicians and, therefore, not analyzed by routine ldt.to our knowledge, this study is the first to report the use of the eplex® rp panel in a clinical setting. it demonstrated a significant time reduction, reflecting previous clinical studies implementing rapid molecular testing [12] [13] [14] [15] , and significantly reduced the number of isolation days. furthermore, confirmation of a single viral cause of infection in a cohort of patients enabled cohort nursing, which increased the number of isolation rooms available to patients awaiting identification of their respiratory pathogen. efficient use of isolation rooms is essential during the influenza season, when the demand for these rooms is high.the rapid eplex® rp panel results could have resulted in a reduction of oseltamivir usage, which is in line with previous studies [14] . results regarding reduction in antibiotic treatment for atypical pneumonias should be interpreted with care, while they are, according to the dutch guidelines, only indicated for legionella pneumophila in high-risk populations and can also been stopped based on negative urine antigen testing. the lack of routine testing for atypical respiratory bacterial pathogens (mostly legionella pneumophila) and the finding of additional respiratory pathogens initially not considered by the clinicians underline the importance of syndromic respiratory testing.our study has a number of limitations. first, the clinical impact of our pilot study was hampered by its design. since the eplex® rp assay was readily offered to reduce the quest for isolation rooms during the coinciding influenza and respiratory syncytial virus epidemics early in 2017, its test results were not yet shown in the hospital information system but reported by phone, creating a bias. moreover, the eplex® rp panel result was reported as a provisional result awaiting routine ldt confirmation. the delay in showing the test results in the electronic patient record might have withheld clinicians to discontinue isolation and, therefore, created an underestimation of the true clinical potential. furthermore, the findings of this study cannot be extrapolated readily, since this was a single-center study during just a part of one winter season. the benefits of rapid diagnostics might be more pronounced when assessing complete respiratory seasons. so far, the eplex® rp panel has been ce-ivd cleared for nasopharyngeal swabs only. however, especially samples from the lower respiratory tract such as sputum and bronchoalveolar lavage can be important to include in the ce-ivd clearance, since our study shows that these samples might have a higher diagnostic yield. however, in both our previous and current study, several different sample types were tested, with good results [7] . nevertheless, the eplex® rp panel had a failure rate of nearly 10%, in two cases due to internal control failure, while none of the ldt failed. overall, the eplex® rp panel results showed excellent concordance with our ldt; only three ldt positives (all with cq values > 30) could not be detected using the eplex® rp panel. this is in line with our previous findings reported by nijhuis et al. [7] . the eplex® rp panel is based on syndromic testing and has a standard panel containing the most common respiratory pathogens that are requested by the physician. however, the eplex® rp panel is not complete, especially when caring for immunocompromised patients. in that case, additional ldt testing for legionella species, cytomegalovirus, herpesvirus, toxoplasmosis, and fungal pathogens would still be necessary. compared to ldt, eplex® rp panel testing is more expensive regarding reagents and consumables, but cheaper with respect to hands-on time. in addition, rapid diagnostics will result in a cost reduction in the clinical departments, as demonstrated previously [16] .in conclusion, diagnosis of respiratory infections with the eplex® rp assay resulted in a significant reduction in the time to result compared to ldt, which causes a reduction in isolation days and theoretically improved treatment regimens. because of these advantages, we assume that this rapid diagnostic molecular assay will be of added value for ongoing improvement in patient care.in december 2019, an outbreak of an unexplained pneumonia originated from the city of wuhan, hubei province, china (huang et al., 2020; guan et al., 2020) . after the initial outbreak, a novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) was quickly identified as the etiological agent, and the associated disease defined as covid-19 (named as an acronym from co-rona vi-rus d-isease, where 19 stands for the year the virus was firstly detected). the exponential growth of affected individuals led the world health organization (who) declaring a global pandemic on the march 11, 2020 (huang et al., 2020) , with 3,002,303 confirmed cases and 208,131 deaths worldwide as of the april 27, 2020, with many more anticipated. the utilization of direct molecular diagnostic testing based on sequencing of sars-cov-2, has been critical in identifying infected individuals. however, as lock down measures have begun to bite, there has been a race to develop and approve tests with a different purpose, to assess not current viral infection but rather immunity to severe sars-cov-2 to facilitate a return to work. however, antibody testing may also be relevant in our critical evaluation of the disease including: i) understanding the kinetics of the immune response to infection ii) understanding the immune response relative to disease severity and timeline iii) understanding whether cross-reactivity with other coronaviruses leads to cross-protection, iv) clarifying whether infection protects from future infection and how long will immunity last and v) what are the correlates of protection that can guide public health measures. in addition to these critical questions, immediate clinical applications would include i) diagnosis and triage of patients who seek medical attention in the later phases of the disease, ii) contact tracing; iii) stratifying workforces and patients if immunity shown to be lasting and iv) sero-epidemiological studies to understand the extent of covid-19 spread.an understanding of the application and diagnostic performance of the different testing approaches for sars-cov-2 is essential in the fight against this pandemic. in our own field, these tests are believed by many to be one of the milestones for the recommencement of clinical activity. the recent eshre (www.eshre.eu/home/covid19wg) position statement highlighted the current lack of understanding in the field of in-vitro diagnostic assays and in particular serological testing, and the asrm (www.asrm.org/news-and-publications/covid-19) have called for healthcare providers to be aware of the limitations of these tests. the purpose of this review was to provide an overview of current diagnostic approaches for sars-cov-2 and in particular highlight the issues with serological testing with the objective of providing a clear guide to clinicians on the assays currently available.a literature search was carried out for studies that focused on the diagnostic and serological testing for sars-cov-2, using the keywords coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), and covid-19. pubmed, google scholar and embase databases were searched without language restrictions from inception through to april 16, 2020 and updated on may 15, 2020. given the rapidly developing field and rapid dissemination of scientific findings with respect to covid-19 the preprint servers for both health sciences (medrxiv) and biology (biorxiv) databases were also performed. additional journal articles were identified from the bibliographies of included studies. for the main objective of this review, all original studies reporting on the sensitivity and/or specificity of antibodies against sars-cov-2 were included in the analysis.more than 20,000 articles have been published on sars-cov-2, of which 4,182 articles were related to coronavirus and antibodies or serology. after screening of title and abstract, 887 full text studies were retrieved with 66 studies meeting the inclusion criteria and reporting data on test sensitivity and specificity, as summarized in table 1 .coronaviruses (cov) belong to the subfamily coronavirinae in the family of coronaviridae of the order nidovirales. in this subfamily four genera are included: alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, gammacoronavirus, and deltacoronavirus. the genome of the virus is a single-stranded positivesense rna (+ssrna) (~30 kb) with 5′-cap structure and 3′-poly-a tail. the genome and subgenomes of a typical coronavirus may present six open reading frames (orfs) or even more.the first orfs (orf1a/b), encompass approximately 66% of the whole genome and encode 16 nonstructural proteins (nsp1-16), which are mainly involved in replication of covs. other orfs encompassing one-third of the genome near the 3′terminus encode the main structural proteins: spike (s), membrane (m), envelope (e), and nucleocapsid (n) proteins (chen et al., 2020a) .the different coronaviruses exhibit 54% identity of the whole rna, with 58% identity on the nonstructural proteins-coding region and 43% identity on the structural protein-coding region.sequence analysis shows that the new coronavirus incorporates the typical genome structure of cov and belongs to the cluster of betac-cov that includes bat-sars-like (sl)-zc45, bat-sl zxc21, sars-cov, and mers-cov. based on the phylogenetic tree of covs, 2019-ncov is more closely related to bat-sl-cov zc45 and bat-sl-cov zxc21 and more distantly related to sars-cov (chen et al., 2020a) four principal structural proteins are essential for virion assembly and its associated infective capacity. homotrimers of s proteins make up the spikes on the viral surface and they are responsible for attachment to receptors on the host cells. the m protein has three transmembrane domains and it shapes the virions, promotes membrane curvature, and covers the nucleocapsid. the e protein participates in virus assembly and release and is involved in viral pathogenesis. the n protein presents two domains, both of which can bind virus rna genome via different mechanisms.the n protein binds to nsp3 protein to help tether the genome to replication-transcription complex and package the encapsidated genome into virions. n protein is also an antagonist of interferon and viral encoded repressor of rna interference, which may be beneficial for the viral replication.the database held by the foundation for innovative new diagnostics, which is the who collaborating centre for laboratory strengthening and diagnostic technology evaluation, on the 22 may 2019 contained 560 sars-cov-2 laboratory tests for the diagnosis of covid-19. this comprises 273 molecular assays and 287 immunoassays. excluding those intended for research use only, 152 of these are molecular assays and 211 immunoassays are ce-ivd marked. there are principally two types of tests available for covid19; viral tests and antibody tests. the viral tests are direct tests as they are designed to detect the virus and therefore reflect current infection. in contrast, the antibody tests are indirect tests, as they do not detect the virus, but rather ascertain established seroconversion to previous infection, or early seroconversion to ongoing infection.the recommended test for sars-cov-2 infection diagnosis is by detecting the viral rna with nucleic acid amplification tests (naat), such as rt-pcr (www.ecdc.europa.eu). in areas with widespread community transmission of sars-cov-2 and when laboratory resources are limited, detection by rt-pcr of a single discriminatory target is considered sufficient. there are however, still specific technical considerations for laboratory testing, including specimen collection (variable collection methods), which samples to collect (upper or lower respiratory tract biospecimens, or other samples), time of collection in relation to course of disease and the availability of different laboratory test methods and kits (not all of which may be standardized or approved by authorities such as the food and drug administration). then there are the infrastructure considerations, are the approved laboratory facilities and trained manpower available, can the methodology be rapidly scaled up, and how are test results interpreted and false negatives excluded?these issues have been faced by the whole scientific community, with a collective response to develop guidance. the currently used protocol was developed and optimized for the detection of the novel coronavirus at the charité university hospital, in collaboration with several other laboratories in germany, the netherlands, china, france, uk and belgium (corman et al., 2020) . additionally, the existing protocol was further optimized by the center for disease control (cdc) in the united states through the comprehensive comparison and validation of alternative available kits for nucleic acid extraction and the use of alternative probe and primer sets for efficient sars-cov-2 detection in clinical samples (www.cdc.gov/coronavirus). with similar approaches undertaken by other national authorities as they continue to scale up provision for laboratories not using ce marked assays (www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/). the importance and variability of specimen collection was initially highlighted on comparison of the positive rates of pharyngeal, nasal, blood, sputum, feces, urine, brochoalveolar lavage fluid and fibrobronchoscope brush biopsy of patients with confirmed covid-19 (zou et al., 2019) . at present the cdc recommend collecting and testing an upper respiratory specimen, with a nasopharyngeal specimen the preferred choice for swab-based sars-cov-2 testing. when collection of a nasopharyngeal swab is not possible, the following are acceptable alternatives; an oropharyngeal specimen, a nasal mid-turbinate (using a flocked tapered swab), an anterior nares (nasal swab) specimen (using a flocked or spun polyester swab) or a nasopharyngeal wash/aspirate or nasal aspirate specimen. for those having invasive procedures lower respiratory tract specimens are also recommended if available. although detected in other specimens like blood and stools these were generally less reliable than from respiratory specimens.at present it is recommended that specimens should be collected as soon as possible once a decision has been made to pursue sars-cov-2 testing, regardless of the time of symptom onset. the viral load in throat swabs is greatest at the time of viral onset and decrease monotonically thereafter (zou et al., 2019; . analysis of these temporal dynamics suggests that viral shedding may begin 2 to 3 days before the appearance of the first symptoms facilitating pre-symptomatic or asymptomatic transmission . covs have a number of molecular targets within their positive-sense, single-stranded rna genome that can be used for rt-pcr assays. the who have provided primers for the genes which encode the structural proteins of the viral envelope (e) and the nucleocapsid (n), and for the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), which is a key part of the virus's replication machinery that makes copies of its rna genome (corman et al., 2020) .however, there has been no demonstration that any one of these three (e, n or rdrp) sequences may offer an advantage for clinical diagnostic testing, with different targets being preferred by different authorities. for example, the public health england assay employs two probes against rdrp with one being a pan sarbeco-probe which will detect 2019-ncov, sars-cov and bat_sars-related covs while the second probe is specific to 2019-ncov. continued refinement of these naat assays is ongoing to facilitate their upscaling, while maintaining laboratory safety, a low-cost and high-sensitivity (won et al., 2020) .great efforts have been carried out in order to develop tests for rapid detection of sars-cov-2 antigens. antigen detection tests are designed to directly detect viral particles in biological samples like nasopharyngeal secretions. several rapid antigen tests have been proposed (diao et al., 2020) however, the principal concern is the false negative rate due to either a low or variable viral load and the variability in sampling, with the latter having the potential to further compound cases with low viral titres thereby increasing the false negative rate (tang et al., 2020) . diao and colleagues (2020) have reported the preliminary results from the utilization of a fluorescence immunochromatographic assay for detecting nucleocapsid protein of sars-cov-2 in both nasopharyngeal swab sample and urine from 239 participants, with comparison to natt testing where the intersection of the amplification curve and diagnostic threshold line (ct value) was set at either ≤30 or ≤40 (diao et al., 2020) . with a higher viral load in the sample, the prespecified ct value may be lower, as fewer replication cycles are required to achieve a detectable signal, however, with a low viral load a greater number of replication cycles (higher ct value) will be required for a detectable signal to be attained. for this assay with a prevalence of 87%, although the positive predictive value was 100%, the negative predictive value was 32% for a ct ≤40, increasing to 97% for patients with a higher viral load as demonstrated by a ct≤30. this would suggest that at present this assay would only be useful in excluding those with high viral loads.whether alternative approaches as previously suggested for influenza viruses in children including the utilization of colloidal gold-labeled iggs as the detection reagent , to increase the sensitivity of rapid antigen tests for respiratory viruses is feasible is still under consideration, with monoclonal antibodies specifically against sars-cov-2 under development. further validation of these technique and similar approaches in larger populations including asymptomatic cases is warranted. consideration of approaches to try to concentrate antigen and amplify the detection phase are however likely to be needed for these methods to have any clinical utility (loeffelholz et al., 2020) .at present (april 25, 2020), the non-governmental organization find (https://www.finddx.org/) have listed four ce-marked rapid sars-cov-2 antigen detection tests, which are primarily lateral flow immunochromatographic assays based on the presence of a colloid gold conjugate pad and a membrane strip pre-coated with antibodies specific to sars-cov-2 antigens on a test line. if sars-cov-2 antigens are present in the specimen withdrawn from a nasopharyngeal swab, a visible band appears on the test line as antibody-antigen-antibody gold conjugate complex forms.the evaluation of these diagnostic tests has however been limited, and their ce-mark means that they manufacturers state that they conform with the relevant eu legislation, but they may still not be available to purchase. according to ivd directive 98/79/ec, to affix the ce-mark to covid-19 diagnostic devices to be used by health professionals, the manufacturer has to specify device performance characteristics and self-declare conformity with the safety and performance requirements listed in the directive. in contrast, self-tests intended to be used by patients themselves must also be assessed by a third party body (a notified body), which for these tests has yet to happen.although direct antigen tests are being registered by several health authorities, the sensitivity of these tests is lower than rt-pcr, with previous antigen detecting elsias developed for sars_cov having limits of detection of 50pg/ml (che et al 2004 , di et al 2005 . furthermore, clarification of their specificity for sars-cov-2 is awaited, given the potential for cross-reaction with other human coronaviruses. despite these limitations, the chief advantages of antigen tests including their rapidity (10-30 mins compared to hours for naat testing), ease of interpretation and the limited technical skill and infrastructure required as compared to the naat based testing, continue to make them worth pursuing. however, experience with influenza antigen testing, invites caution as these tests may have low sensitivity and specificity, moreover, as noted the false negatives rate will be critical (tang et al., 2020) . their greatest utility if they come to fruition may be in symptomatic patients when the viral load will be at its greatest to enable accurate triage.in contrast to natt based testing, where as soon as the sequence is known, a diagnostic test can be built, the diagnostic technology and methodology underlying serological test development is quite different, with a substantially longer timeline to obtain a robust product which is suitable for routine deployment. the principal difference is that antibody tests require identification of distinct proteins that form the viral coat, with elucidation of which proteins are most divergent from previous coronavirus proteins; then identification of specific antibodies to these proteins that are part of the acquired immune response to viral exposure, and finally testing to ensure that there is limited crossreactivity with antibodies developed to other historical coronaviruses.with the previous two coronaviruses a variety of assays encompassing different methodologies were developed including elisa, chemiluminescence, western blot, protein microarray, and immunofluorescence platforms. with only elisa and chemiluminescence deemed suitable for clinical application because of costs, time-to-results, relative simplicity and ability to scale to very large throughput. it is these platforms which are once again being examined for detection of antibodies to sars-cov-2.appropriate thresholds for sensitivity and specificity of an antibody test depend on its purpose and must be considered prior to implementation. for diagnosis in symptomatic patients, high sensitivity is required (generally ≥ 90%). in this context, a slight reduction in specificity may be acceptable as some false positives may be tolerated, provided other potential diagnoses are considered and acceptance that over-diagnosis may result in unnecessary interventions which for sars-cov-2 may include quarantining. however, if antibody tests were deployed as an individual-level approach to inform release from social isolation and return to normal activities, then high specificity is essential, as false-positive results return non-immune individuals to risk of exposure. it is with these purposes in mind that the uk medicines and healthcare products regulatory agency set a minimum 98% specificity threshold for lateral flow immunoassays (lfias). this is particularly challenging, particularly given the scale of validation study required for a suitable candidate lfia as to demonstrate a high specificity if the true underlying value was 98%, 1000 negative controls would be required to estimate the specificity of an assay to +/-1% with approximately 90% power.as part of the evaluation of test performance the influence of population prevalence also needs to be considered, acknowledging that at present this is rapidly changing (brenner and gefeller 1997) .this can be considered as the proportion of all positive tests that are wrong, as well as the number of incorrect positive tests per 1000 people tested. for example a point of care test with 70% sensitivity and 98% specificity, the proportion of positive tests that are wrong is 35% at 5% population seroprevalence (19 false-positives/1000 tested), 13% at 20% seroprevalence (16 falsepositives/1000) and 3% at 50% seroprevalence (10 false-positives/1000).according to available data, seropositivity prevalence is still low. the prevalence of antibodies to sars-cov-2, among a high risk category such as healthcare personnel is 5.9% in utah ( (grzelak et al., 2020) , 1.7% in denmark (erikstrup et al., 2020) and 3.3% in kobe, japan (doi et al., 2020) , 9.6% in whuan, china 21% in guilan, iran (shakiba et al., 2020) .large scale seroprevalence studies are ongoing but understanding the background rates are essential for accurate interpretation of diagnostic tests.the potential risk of a test providing false reassurance and release from being sheltered for nonimmune individuals, can therefore widely based on the underlying seroprevalence and this still assumes antibody-positivity as a correlate of protective immunity, which may be incorrect.understanding viral and host interactions during acute and convalescent phases are critical to be able to understand both the timing of initial seroconversion after exposure to sars-cov-2, and the subsequent duration of antibodies. however, at present the studies regarding seroconversion are being developed in parallel to the assays, limiting some conclusions. the data does suggest that seroconversion after exposure to sars-cov-2 is very similar to other acute viral infections, withigg concentration beginning to rise as igm levels reach a plateau (figure 1 ). however, observations that igm and iga growth is relatively slow related to other respiratory viruses, have been suggested to contribute to the heterogeneous pathogenicity of sars-cov-2 in covid-19 patients (zhao et al., 2019) .the most comprehensive study to date of seroconversion assessed 173 patients affected by covid-19 utilizing an assay developed to detect antibodies against the receptor binding domain (rbd) of the spike protein of sars-cov-2 (zhao et al., 2019) . the median seroconversion time of total ab, igm and igg antibodies was 11, 12 and 14 days respectively (zhao et al., 2019) . the respective seroconversion rates for total ab, igm and igg were 93.1%, 82.7% and 64.7% (zhao et al., 2019) , with the cumulative seroconversion curve suggesting that the rate for total ab and igm reached 100% 30 days after the onset. these studies have also highlighted the temporal nature of testing.as despite all patients being subsequently confirmed as covid-19 positive, in the early phase of illness (within 7-day since onset), the natt test only exhibited 66.7% sensitivity with the antibody assays even lower with a positive rate of 38.3% (zhao et al., 2020) . however, the sensitivity of ab overtook that of rna test since day 8 after symptom onset and reached over 90% across day 12 after onset. among samples from patients in later phase (day 15-39 since onset), the sensitivities of total ab, igm and igg were 100.0%, 94.3% and 79.8%, respectively. in contrast, rna was only detectable in 45.5% of samples of day 15-39. in a separate small series of nine cases, seroconversion was occurred after 7 days in 50% of patients (14 days in all) but was not followed by a rapid decline in viral load (wolfel et al., 2020) . analysis of 285 patients would further support igg seroconversion within 19 days after symptom onset (long et al 2020). collectively this data suggests that there is a role for both tests depending on where the patient is on their infection journey, with the combined use of natt and ab tests markedly improving the sensitivity of a pathogenic-diagnosis for covid-19 patients in different phases.with respect to antibody titres and disease severity, critically ill hospitalized patients have been reported to exhibit significantly higher ab title values than non-critical cases in some studies (zhao et al., 2019; long et al., 2020) but not all studies. in previous epidemics sars-cov and the mers-cov, antibody titres were positively associated with disease severity (okba et al., 2019; choe et al., 2017) . in a limited case series (n=57 confirmed sars-cov-2 cases), six patients with detectable viral rna in the blood, were at increased risk of severe disease progression as compared to those with low titres, but unfortunately, the authors did not measure antibody titres (chen et al., 2020b) . clarification of whether even in previously healthy individuals a high viral titre, and / or high antibody titer can predict disease severity and likely progression is awaited.our extensive search identified 25 peer-reviewed articles and 26 pre-print studies reporting on the sensitivity and specificity of immunoassays for covid-19 with a sample size ranging from 16 to 6001 subjects (table 1) . most studies were conducted in china, with only a few coming from western countries. the overall sensitivity ranged from 0% to 100% and the specificity from 78% to 100%, with performance highly time sensitive reflecting the dynamics of seroconversion. in general, most assays performed better shortly after initial symptom resolution, accepting the very limited time frames evaluated for all studies to date. in an evaluation of nine commercially available sars-cov-2 immunoassays the sensitivities varied the duration of disease: early phase, 7 to 13 days after the onset of disease symptoms (sensitivities ranged from 40 to 86%); middle phase, 14 to 20 days after the onset of disease symptoms (sensitivities ranged from 67 to 100%); and late phase, ≥21 days after the onset of disease symptoms (sensitivities ranged from 78 to 89%) (lassauniere et al., 2020).the range of assays being released is extensive, with apparently very limited validation. gonzalez and colleagues reviewed four web databases for sars-cov-2 immunoassay for, and by the april 4, 2020, there was already 226 immunoassays from 20 different countries. the technical data sheet was available online in only 22% of tests and despite 23 claiming regulatory certification only four had pubmed listed papers (gonzalez et al., 2020) . despite wide claims on sensitivity and specificity, practically at present it is almost impossible to conclude which antibody test would be the one to use. a pragmatic choice would be to use an automated immunoassay that is scaleable, from a well-known established manufacturer, with a complete and clear technical data sheet, which has received regulatory certification issued by the health authority and been validated independently.in accordance with this, the most recent novel assays utilize fully automated chemiluminescence immunoassays (clias) implemented on high throughput laboratory instrumentation. these systems 0.14-0.65). the igg assays also exhibited different concordance during the early phases of symptom onset, with concordance improved 10-21 days after symptom onset. further studies with longer timelines and known cases with a range of symptoms will help confirm alignment of these assays. inevitably we anticipate an enormous number of studies comparing the available assays, with the advantages and disadvantages of the respective assays discussed at length.point of care (poc) immunoassays have also been developed for the rapid detection of sars-cov-2 antibodies (igg and igm). the primary advantage of these tests, like an at home pregnancy test, is to obtain a diagnosis without sending samples to centralized laboratories, thereby enabling communities without the necessary laboratory infrastructure to detect sars-cov-2 exposed subjects, use only finger prick testing rather than formal blood draws thereby reducing training requirements and enable clinicians to have a validated test at the bedside. as these devices are cheap to manufacture, store and distribute, provided that a positive antibody test was confirmed to be an accurate surrogate for immunity to infection they would also be able inform decision making.this would be particularly the case as secure confirmation of antibody status would reduce anxiety, provide confidence to allow individuals to relax social distancing measures, and guide policymakers in the staged release of population lock-down, potentially in tandem with digital approaches to contact tracing.the rapid point-of-care immunoassays are generally lateral flow immunoassays (lfia) . in lateral flow assays, a membrane strip is coated with two lines: gold nanoparticle-antibody conjugates are in one line and bind antibodies in the other. the blood sample from the patient is put on the membrane, and the proteins draw through the membrane strip by capillarity. as it passes the first line, the antigen binds to the gold nanoparticle-antibody conjugate, and the complex flows together across the membrane. generally, the rapid assays have a low diagnostic performance when compared to elisa assays and this is explained not only by the well-known technical differences between the two methodologies but also because of possible low antibody concentrations that may further contribute to the false negatives observed with the rapid tests.at present, 11 peer-reviewed articles and 8 pre-print studies have reported on the diagnostic performance of the rapid assays, these are summarised in table 1 . in the published studies sensitivity and specificity ranged from 9 to 88.6% and from 88.9 to 91.7%, respectively (table 1) , while in the pre-print articles sensitivity and specificity ranged from 30 to 98.8% and from 89 to 100%, respectively. of note the sensitivity of these tests performed in non-chinese countries were substantially lower than those reported for studies conducted in china. extensive evaluation of manufacturers claims on the performance of these tests and optimal timing will be required before for all studies to date, sample size has been limited, with further testing across a large diverse population from a range of geographical locations and ethnic groups required, with inclusion of children and individuals with autoimmune disease and immunosuppression. with extensive evaluation it is likely that technical performance may deteriorate. at present evaluation of the current lfia devices suggest that although they may provide some information for population-level surveys, their performance is inadequate for most individual patient applications.the interpretation of a test for sars-cov-2, will depend on a combination of the accuracy of the test and the estimated risk of covid19 prior to performing the test (watson et al bmj 2020) . a positive direct antigen test and specifically the nucleic acid amplification tests are strongly suggestive of current infection due to its high specificity but moderate sensitivity, and the patient can be reassured that you are confident that they have covid19 and should managed in accordance with local policies regarding positive cases. in contrast, negative tests need to be interpreted with caution, and a single negative sars-cov-2 test in a patient with strongly suggestive symptoms should not be relied upon to exclude covid19. in this situation, it would still be safer for the patient to be treated as a positive and local policies regarding retesting and isolation be followed.for the serological tests, the clinical implication of seroconversion with respect to future immunity continue to be elucidated, but similar principles for evaluating the test result in the clinical context and history of previous infection or exposure is critical, particularly as a false positive could lead to false reassurance and inappropriate behaviour that may enhance community disease transmission.at present natt based methodologies remain the cornerstone of in-vitro diagnostic assays for sars-cov-2. there is an urgent need for development of serological assays with high sensitivity for screening and adequate specificity to avoid unnecessary interventions, and confirmation that seropositivity equates to immunity. at present none of the point of care diagnostics for sars-cov-2 appear suitable for wide-scale deployment and large prospective studies are urgently needed to clarify their utility. evaluation of the performance of the potentially scaleable high-throughput immunoassays is ongoing, however, extensive validation across different populations will be required before they can be routinely used to inform critical decision making for clinicians, the public health community and policy-makers. molecular and serological assays for sars-cov-2 are being developed and implemented at an exponential rate. this suite of complementary tests will inform crucial decisions by healthcare providers and policy makers and understanding their strengths and limitations will be critical to their judicious application to treatment and public health strategies.legend of figure   figure 1 the time correlation between viral load, symptoms and positivity to the diagnostic tests.the onset of symptoms (day 0) usually begins 5 days after infection (-5) . at this early stage corresponding to the window or asymptomatic period the viral load could be below the rt-pcr threshold and test may give false negative results. as well as at the end of the disease, when the patient is recovering. the seroconversion usually may be detectable 7 to 14 days after the onset of symptoms, hence in the first 12-20 days after the infection the serological tests are more likely togive false negative results. recently, a novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2; coronavirus disease 2019, covid-19) has emerged, rapidly spreading and severely straining the capacity of the global health community.many nations are employing combinations of containment and mitigation strategies, where early diagnosis of covid-19 is vital in controlling illness progression and limiting viral spread within the population. thus, rapid and accurate methods of early detection are vital to contain covid-19 and prevent further spread and predicted subsequent infectious waves of viral recurrence in future. immediately after its initial characterization, chinese and american centers for disease control and prevention (cdcs) rapidly employed molecular assays for detection of covid-19, mostly employing real-time polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) methods. however, such methods require specific expensive items of equipment and highly trained analysts, requiring upwards of 4-8 hours to process. these requirements coupled with associated financial pressures may prevent effective deployment of such diagnostic tests. loop mediated isothermal amplification (lamp) is method of nucleic acid amplification which exhibits increased sensitivity and specificity are significantly rapid, and do not require expensive reagents or instruments, which aids in cost reduction for coronavirus detection.studies have shown the successful application of lamp assays in various forms to detect coronavirus rna in patient samples, demonstrating that 1-10 copies of viral rna template per reaction are sufficient for successful detection, ~100-fold more sensitive than conventional rt-pcr methods. importantly, studies have also now demonstrated the effectiveness of lamp methodology in the detection of sars-cov-2 rna at significantly low levels, particularly following numerous improvements to lamp assay protocols. we hypothesise that recent advancements in enhanced lamp protocols assay perhaps represent the best chance for a rapid and robust assay for field diagnosis of covid-19, without the requirement of specialized equipment and highly trained professionals to interpret results. herein, we present [2] . however, early diagnosis of covid-19 is vital in controlling illness progression and limiting viral spread within the population, employed as part of such mitigation strategies to stop onward transmission and decrease load on healthcare systems [3, 4] .thus, rapid and accurate methods of early detection are vital to contain covid-19, and prevent further spread and predicted subsequent infectious waves of viral recurrence in future ( figure 1 ). although covid-19 is generally thought to be milder compared to sars and mers-cov, the full extent of the impact from covid-19 remains pending. however, this outbreak represents an opportunity for multiple governmental and health sector stakeholders to partner and develop rapid diagnostic tests for infectious agents of global health concern [5] .to enable effective identification and isolation strategies, a rapid and robust diagnostic test is essential, conductible in the field and at local point-of-care (poc) centres, without the requirement of specialized equipment and highly trained professionals to interpret results.herein, we propose from a collection of recently published articles a potential protocol based on loop mediated isothermal amplification (lamp).and prevention (cdcs) rapidly employed molecular assays for detection of covid-19 in clinical samples [5] [6] [7] . these, and methods by other groups, mostly employed development of of quantitative rt-pcr characterized by rapid detection, high sensitivity and specificity, and are often described as a gold standard for virus detection [3] . however, further novel pcrbased methods also present enhanced specificity and assay sensitivity.pcr produces numerous copies (amplification) of a gene or series of genetic sequences by using a primer sequence and dna polymerase enzymes to exponentially increase the amount of dna required. pcr is widely used to amplify minute quantities of dna to enable adequate requisite amounts for laboratory analysis of diagnosis. owing to its simplicity, high sensitivity, and high sequence specificity, pcr-based method are a routine and reliable method for detecting coronavirus infection in patients [3, 11, 12] . in principle, such assays are employed following conversion of coronavirus rna into complementary dna by reverse transcription, following which pcr is performed and resultant amplification of dna subject to specific detection or analytical methods such as electrophoresis or sequencing [3, 13, 14] .rt-pcr is significantly more sensitive than conventional methods [15, 16] , and is routinely employed as the predominant method to detection most coronaviruses [17, 18] , including covid-19 [19] . a concern, however, particularly in the current demanding times, is that such analysis requires various specialist and expensive items of equipment, alongside highly trained analysts. furthermore, current pcr-based methods of analysis require (realistically speaking, particularly when dealing with increasing volumes of potential infected) upwards of 4-8 hours to process. these requirements, with the addition of financial pressures dictating that samples to be tested be sent potentially hundreds of miles away where requisite facilities and resources are present to perform such diagnostic analysis, may result in further inflation of the required time and finances to perform such diagnostic tests.loop mediated isothermal amplification (lamp) is a novel isothermal nucleic acid amplification method. lamp exhibits increased sensitivity and specificity due to an exponential amplification feature that utilises 6 different target sequences simultaneously identified by separate distinct primers in the same reaction [20] . lamp assays are significantly rapid, and do not require expensive reagents or instruments, which aids in cost reduction for coronavirus detection [3] . first, fip anneals to the template, and extension occurs using a polymerase with displacement activity (such as bst polymerase), which will displace the product obtained from fip by the extension reaction associated with the f3 primer. subsequently, an extension reaction occurs using bip on the product of fip, and not on the template dna due to displacement by dna synthesis associated with the b3 primer. these reactions result in a product with a dumbbell-like structure which is essential for lamp to establish isothermal amplification as the loop structures are always single stranded and can be annealed by fip or bip. this loop structure formation eliminates the denaturing step, which is otherwise essential in pcr for obtaining single-stranded dna, and also establishes a cyclic reaction between the dumbbell-like structure and its complementary product, leading to elongated products with various copies of the target sequence produced (for reviews and detailed schematics, refer to [22, 23] ).numerous studies have now shown the successful application of lamp assays in various forms to detect coronavirus rna in patients samples [24] [25] [26] [27] , demonstrating that 1-10 copies of viral rna template per reaction was sufficient for successful detection, which were ~100fold more sensitive than conventional rt-pcr methods [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] . of course, however, as with any emerging technology, there are some disadvantages associated with lamp assays. such methodology prevents inclusion of an internal pcr inhibition control, necessitating duplication of reactions while testing. another disadvantage is the perceived complexity of the methodology, requiring a complex primer design system which can constrain target site selection and resolution or specificity. furthermore, as the final product is a large fragment, downstream applications such as cloning are limited.however, despite such drawbacks, lamp is an ultrasensitive nucleic acid amplification method that can detect minute quantities of dna or rna templates within roughly an hour, far outstripping normally utilised rt-pcr methods, particularly with the current demands for rapid and sensitive testing. as the growing number of suspected covid-19 cases exceeds the capacity of many hospitals, many patients remain untested impeding efforts to the control the disease. a rapid, point-of-care diagnostic for the covid-19 is urgently needed, which we propose to be the lamp method of detection ( table 1 ).el-tholoth et al., [32] recently described design of a two stage lamp (covid-19 penn-ramp) strategy, which could be carried out in closed tubes with either fluorescence or colorimetric detection. performance of such assays were not only comparable with conventional rt-pcr assays, but also exhibited ~10-fold higher sensitivity when testing tested on patient samples less tested on patient samples importantly, however, zhang et al., [34] have described the successful application of lamp methodology to identify covid-19 viral rna from purified rna or patient cell lysis using a visual, colorimetric detection. these results were further verified using rna samples purified from respiratory swabs collected from covid-19 patients in wuhan, china with performance comparable to commercial rt-pcr tests, requiring only heating and visual inspection. intriguingly, results obtained were also comparable between 'spiked' rna samples and patient samples, suggesting that the improved methodology of el-tholoth et al., [32] should yield satisfactory results with patient samples (figure 2 ). considering the success obtained by zhang et al., [34] using relatively less-sensitive lamp, the enhanced sensitivity of the penn-ramp strategy employed by el-tholoth et al., [32] attributable to a modified two-step lamp protocol could prove significantly successful as a diagnostic. penn-ramp involves a preliminary reaction with outer lamp primers to amplify all targets through recombinase polymerase amplification (rpa), in which all targets are amplified concurrently. after this, a second highly specific lamp reaction is initiated.specifically, the first stage uses outer lamp primers f3 and b3, while the second stage further combines the other 4 ramp primers. this 'nested' principle significantly enhanced lamp sensitivity by ~10-100-fold compared to normal lamp, particularly when operating with purified and crude samples [35] . indeed, the penn-ramp methodology when applied on mock trials by el-tholoth et al., [32] provided a success rate of 100% at 7-10 copies of viral rna per reaction, compared to a 100% success rate at 700 viral rna copies required for pcr methods [32, 35] . to this degree, we hypothesise that the modified lamp assay proposed by el-tholoth et al., [32] perhaps represent the best chance for a rapid and robust assay for field diagnosis of covid-19 (figure 3 ), using the primer sequence strategies utilised ( we hypothesise that this assay is will be a rapid, cost-effective, and simple method that could be applied within the field at short-notice and utilised by users with even limited training.all the equipment that would be required would be a hot-block or heater capable of differential heating. reagent-wise, the costs would be similar to that of real time rt-pcr, but the real advantage of this would be the rapidity of this assay, yielding results within an hour of testing, compared to 4-8 hours taken with rt-pcr methods. the aim is not necessarily a quantitative measure of infection, but rather a simple positive/negative assay for rapid detection/confirmation. we consider that this strategy should be applied rapidly, and confirmed for viability with clinical samples, before being rolled out for mass-diagnostic testing in these current times. this is a pdf file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of record. this version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. please note that, during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.a week after alerting the who of a cluster of pneumonia of unknown etiology in wuhan, the chinese authorities announced on 7 january 2020 that a novel coronavirus was identified as the cause of these pneumonia. according to phylogenetic analysis, this novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), previously named 2019-ncov, belongs to the b lineage of betacoronavirus genus and the sarbecovirus subgenus and has more than 85% j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f nucleotide sequence identity with a bat sars-like cov genome published previously 1,2.initially described in china, the coronavirus disease (covid-19) caused by sars-cov-2 rapidly gained ground and evidence of human-to-human transmission rose. on january 30, who declared covid-19 outbreak a public health emergency of international concern and the disease has now spread worldwide. highly sensitive and specific tests are crucial to identify and manage covid-19 patients and implement control measures to limit the outbreak. real the aim of this study was to assess the performances of covid-19 ag respi-strip as a frontline testing in comparison to molecular technique.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f nasopharyngeal swab specimens were collected from samples received at the microbiology department of the cliniques universitaires saint-luc hospital, a tertiary hospital of more than 900 beds in brussels, between april 6 and april 21 2020. samples were selected at random. if the rapid antigen test was not performed immediately, samples were stored at 4°c until the test. in a second time, some samples were ultracentrifuged at 31510g for 2 hours at 4°c. after discarding the supernatant, the 150 µl of residual sample were vortexed and analyzed by the rapid test. the criteria used for the performance assessment of covid-19 ag respi-strip were sensitivity and specificity. rt-qpcr was considered as the gold standard for this evaluation, therefore positive and negative samples by molecular techniques were considered to be true positive and true negative samples, respectively. the overall percentage of agreement and cohen's kappa coefficient (κ) were used to evaluate assay agreement. analyses were performed using graphpad prism 7.0 (graphpad prism software inc., san diego, california) and medcalc 19.2.0 (medcalc software ltd, ostend, belgium).we collected 148 nasopharyngeal samples from 148 patients. the median age of the study population was 57.5 (range: 0-94) with a sex ratio of 0.8 (64 men and 84 women). according in the ongoing pandemic context of covid-19, diagnostic testing for sars-cov-2 is crucial in order to limit the spread of the virus as well as appropriately manage infected patients.different diagnostic test manufacturers have developed rapid tests based on sars-cov-2 proteins detection in respiratory samples. however, the analytical performances of these rapid antigenic tests depend on different factors including the viral load, the quality of the specimen and how it is processed. the performances also depend on the setting of patients tested.although the covid-19 ag respi-strip has several advantages such as the ease and fast achievement of the test, the rapid answer, the lower cost and the non-requirement of special equipment or skills compared with molecular techniques, data presented here suggested that this rapid test is suffering from poor sensitivity. the rapid antigen detection test is able to detect sars-cov-2 with high sensitivity in nasopharyngeal samples with high viral load equivalent at least to 1.7 x 10 5 copies/ml (ct <25), but the sensitivity declines substantially when the viral load decreases with ct values over 30, equivalent to 9.4 x 10 3 copies/ml, which is often the case in patients suffering of covid-19. actually, in our study, while the specificity was 100%, the overall sensitivity of the covid-19 ag respi-strip was 30.2%. this lack of sensitivity of rapid diagnostic tests for virus detection was already observed during the influenza a (h1n1) pandemic 5. ensuring accurate diagnosis is essential to limit the spread of the virus. the poor sensitivity of the covid-19 ag respi-strip leads to false negative results, which in these times of pandemic can be of great consequence. this rapid test was thought to be used as a first line covid-19 diagnostic test in belgium in order to possibility reduce the number of rt-qpcr testing in case of positive results, but requiring confirmation for negative results. however, because negative results cannot rule out sars-cov-2 infection, this test is of little use in a j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f log (copies/ml)internet connectivity has opened the door to new techniques for disease detection worldwide1. these ideas have been applied to influenza, given its annual occurrence and the potential for pandemics and emerging infections2. accurate and rapid surveillance of influenza and other acute respiratory infections could: reduce the costs associated with unnecessary investigations, facilitate more timely (and hence more effective) use of antiviral drugs for influenza, help prevent the secondary spread of infection, reduce the unnecessary use of antibiotics and shorten hospital stays3. over the last decade, internet-based influenza surveillance systems have been developed and deployed nationally in australia, the united states and canada and 10 countries in europe4 , 5 , 6. these systems have pioneered the ability to involve individual volunteers in public health through a participatory process; influenza and acute respiratory illness-related symptoms are collected from community members who voluntarily report their health status on a weekly basis via web and mobile apps. data from these systems have demonstrated the potential to better understand acute respiratory illness in the population by detecting trends early and at the point of contact, piecing together real-time patterns of disease spread, identifying important subpopulations, monitoring the course of an epidemic or pandemic, and helping to target prevention and control efforts. however, none of these internet-based systems employ molecular diagnostics to rapidly confirm the viral cause of illness, which is important because the clinical presentation of influenza is similar to illness caused by other respiratory pathogens7.new detection technologies are rapidly emerging for home-based and point of care diagnosis; they harness real-time polymerase chain reaction as well as newer techniques for high sensitivity and specificity molecular detection8 , 9. in all of these technologies, there are common threads needing investigation, with respect to the types of specimens, both in regards to feasibility of viral detection as well as the willingness and capability of individuals to generate the sample on their own. specimens for molecular detection of acute respiratory infections generally consist of nasopharyngeal wash and aspirate as the gold standard, however there are safety concerns for lay volunteers to collect this type of specimen at home10. nasal swabs have been successfully used by volunteers to collect viable samples for influenza culture at home, at first for individuals whom were classified by nurses to have 'colds and flu' 11 , 27. further, nasal self sampling has been used as part of population-based surveillance of respiratory virus infections and compared to contemporaneous clinical surveillance specimens and general practitioner sampling in some european cohorts 26 , 28. to date, none of these systems have considered other specimen types, or reported how individuals' symptoms were linked to detected infection.while nasal swabs are easy to use, the non-invasive nature of oral specimen collection makes it an easier and more convenient and thus preferable alternative to nasal swabs15 , 16. oral specimens have been widely used to obtain genetic material for direct-to-consumer medical tests14. as well, although the literature is sparse, oral specimens have been shown to be reliable in the detection of certain respiratory pathogens. saliva were found to be accurate and reliable in the detection of h1n1 and comparable to the nasopharyngeal swab18. oral specimens have also been found to be effective in the detection of sars, measles and beta-hemolytic streptococcus in pediatric patients12 , 13 , 15 , 16 , 17. others have found oral specimens to be inferior to nasal swabs in the detection of respiratory viruses, but still suitable in settings where obtaining a nasal swab would be impractical21. beyond specimen type, community participation in analysis and specimen collection for flu surveillance is also unexplored. academic and commercial entities have demonstrated19 , 20 , 21 that home sample collection is feasible from the community and at scale for genomic, microbiome and std testing23 , 24, however the utility and format of what information should be communicated back to individuals, in order to be useful to impact public health behaviors is a related and open question.in sum, while there have been some efforts to use nasal swabs for self-collection of specimens and surveillance of acute respiratory infection at scale, the work reported here adds to these existing efforts by considering important questions of utility of different specimen types, linking of individual participatory symptom reports to specimen types, and how the resulting surveillance information can be used at an individual level. to address these needs, we developed the goviral platform. this platform is designed to acquire community generated diagnostic samples and couple them with other contemporaneous information such as participatory syndromic reports. thus, goviral enables us to test: 1) the types of samples that individuals are able to and willing to generate in their own homes in a timely fashion when they have an acute respiratory infection along with and appropriate processing methods, 2) how user-generated diagnostic information corresponds to self-reported symptoms and 3) reception and use of the information by the public. herein we report results from an initial deployment during the 2013-2014 influenza season participant recruitment and sign up a cohort of lay volunteers was recruited in massachusetts. recruitment was open throughout the study period (november 1, 2013 to april 30, 2014). we used a convenience sample in order to rapidly recruit participants and evaluate the platform during this first season (thus anticipating participants to be skewed towards those who have access to internet), permitting investigation via a more representative sampling during subsequent years. enrollment was driven largely by announcements on local radio stations and word of mouth. paid online advertisements and social media were also used as means of recruiting volunteers to the study. the study size was limited by our ability to recruit and engage participants. in order to register, volunteers signed an electronic consent form and reported their email address, name and mailing address, gender and age. volunteers were immediately sent a kit (see section below) to keep at home. users were instructed that if they became sick with symptoms of a cold or flu, they should perform the specimen collection and rapid test within 48 hours of experiencing symptoms. participants who returned a kit were sent a replacement, allowing them to report a second illness (second illness was included if the specimen was provided at least 2 weeks after the initial specimen). goviral participants were also registered for flu near you and reported symptoms through weekly surveys, as has been previously described6. if a participant reported any symptoms on their weekly survey, they immediately were sent an email reminder to follow the instructions in the kit and submit specimens. instructions for submission of the kit were made available on a report page. on the report page, an individual confirms the symptoms that they have, can view video instructions (supplementary information) for each of the sample types and rapid test, and they record the date illness began, the numbering on their sample tubes, and test results from the rapid test. all participants who signed up with a massachusetts mailing address were sent a kit and their symptom reports were included in the study. ethics the protocol was approved by the boston children’s hospital institutional review board. kit contents each kit (figure 1) included an oragene om-505 saliva collection tube (dna genotek inc.), flocked nasal swab with viral collection media (part number 407c, diagnostic hybrids), and a lateral flow immunoassay rapid test (certest biotec). the certest rapid test tested for influenza a, influenza b, rsv, and adenovirus. for the nasal specimen, we selected a nasal swab rather than a nasopharyngeal swab because it is easier to collect for the individual, and a previous study has demonstrated that they are comparable in sensitivity when using molecular diagnostic tests13. self-collected flocked swabs have also been found to be equivalent in cell yield compared to staff collected flocked swabs22 and respiratory cell yields were higher when using flocked nasal swabs compared to rayon swabs14. for the saliva sample, we used the oragene saliva collection tube which has been designed for the collection and stabilization of microbial dna and rna from saliva. samples are reported to remain stable at room temperature for up to 3 weeks in the stability solution included in the tube23. the kits, along with prepaid postage were mailed to participants at the beginning of the influenza season with pre-paid return overnight postage. we used usps so that participants simply had to return the kits by dropping them off in any mailbox or post office. kits were paired with customized written instructions and instructional videos (see specimen collection section).   specimen collection participants were instructed to collect a nasal sample by inserting the flocked nasal swab approximately 2.5 cm into one nostril and rotating. the swab was then placed in transport media for testing. 2 ml of saliva in transport media was collected. a second nasal swab mixed with reagent was collected and then the reagent was used as per instructions for the rapid test 27. from the written goviral kit instructions participants were directed to the goviral website to submit symptom information, kit number, and photo of rapid test results. customized youtube instructional videos (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gwrmbvfjrsg, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jaq-of8-cya, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1oe4dldiw8) showed participants how to collect the oral and nasal specimens and package them for mailing. samples were sent by overnight mail to the laboratory for detection. specimen preparation and analysis specimens received were excluded (both the pair of nasal and saliva specimens) if they were received and had leaked due to poor packaging or appeared to not have any saliva added. we tested samples on both the genmark respiratory viral panel, and biofire filmarray respiratory panel. both offer a multiplex panel for respiratory pathogens. they however differ in the dna/rna extraction methods used, in the measured sensitivity and specificity (for nasopharyngeal specimens), and workflow parameters, such as hands-on time, time to result, and relative ease of use. previous studies have compared these molecular multiplex platforms including laboratory developed molecular methods (pcr)25. while all of these studies were using nasopharyngeal (np) swab specimens, because of the different nucleic extraction methods in each platform and potential differences in viral load and location in saliva versus nasal specimens, their performance on these sample types is still indeterminate. detection on genmark prior to detection on the genmark assay, dna/rna were extracted from the samples using the magna pure extraction protocol. details of this and further procedure are reported in the supplementary information section. the genmark panel includes: influenza a (subtype to influenza a h1, influenza a h3 and influenza a 2009 h1n), influenza b, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) a, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) b, parainfluenza virus (piv) 1, parainfluenza virus (piv) 2, parainfluenza virus (piv) 3, human metapneumovirus (hmpv), human rhinovirus (hrv), adenovirus b/e and adenovirus c. viral targets in the filmarray are influenza a (influenza a h1, influenza a h3, influenza a 2009 h1n1), influenza b, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), coronavirus hku1, coronavirus nl63, coronavirus 229e, coronavirus oc43, parainfluenza virus (piv) 1, parainfluenza virus (piv) 2, parainfluenza virus (piv) 3, parainfluenza virus (piv) 4, human metapneumovirus (hmpv), human rhinovirus/enterovirus and adenovirus. the result is not binary, a threshold cycle (c­­t ) of 3.0, determined through experience with the genmark system, is used to classify a pathogen as detected or not in our analysis. detection on biofire filmarray specimens were processed following the procedure found in the filmarray respiratory panel instruction booklet. the filmarray rp contains its own extraction procedure and internal controls within each pouch. in the filmarray, dna/rna is extracted from the sample through physical agitation and chemical disruption of the cells with beads. possible results include detected, not detected, equivocal (influenza a only) and invalid. survey in order to gauge if diagnostic test results or flu risk actually influence individuals to change behaviors, participants were sent a survey at the completion of the study period. one of two versions of the survey was sent depending on whether the participant had sent in diagnostic samples. participants were asked about their preventative behaviors and the difficulty of the specimen collection protocols (all questions and responses in table s1). outcomes and statistical methods analyses were performed using r version 2.15.1 (r development core team, vienna, austria). key outcomes of interest were self-reported symptoms (participants could report any of fever, cough, sore throat, shortness of breath, chills, fatigue, nausea, diarrhea, body aches and headache), and diagnostic results for each of the nasal and saliva specimens via both the genmark and biofire systems for each set of specimens sent in. timing of specimen collection compared to symptom onset was noted in order to understand the potential of self-collection. univariate comparisons between symptoms and diagnostic results were performed, but sample size was too low to warrant further analyses. participant demographics and participation between november 1, 2013 and april 30, 2014, 295 participants enrolled in the study and received a kit. during the study period we also sent a second kit to participants who already completed one kit, allowing for second illnesses to be captured. among the cohort of enrolled study participants, 167 individuals reported any symptoms during the study time frame, and from those individuals 71 pairs of diagnostic samples were returned (1 returned nasal sample had no accompanying saliva sample), and sent for nucleic acid analysis. participants submitted kits an average of 3.29 (95% ci: 2.39, 4.18) days after symptom onset (figure 2). people ages 20 to 77 signed up and received kits (figure 3), and 70% of signups were women. kits were returned by individuals ranging in age from 20 to 70.      pathogens detected (biofire filmarray, genmark and rapid tests) out of the 71 pairs of samples tested, 35 sets of samples tested positive in at least one specimen on both systems, 31 were negative on both and there were 5 cases in which both the saliva and nasal specimens tested on one system did not detect a virus detected in at least one specimen using the other system: influenza a was detected in one nasal specimen by genmark (and not on the filmarray), coronavirus was detected in one saliva sample detected by genmark (and not on the filmarray), coronavirus detected in one nasal sample by filmarray (and not on the genmark), coronavirus detected in one saliva sample by filmarray (and not the genmark), rsv was detected in both a nasal and saliva samples from one person on the filmarray (and not on the genmark). the distribution of samples and viruses detected in at least one specimen (saliva or nasal) on both systems are illustrated in figures 4a and b. in 10 cases, there was a difference between results for the nasal and saliva specimen pairs on at least one of the systems, but the same pathogen was also detected in the other system (table s2).  rapid immunoassays performed by the users were not useful in identifying the specimens that were positive with influenza, rsv or adenovirus. none of the rapid tests returned alongside any of the 71 returned pairs of specimens demonstrated positive results for any pathogens, even ones that were determined positive by the pcr-based methods. relationship between symptoms and diagnostic results of people who reported the cdc (centers for disease control and prevention)’s “influenza-like illness” (ili) symptom profile (fever and cough or sore throat) two out of twelve of tested positive for influenza, five out of twelve did not test positive for anything on the panel and five out of twelve tested positive for other viruses (coronavirus, hmpv and rsv). the full summary of symptom profiles by pathogen is provided in table s3. participant survey results results of the survey are reported in table s1. overall, it was found that i) most participants who sent in a kit did not seek any interventions from healthcare professionals for their illness (86.7%), ii) it was harder for people to produce the nasal sample than the saliva sample, and iii) beyond finding out their own diagnosis, most individuals reported that they would find it also useful to know what others in their area have had near them (83.3% for those who sent in kits, 93.7% for those who did not).our study seeks to specifically study user preferences and specimen types towards building a scalable method connecting self-reported symptoms to infection type for understanding community prevalence of respiratory infections. multiple initial findings are offered: diagnostic samples can be generated by the public demonstrated by the high user participation rate (half of the people who reported any symptoms at all completed the kit and sent in specimens), and initial validation of oral specimens as compared with nasal specimens can be used for the identification of upper respiratory pathogens, along with reports of greater comfort and preference for oral specimens. while we anticipate the participation rate is biased upwards based on the types of people who may have agreed to participate in the study, it indicates that while sick at home, people are willing and able to complete the specimen collection. influenza a, rsv, coronavirus (3 subtypes), hmpv and hrv were detected from saliva and nasal samples, with high concordance between the nasal and saliva samples measured on two different detection methods. pairing symptom profiles with the detected viruses showed that most people who self-report the common ili profile did not have influenza. through our survey, we found that most individuals who became ill and returned a sample did not seek healthcare, such as going to a clinic or the hospital. overall, saliva collection was reported to be easier than the nasal swab specimen collection. rapid immunoassays did not show value for community use, compared to the pcr detection of community-acquired specimens. beyond the expected lower sensitivity and specificity of the rapid tests, the specifications for these tests have been determined using nasopharyngeal swabs on children, thus the performance on specimens from adults and using nasal swabs can be attributed to this difference. the different assays, genmark and biofire filmarray, demonstrated similar performance with some false negatives on both saliva and nasal specimens from each system as compared to the other. we also found that individuals would find it useful to know what pathogens were detected in other people in the community. regarding finding out their own diagnosis, most common reasons cited for desiring this information included concern for exposure to others, especially by those who also mentioned they work in healthcare. the results presented here suggest methods for achieving these preferences, and with further studies involving more and diverse groups the power of these conclusions will increase.there are many aspects of the study which can be improved and future research should address. one limitation of this study was the small and non-representative sample of volunteers. based on the internet or mobile requirement for participation, as well as a self-selective nature of interest, participants of this study are similar demographically to those in other participatory systems6. geographically, recruitment was purposefully limited but will be expanded in the future to target under-represented groups. although the number of samples received was consistent with the expected number of individuals who would be sick with some type of respiratory infection, this indicates that in order to increase the number of samples, a greater number of participants are required. finally, while rapid tests were included in the kits and obtaining rapid results is an incentive for individuals to participate, the performance was not specific nor sensitive enough to warrant further use. different rapid diagnostic tests may be experimented with in forthcoming kits, as while the majority of individuals report they would like to receive the results of their own tests within two days, which is feasible with this model, a more real-time test is optimal for decision making.this study represents an advance with respect to the field of participatory public health surveillance systems. to-date, reports in the literature of online participatory studies have been limited to self-reported syndromic information only. some studies have combined self-reported influenza symptoms with serology to understand attack rates in the population. however, linkage to symptoms has been limited in self-sampling studies, and although other studies have demonstrated that individuals can obtain a nasal swab specimen from themselves, we report here that individuals prefer saliva and initial results indicate that it can potentially provide a feasible medium for acute upper respiratory infection detection. finally, via the results of our survey, it is indicated that participatory information (crowdsourced) can be used to generate context-specific, rapid information for disease surveillance that has the potential to impact public health behaviors.going forward, further study of data from the goviral surveillance method offers potential benefits such as understanding household transmission characteristics, enabling evaluation of the relationship between reported symptom profiles and viral etiology as well as spatio-temporal distribution of upper respiratory infection, duration of symptoms and its relation to viral etiology, and impact of these efforts on an individual’s public health and healthcare seeking behavior. beyond a cohort approach here, community specimen collection can be used during seasonal outbreak or pandemic investigations. future work will increase the number and representatively of study participant demographics, as well as employ next-generation detection technologies to improve sensitivity and speed of generating the diagnostic results.all authors have confirmed that they have no financial, personal or professional competing interests to report. 1. do you take any preventative measures during flu season (multiple choices allowed)?  sent in kits (n = 29 responses)    did not send in kits (143 responses)    2. did your illness this season for which you sent in a sample prevent you (or the household member who’s specimen it was) from participating in any normal activities (work, school) if yes, for how many days?  sent in kits (28 responses)    3. did you go see a doctor, or go into the hospital or seek some kind of care because of your illness?  sent in kits (30 responses)    4. what part of the process of submitting your sample was easiest?  sent in kits (29 responses)    5. what part of the process of submitting your sample was hardest?  sent in kits (26 responses)    6. would you find it useful to know the result of what you had when start feeling sick?  sent in kits (30 responses)    did not send in kit (138 responses)    7. would you find it useful to know what others in your area have had near you (such as in the map?)  sent in kits (30 responses)    did not send in kit (141 responses)    8. what would you do with this information?  sent in kits (27 responses)    didn’t send in a kit (110 responses)       during the end of december 2019, some patients having symptoms of flu like illness were admitted in wuhan, china, the infecting organism remained unknown as preliminary etiological agents suspected like influenza, other respiratory viruses, chlamydia pneumoniae and mycoplasma pneumoniae were not found in the laboratory investigations. so, to identify the pathogen responsible, metagenomic rna sequencing of this patient's sample was done. the complete viral genome data suggested, this is a new rna virus related to the family coronaviridae which was later on designated as '2019-ncov' or novel cov-19. this analysis revealed that this virus has more than 89% genomic similarity with a sars-like bat coronaviruses which belongs to sarbecovirus subgenus and betacoronavirusgenus. on 11 february 2020, international virus classification commission renamed this novel cov-19 as ''severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2)'' on the basis of its genetic composition and similarity with other coronaviruses and the disease caused by the virus was renamed as covid-19 [18] .coronaviruses are a group of large sized (100-160 nm), spherical, positively sense, non-segmented, single-stranded rna with genome sized 26-32 kb (the largest among known rna viruses), and known to infect both animals and humans [2, 44, 45, 47] . coronavirus has been classified into four genera (a-alpha, b-beta, c-gamma and d-delta), out of which only two genera-alpha which contains cov-nl63 & cov-229e, and -beta contains cov-oc43, cov-hku1, middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) and sars-cov, found to be infectious for human [27, 44] . the genome of covid-19 virus constitutes 29,903 nucleotides which upon fresh reannotation and mapping of the rna-sequences obtained, presented the 123,613 reads assembly, and was very similar to sl-covzc45-an already known bat strain and sars-cov [17, 18, 42, 46] . this group of viruses can easily undergo mutation and recombination to adapt any environment and thus survive by altering wide host range [40] causing constant and long-term health threats, therefore it is necessary to understand its virology to prevent its rapid spreading and safety of mankind.coronavirus are among top ten deadliest viruses known for human beings with a high fatality rate of up to 36% by mers-cov during 2012 and 10% by sars-cov in 2002-2003 [40, 42, 46] . the current sars-cov-2 has already infected around 1.3 million persons and killing 72,774 persons from over 211 countries, and all it happened within 100 days of emergence of this new virus (who, as on 8 april 2020). international air travel facility and asymptomatic carriers state of the patients has been mainly responsible for rapid and exponential increase of the incidences of covid-19 infections over the globe. to slow down or curtain the covid-19 spread in very first step many countries including india have followed the complete ''lockdown'' of their countries.the second step to slow down the spread of disease is to identify the infected persons as early as possible for early prevention and cure but patient infected with this virus shows no symptoms or only mild symptoms of infection matching or confusing with common cold/flu. the potential of a pathogen is estimated by its reproduction number (r 0 ) which is the average secondary cases can be infected by an individual. r 0 of sars-cov-2 has been told much higher (i.e. [ 2.5) than that earlier human coronaviruses, sars (\ 2) and mers (\ 1), hence potential of covid-19 have more potential to causing pandemic, which has been turned true within short time span [10, 28, 49] . even in some reported studies, the r 0 for sars-cov2 was estimated to be around 4, thus indicating even bigger pandemic situation than the present status [7, 30] . asymptomatic carriers can increase the disease transmission to an uncontrollable manner if they will not be identified and quarantine in early stage. in such situation, mass screening for the disease becomes necessary and hence the fast testing devices are strongly advised to prevent the spread of the virus. therefore, rapid, on-the-spot and accurate screening of potential virus carriers along with critical observation of patients without any indicative symptoms is very much essential for controlling the spread of covid-19. thus, the present review paper summarized the various detection methods available for the detection of covid-19, their advantages, disadvantages and urgent need for a rapid poc detection method, on the spot biosensor their feasibly and importance in presence ever increasing countdown of covid-19 infected patients.coronavirus detection approaches are generally based on the travel history of the person from the affected areas as well as the analysis of their clinical symptoms along with some auxiliary examinations. clinical symptoms like pneumonia, due to covid-19 are highly atypical, and quite similar to diseases due to other respiratory viral pneumonia. a rapid and sensitive diagnosis of covid-19 is still unavailable, although some diagnosis methods are available presently (fig. 1 ) for virus detection, each having different degree of specificity and based on single or multiple target molecule from the sars-cov2. these methods use the pathological changes in the patient's organ by imaging like ct, or viral nucleic acid like rt pcr using one or more gene, or next generation sequencing whole genome, immunological molecules produced by the patient or by the virus in the patient's body-antigen-antibody reaction based tests like elisa and utilizing each of these diagnosis approach has its their own advantages and shortcoming in present scenario ( table 1) . out of these, some methods were already established and considered as gold standard methods which could be replicated for this novel virus also while others are being developed and evaluated for the diagnosis of this virus. on other hands, there are other methods, technologies/devices also which has been developed but pending for regulatory approval and are intended for the use in covid-19 methods are described here.nucleic acid based technologies are utilizes the genetic material such as dna/rna and are based on the principle of their highly specific base paring with homologous strands. genetic materials-based detection and diagnostics are comparatively faster than traditional culture-based methods and very useful for high-throughput testing and also provide clinical useful information like drug resistance, virulence factors or strain sub-types within some hours, but are relatively expensive. these technologies such as polymerase chain reaction (pcr), dna microarrays, and high throughput automated sequencing methods have tremendous role in the routine clinical diagnosis and discovering novel strains of bacteria and viruses and other pathogens. here, the current state of the art in the nucleic acid-based technologies for diagnostics of covid-19, and their future advancements along with pro and cons of using these technologies are being described.the, next-generation sequencing (ngs) is also called as high-throughput sequencing (hts). by this method we can determine the genomic sequence, even more than 1 million base pairs in a single experiment. by this technique, we can diagnose the inheritable diseases, cancer, and infectious diseases. earlier, also the same technology was used for in uk for tracking an outbreak due to the methicillin resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa) [8, 22] with high precision and traceability even in a single patient, while other routine surveillance techniques could not do it with that much precision. ngs helps not only in discovery of novel viral strains on large scale but also provides very rapid detection of these viruses which link with human diseases. the ngs technology along with bioinformatics tools have largely influenced the modern viral parthenogenesis studies and viral diagnostics. this technology also played great application in the present covid-19 outbreak. at initiation of current outbreak of sars-cov2, the samples from the patients admitted acute respiratory distress syndrome were negative for the all suspected already known pathogens, the etiological pathogen was identified by only ngs by doing metagenomic rna sequencing and the phylogenetic analysis of its complete genome generated could conclude that it is a new strain of an rna virus which belonged to the coronaviridae family and was designated as sars-cov2 after nucleotide similarity and genome matching with the existing pathogen's genome [33] .therefore, this technology has great importance for identifying unknown pathogens, and mutation or recombination in the genome of the pathogen in a short span of time, but the huge cost of presently, quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr) is being used for diagnosis of covid-19 and is a gold standard molecular diagnostic technique for many viruses as well. single step quantitative rt-pcr with taqman chemistry is more sensitive and specific. as this technology is well established, and so can be used easily, only needs specific primer-probe designed and synthesized, remaining components of the reaction remain same as used for other viruses without or with a little change. once the first sequence results of the sars-cov-2 virus from china were out, candidate diagnostic rrt-pcr assays were designed and made available in the public domain for researchers. various agencies or manufacturers have opted different set of genes out of many genes of sars-cov2 (orf-1a gene, orf-1b gene, rdrp gene, n gene, e gene etc.), so every assay has varied degree of sensitivity.as per the standard protocol one patient is confirmed of infection when both the selected target genes come to be positive (http://ivdc.chinacdc.cn/kyjz/202001/t20200121_ 211337.html) [13] . while in some reported studies two individual single-step rt-pcr assays (based upon taqmanchemistry) were performed for identification, and amplification of two segment of any two genes, mostly n or orf1b from viral genome separately, others have used multiplex assays using more than one genes amplification in single reaction (https:// www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/lab/rt-pcr-panel-primer -probes.html (2020). although, these methods are very sensitive (almost 100%), but take longer time for confirmation as the test has to be done in a well sophisticated laboratory. the testing has to be done in two steps; first step for screening assay, using the sars-cov-2-specific e gene and second step for confirmatory assays targeted the 'rdrp gene', 'n gene' and 'orf-1b'. the ''positive control'' material used for these assays was in vitro transcribed rna of known copy numbers. rnase p gene detection as used in other most respiratory viruses, is being used as an internal control give the information of the quality of sample collection, rna extraction process. the standard testing protocol as per who (https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/ handle/10665/331509/who-covid-19-lab_testing-2020.1eng.pdf) involves 5 steps, (1) sample collection from patient;(2) proper transportation of collected samples to the laboratory;(3) providing demographic and clinical information to the laboratory; (4) sample testing by the laboratory; (5) preparing and reporting the correct and appropriate test results. testing is carried out at specific centers which further delays the diagnosis and make condition of patient severe. these pcr assays provide good results but on the other hand they are laborious and expensive as well. some studies using rt-pcr syber green dye based assay found to be less specificity than taqman probe based assays. similar results were reported recently in china by patients who self-collected saliva and showed 91.7% (11/ 12) positive sars-cov-2 while diagnosing by sybr based rt-qpcr [43] . rt-qpcr assays have been reported highly sensitive and specific for sars-cov, mers-cov detection and also same for covid-19, but this technology is prone to its false negative rates which could result in severe consequences due to missed diagnosis of covid-19 [48] . the real example is present from the current outbreak of sars-cov2 where five patients were reported as negative by rt-qpcr, but found positive when ct scan examination of their chest was done and recollected samples repeated rt-qpcr, all patients were confirmed positive for sars-cov-2 [50] . the sensitivity of rt-qpcr for detection of sars-cov was reported between 50% and 79%, that too depends on their adopted protocol, quality of sample (time of collection, amount, maintenance of cold chain) and total number of samples [9, 51] , and needs further improvement using synergistic approaches.besides sensitivity problem, rt-qpcr has some other drawbacks such as possible biological safety hazards occurred during transport and sample processing, nucleic acid extraction, and requirement of sophisticated laboratory equipment like biosafety cabinets that is often available only in few main central laboratory [14, 16] . technical expertise along with sample transportation which is inevitable makes the overall process time consuming. all these drawbacks could make the process less useful in case of health emergency or present global outbreak situation. moreover, in pcr we are able to detect not only target virus, but it can also perform co-detection of several other respiratory viruses which leads increase in false positive or negative results [12, 21] .lamp, comparatively novel technique which in process of approval for covid-19 diagnosis is molecular amplification technique that can amplify any genomic material with high efficiency and in shorter time. the technique is based on synthesis of target dna at constant temperature of 60-65°c using specially designed primer sand enzyme (dna polymerase) having strand displacement activity instead of heat denaturation as in other pcr techniques [35] and in an hour or lesser time can amplify the target sequence up to more than 10 9 copies forming a cauliflower shaped structure as a final product consisting a stem and a loop form of dna with many inverted repeats.lamp is a user-friendly technique which can provides reliable, sensitive and specific results in lesser time as compared to other conventional techniques, and therefore become quite popular just after its development focusing its applications in microbial detection [19, 20] . this technique has the advantage of requiring only single constant temperature, and thus eliminating the need of thermocycler and so as power consumption.ct scan is also one of the diagnosis techniques having high sensitivity due to which many researchers recommend its use as one of the necessary auxiliary diagnostic method for covid-19, moreover its results come even before clinical symptoms appear. typical features by ct of covid-19 patient include bilateral multi-lobar groundglass opacificities with differently distributions in posteriors and also in peripheral [39] , along with sub-pleura ascendance, thickened lobular septa with variable alveolar filling, and amalgation [41] .according to a recent report from wuhan, the ct is significantly more sensitive than pcr for isars-cov-2 suspected persons. the results concluded that in patients having negative rt-qpcr reports, more sensitive and accurate conclusion can be achieved using a combination of ct-scan and other standard techniques like rt-qpcr or other sensitive diagnostic tests.moreover, the high-resolution ct of the chest is also proved as an essential tool for detection of sars-cov-2, at early stage and to take rapid and necessary intervention [15] . therefore, various studies recently utilizing chest ct images to diagnose the covid-19 [1, 15, 38] . earlier also the typical ct images in patients infected with sars-cov and mers-cov showed similar symptoms as in covid-19 (38, 39) . as per these findings, ct scans found to be a great diagnostic tool for screening of covid-19 patients especially in the high prevalence or pandemic areas.as the ct scans are indicative and not confirmatory tool for pathogen detection in the covid-19 diagnosis and associated with few shortcomings also such as inability to separate the cases of other pneumonia (viral or non-viral) and the hysteresis of the abnormal ct imaging.serological based testing methods normally use blood samples for detection of virus instead of nasopharyngeal swab samples used in pcr test. the blood samples contain either a significant and measurable concentration of antibodies or virus specific antigens. the two main type of antibodies in the covid-19 diagnostic approaches: different roads to the same destination blood which the test looks for are the immunoglobin g (igg) and immunoglobulin m (igm). the body's way of remembering the prior infection, and how it responded to infection in previous encounter is very crucial, so that the body is able to attack the same pathogen again is through antibodies. igm appears within few days and act as first line of active defense, followed by production of igg to start clearing the infection. all kind of infections are fought through igm and igg. the body's immune response mechanism can be utilized to detect the particular pathogen. the blood test for covid-19 detect the protein (signature antigen/biomarkers) or antibodies particular to the virus so as for sars-cov2 with the confirmed sars-cov2 specific antibodies in case of antigen detection or confirmed sars-cov2 antigen in case of antibodies detection, and not produced for the seasonal flu or other virus. currently, two types of covid-19 tests have been reported one direct utilizing antigen based on detection of viral component present during the time of infection and the second indirect using antibodies that appears in patient's serum later due to development of immune response against the virus (https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/overviewrapid-test-situation-covid-19-diagnosis-eueea).antigen detection tests: find, non-governmental organization (https://www.finddx.org/covid-19/pipeline/) lists ten rapid antigen detection tests for covid-19 with eu approval under ivds directives (98/79/ec), but yet to come in the market due to non-availability of distributors for these devices. however, reports from competent authorities indicates the availability of three such cemarked devices very soon.antibody detection tests: there are nearly 60 antibody tests marked rapid sars-cov-2 that are expected to come soon in market along various other in-house validated tests for sars-cov-2 by many researchers, which can help in early diagnostic at commercial scale [37] .also, a number of point of care (poct) kits based on igm or igg, and elisa for covid-19 showing higher detection rates compared to nucleic acid based detection methods, have been developed and pre-tested by many companies but still not in commercial stage [3] . elisa based detection kits developed or being developed using antibodies against spike, nucleocapsid or membrane and envelope proteins are considered as the one of the most sensitive method for covid-19 diagnosis. earlier also this method using n-based igg elisa and s-based igg elisa showed good sensitivity for sars-cov i.e. 94.7% and 58.9% respectively [9] . the sensitivity of elisa kit for sars-cov-2 is still under study. also, antibodies-based diagnostic assays are not useful for early or active diagnosis of covid-19, due to their longer time requirement (7 days or more) to be developed by the host to provides positive results, and so, the detectable antibodies are produced late after appearance of symptoms [3, 37] and once developed can persist long after the infection has been cleared. there is great urgency to develop an auxiliary method for accurate diagnosis of covid-19 which should be enough sensitive, specific and cost effective.rapid tests are the one which involve non-automated, mostly qualitative but in some cases quantitative also, are used for in vitro diagnostics (ivds) of many diseases already, and now also being tried for covid-19 diagnosis. these tests can provide results within 10-30 min, so their results are considered as instant as compared to the molecular tests which generally takes 4-6 h. moreover, these tests are user friendly, thus won't require any extensive training or expertise to operate and can be used either in hospital environment, in the laboratories or at patient bedside without any difficulty.point of care testing (poct), as the name indicates can be used at the patient's bedside with ease without any experts or trained person to operate. these devices are useful for detecting various diseases including infectious viral like hiv, influenza, hepatitis etc. and bacterial disease in cost effective and user-friendly way, and help in finding the source of any health outbreaks quickly and providing the enough time to the authorities for taking necessary preventive or therapeutic measures. out of many types of poc devices, the handheld pocts are of great importance in medical diagnostics which includes various type of biosensors.biosensor is a self-contained integrated analytical device consisting of the bioreceptor, transducer and a signal detector. the interaction of bioreceptor with the target analyte produces an electronic signal and through transduces which can then be further amplified by a detector circuit, processed, and displayed.biosensors helps in development of point of care, portable devices for sensitive, specific and rapid diagnosis of disease in cost effective way. they use various diagnostics principles, such as pcr involving rna or dna sequences, gel electrophoresis, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa) also called sandwich assay involving interaction of antigen antibodies, and other detection procedures coupled with fluorescent and or radioactive labeling [5] .nowadays several advanced biosensors-based diagnosis approaches has been utilized for fabrication of innovated and novel handheld devices which can overcome the drawbacks of lengthy gold standard detection protocol. these biosensors use the nanomaterials with tunneling and quantum properties leading to enhancement in signal amplification [34] . further, the nanomaterials are having high surface-to-volume ratio which enhanced their high sensitivity many fold [29] , moreover the viruses (target analytes) are also in nanoscale, these all features make the nano-sensors a potential diagnostics tool [4] .nano-biosensors using aptamers are one of such potent analytical tools for rapid diagnosis of diseases with high sensitivity and specificity in a cost effective and userfriendly manner compared to conventional methods [6] . such nano-sensor will have great potential for detection of sars-cov-2 even in person without any symptoms with high sensitivity, specificity and selectivity only for covid-19.aptamers originated from a word 'aptus' (a latin word) means ''fit'' in 1990 [23, 24] , and consist of oligonucleotides of nucleic acids or even small peptide molecules having high specific binding affinity for certain target molecules leading to increase in sensitive and accurate detection. these molecules can be any membrane protein, amino acids, toxins, immunoglobulins, cytokines, growth factors, coupling agents, ionic metals, intact cells or other small molecules. apta-sensors can be easily converted to any specific design through surface activation or modification by chemical treatment to induce linkers and coupling sites. due to their high reproducibility and purity, stability and reversibility under harsh environmental conditions with vast availability of target specific linkers, aptamers are being used as novel diagnostics tools [25, 26, 36] .aptamers, can specially designed and synthesized for the of sars-cov-2, using its nucleocapsid protein to obtain fast test results within few seconds only, and it won't require any sample preparation step. pinpoint's aptamer based poc for detection of sars-cov2 is in developmental stage, for which the developers are claiming that will provide the sars-cov2 test result within 1 min and to be precise in only 30 s (https://www.rapidmicrobiology.com/news/pin point39s-low-cost-handheld-covid-19-aptamer-based-diag nostic-device-in-development).an alternative paper-based technology using waste water as samples has been suggested by kang mao et al. [32] .paper based device based on integration of different functional area like for extraction, elution, purification, amplification and detection all in a small inexpensive, disposable paper and printed with wax on its surface in the form of zones. it is very much possible to complete the whole testing process without any power source or energy, just by simply folding the paper in various modes, thus it is more beneficial than expensive and complicated multistep techniques. these analytical devices provide high-quality, fast still very precise method for pathogen's detection, and additionally low manufacturing cost and user-friendly nature [11, 31] .this technology can act as an alternative detection tool for rapid tracing for the source or presence of causative agents like covid-19 in any pandemic area. faeces and urine from disease carriers in the community, entering in the sewer system could contain many biomarkers of the virus, and same has been confirmed in a recent study which showed that these infectious agents can remain active for several days even after has been disseminated from the patients, if found suitable environment [11, 31] . there is strong potential in this paper-based device to trace the covid-19 transmission in community wastewater by analyzing sars-cov-2 in faeces, urine and other excreted output of human.presently, various who referral laboratories along european commission and member states especially working for validation of various commercial testing assays developed for covid-19, and also trying to find rapid diagnostic tests for covid-19. researches are regularly doing clinical trials of rapid diagnostic tests for finally getting approval from regulatory bodies for their use in public health with safety. all regulatory authorities, like european commission, member state authorities, find and who are working in close association, and updating each and every significant research outcome in the form of product or protocol as earlier as it is validated, and being approved at earliest so that these can further be upscaled for device production and distribution to meet the pace of present demand of testing and screening.the rapid spread of covid-19 across the world has become an intense concern for health officials globally, and urgent need for developing better methods for mass screening to prevent the spread of the virus has emerged. today, only scanning of foreheads for fever using thermal scanner is widely used, but this test cannot detect asymptomatic or pre symptomatic infections, nor it distinguish the novel coronavirus from other respiratory illnesses either. other than rt-pcr, sars-cov2 specific other diagnostic tests like rapid antibodies-based kits being used or under development seems not worthy for mass screening. it is essential to diagnose suspected cases at the clinic or hospital, but results take time anywhere from few hours to some days which is too slow for front-line screening. thus, the requirement of rapid diagnostic tool like nano-biosensor based technology which can provide the diagnosis result within few seconds is quite high for mass screening and need to be developed at commercial scale as soon as possible. there are many methodology and devices aiming rapid diagnosis of covid19, are in pipeline for development and are at different stages. these poct, biosensors and other alternative devices have the potential to become the technology of future with high sensitivity, specificity and reproducibility.in december 2019 a major outbreak from wuhan, was reported in the world health organization (who) country office of china. the covid-19 is a highly infectious diseases and after reporting the first case in china it has rapidly covered the entire world and affected the life of millions people. on 17th april there are a total 2,164,111 confirmed cases and 146,198 deaths of covid-19 reported globally to the who [1]. due to the occurrence of many cases worldwide; on january 30th, 2020 the world health organization (who) declared a public health emergency of international concern [2] . in india, at present the total number of active cases and deaths are reported 12,289 and 488 respectively by the government agencies [3] . this covid-19 infection also affected badly the united states of america, spain, italy and other countries.the occurrence of an epidemic of respiratory infections in wuhan, china, the cdc country office china documented its etiology which is attributed by a novel virus belongs to coronavirus (cov) family; which includes alpha, and gamma coronoaviruses. the virus has wide range of host such as humans, other mammals, and birds. the infected one may does not exhibit symptoms and may remain asymptomatic and some may have severe symp- toms in their respiratory and digestive organs [4, 5] . coronavirus is a rna virus which contains approximately 27-32 kb of positivesense single-stranded rna [4, 5] . like other corona viruses the ncov have at least six open reading frames (orfs) and many other accessory genes. at the 5 terminal two-thirds of the genome consists of two open reading frames (orfs), orf1 and orf2. these orf encodes two polyproteins, namely pp1a and pp1ab, and further cleaved into 11 and 16 proteins, respectively. at the 3 terminal the various structural proteins are located such as nucleocapsid (n), membrane protein (m), an envelope protein (e), and spike (s). these viruses also contain some accessory protein, which help in virus replication. the s gene, help ncov for host specificity and receptor binding, and some may also contain hemagglutinin-esterase (he) protein in their virion [6] .the covid-19 infected patients have clinical manifestation which includes the fever and cough as primary clinical presentations and others are shortness of breath and myalgia etc. some patients may have serious complications such as acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and cytokine storm, which may leads to death [7] . the collection of appropriate specimen is very crucial for detection of most of the infected cases of covid-19. the nasopharyngeal swab usually collected, but in some instances we may miss the detection; therefore the lower respiratory tract specimens such as sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage (bal) may be the alternate choice [8] .in this pandemic of sars-cov-2 the reliable, early and accurate diagnosis is very crucial to provide timely medical help to the infected individual as well as it helps to the government agencies to prevent its spread to other individuals and saves people's lives. false negative test result may lead to spread of the epidemic in the community; similarly the false positive result may lead unnecessary treatment and mental trauma to the patients. therefore, there is an urgent need to have accurate, rapid, readily available and reliable diagnostic test for sars-cov-2 infection. till date, various immunological and nucleic acid amplification diagnostic tests are developed and easily available. various integrated point-of-care molecular devices are currently under development and some are available to provide accurate and fast diagnostic services for sars-cov-2 infections.in present crisis of covid-19 an accessible and reliable testing is a need of hour. in this review we try to explore the selection of appropriate specimen; availability and utility of various diagnostic tools for the purpose of diagnosis of covid-19 infected cases. this will help the authorities to utilize the most suitable diagnostic tool, for tracking the virus and to take timely action to suppress the transmission [9] .as per centre for disease control and prevention (cdc) recommendations the upper respiratory specimens should be collected for rt-pcr based testing of covid-19 and especially the nasopharyngeal specimen is a preferred choice [10]. the cdc also recommended that when the nasopharyngeal swab is not possible the other specimen such as; an oropharyngeal (op) specimen, nasal mid-turbinate (nmt) swab, an anterior nares (nasal swab; ns) specimen and nasopharyngeal wash/aspirate or nasal aspirate (na) specimen can be collected alternatively. all specimens should be placed in a tube containing viral transport medium and transported to the laboratory on time. similarly for serological assay the blood sample can be collected. the healthcare professional should adhere to infection prevention and control guidelines of who and use the personal protective equipment such as, gown, gloves, eye protection and n95 mask while collecting the specimen [11] . if the shipping of specimen to the reference diagnostic laboratories required, the sample must be transported in triple packaging system; the sample vial must be properly labeled and sealed and kept in outer covering of absorbent material (primary container) and then placed in secondary container. after that the secondary container should be placed with frozen gel packs in the thermocol box (outer container). all the processes; including packaging, labeling and shipping must be done as per the who guideline [12] .various studies conducted and have given evidence that the sars-cov-2 can invade digestives system and haematological system along with respiratory system [13] . peng et al. [13] from china; in their study they were collected different types of specimen for detection of sars-cov-2 rna and found highest positivity rate in pharyngeal swab (78%), after that equally in blood and anal swab (22% each) and 11% in urine. another study published from united states, they found that stool, oropharyngeal swab and nasopaharyngeal swab were positive for sars-cov-2, while serum and urine were found negative. however this study is published as case report and included only one patient [14] . a study from china enrolled 41 patients; all are laboratory confirmed sars-cov2 infected. among these only six blood specimens were found positive while all 41 respiratory specimens were found positive [15] . another study from china found very interesting results that the virus can be detected in feces and blood along with respiratory specimens, however the percentage is not very promising [16] .in a recently published case report from japan the investigators documented that when the clinical suspicion is high the negative pcr test on throat swabs is not sufficient to rule out the covid-19 infection; but the bronchoalveolar lavage (bal) of the lower respiratory tract specimen should be preferred for diagnosis [17] . thus it is very important to conclude the final result of the highly suspected sars-cov-2 infected individuals; we should consider collecting various types of specimen. this will improve the detection rate and can reduce the false negative results. similarly peng et al. advocated the usefulness of testing of different specimen types for sars-cov-2 infection; to monitor disease changes and progression as well as for establishing a prognosis [13] .the virus culture can be done by standard methodology as described by kim et al; briefly the vero cells which were cultured 1 × dulbecco's modified eagle's medium (dmem) supplemented with 2% fetal bovine serum at 37 • c with 5% co 2; used for the inoculation of nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal samples [18] . and after 3 days of inoculation the specific cytopathic effects were observed. later on they are also confirmed by using real time rt pcr. researcher from wuhan, china have done virus isolation on human airway epithelial cells and vero e6 and huh-7 cell lines by inoculation of bronchoalveolar-lavage samples and the isolated virus was named 2019-ncov [19] . using the human airway epithelial cell cultures for virus isolation is skilled labor intensive task, however these were found very promising for analysis of respiratory pathogens of humans [20] . recently an indian study reported the first isolation of sars-cov-2 by using vero ccl-81 cells [21] . the inoculated cells with nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal samples, visualized for specific cytopathic effects for covid-19 then these cells were fixed, dehydrated and cut into sections for transmission electron microscopy with standard methodology described by kim et al [18] . kim et al reported that they have observed coronavirus-specific morphology and found the virus particle size ranged from 70 to 90 nm. they also found that the virus is observed in wide range of intracellular organelles especially in vesicles [18] . viral culture of sars-cov-2 needs to be conducted in a bio-safety level-3 facility. the cell culture is very useful for isolation and characterization of viruses; but basically the cell culture for virus isolation is not recommended for diagnostic purposes.the immunological test measures the antibodies generated by host body's immune response against the virus infection or measures the proteins of covid-19 virus present in the respiratory specimens. as virus enters in the human body it's elicit immune response to produce the antibody against the virus, detection of such antibody in infected person is very useful whether the person has symptoms or no symptom. thus this type of tests provides valuable information about the person is exposed to this covid-19 or not. the only thing is that the antibody detection test is not for the identification of active cases of sars-cov-2 infections.at the time of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) epidemic, various reports documented that the detection of viral specific igm and igg are valid for serological diagnosis [22] . xiang et al. [22] conducted a study in china and found that the serodiagnosis of covid-19 based on igm and igg elisa have great specificity for diagnosis of covid-19. in their study they found that the sensitivity and specificity of detection of igm were 77.3% & 100% and for igg detection were 83.3.3% and 95.0% respectively; in the confirmed patients with covid-19. similarly in suspected covid-19 cases the sensitivity and specificity were found for igm 87.5% and 100% and for igg were 70.8% & 96.6% respectively. thus the detection of both igg and igm with higher specificity makes them reliable and could help us to establish the diagnosis of covi-19 patients.in general the lateral flow assay is used in the rapid point of care immunoassay. this assay could help us for rapid and on-site detection of covid-19 especially in case of an emergency. these assays were developed to detect antigen of sars cov-2 virus or detecting igg and igm antibodies against the sars cov-2 virus infection [23] . tang et al. [23] emphasized that the detection of igm and igg antibodies by rapid lateral flow assay will play an important role in covid-19 infections and help us to assess the burden of infections, find out asymptomatic patients etc [23] . covid-19 igm/igg rapid test of biomedomics is such of point of care device with 88.66% sensitivity available in the market (nguyen et al, 2020) . despite the rapidity and low cost of these immunoassays based on antigen detection for sars-cov-2; previous experience for influenza (flu) viruses utilizing this type of assay has limitation of its uses. while utilizing this type of antigen detection test; one should keep in his mind that due to sampling variability and low viral load in the infected person, we may miss the case.serological assays are very rapidly developed and they measure the host immune response against the invading pathogens. serological assay were used earlier in sars and other corona virus outbreaks and played important role [24, 25] . a study from china documented that by immunehistochemical analysis that we can detect the antigen in the lung tissue of the patients and the detection of igm and igg antiviral antibodies in the serum can provide additional evidences to confirm the covid-19 cases [19] . a recent study from china analyzing the family cluster of sars-cov-2 infections revealed that the serology testing can assist in timely diagnosis while screening in close contacts [26] . although who has recommended that the serology testing can be used where molecular testing is not available [27] . however the study from china emphasized the need of serology testing in this pandemic of covid-19 due to high number of cases [26] . immunological tests have limitation to use in early phase of infection because that time the immune response is still building. in case of covid-19 infection we are in early phase of developing immunological diagnosis, some diagnostic test has been approved by food and drug administration of america, but still they are not recommended to use solely for the diagnosis of covid-19 [28] . similarly who also recommended that these points of care immunodiagnostic test used only in research setting not the purpose of clinical decision making until and unless the evidences also supported [29] . even though certain limitations, in future these immunological tests may have critical role in the identification of individuals who have recovered from this covid infection in the past. the test result may also help us in choosing the convalescent plasma, which can be used as treatment option for covid-19 infected individuals [28] .in acute respiratory infection, rt-pcr is routinely used to detect causative viruses from respiratory secretions in nucleic acid testing assay. the real time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (real time rt-pcr) is one of the best and accurate laboratory methods for detecting, tracking, and studying the coronavirus. real time rt-pcr is a method by which we can detect the presence of specific target genetic material. nowadays various fluorescent dyes are used as marker to detect the specific genetic target; earlier radioactive isotopes were used as marker. the most important aspect of using real-time rt-pcr assays is that the amplification and analysis will be carried out in a closed system; therefore the chances of false positive results will be minimized [30] .the real time rt-pcr facilitates in analyzing the result in real time even though the process is still ongoing; which makes it more useful than conventional rt-pcr which provides the result at the end. the recent emergence of the coronavirus (covid-19) has demonstrated the need of reliable and rapid detection, thus in present scenario the real time rt-pcr is the most widely used methods for the detection of coronavirus. the molecular testing is still a "gold standard" for relevant case diagnosis [26] . most of the molecular diagnostics being developed are based on real-time rt-pcr assays for covid-19 infection; loop-mediated isothermal amplification, clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats and multiplex isothermal amplification followed by microarray detection are the some other methods which were developed and evaluated worldwide [23] .for conducting the pcr assay the number of molecular target have been identified within the rna of corona viruses; such as helicase (hel), nucleocapsid (n), transmembrane (m), envelope (e) and envelope glycoproteins spike (s) [23] . hemagglutinin-esterase (he), open reading frames orf1a and orf1b and rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), are some other genes that encode structural proteins can be utilized for the covid-19 diagnosis [23] . in this real time -pcr assay the viral rna is measured by the cycle threshold (ct), which is defined as the number of cycles required for the fluorescent signal to cross the threshold and becomes detectable. the interpretation of result in real time-pcr is based on ct values for specimen; a value less than 40 is clinically reported as pcr positive. in rt-pcr most of time results are 100% specific but false negative result may also occur; which may be due to sampling error or inappropriate timing of sampling [30] .the who recommended that the e gene assay followed by a confirmatory assay using the rdrp gene can be utilized for first line screening of covid-19 cases [31] ; and in the united states the cdc asked to use two nucleocapsid protein targets [n1 and n2] as molecular assay [32] . a study published from hong kong, china found that rdrp/hel assay had the lowest limit of detection in vitro and have higher sensitivity and specificity among the three developed novel real-time rt-pcr assays targeting the rdrp/hel, s, and n genes of sars-cov-2 [33] .it is advisable to use, at least two molecular targets to avoid the situation of a potential genetic drift of sars-cov-2 and the cross-reaction with other endemic coronaviruses as well however, the ideal design would include at least one conserved region and one specific region to mitigate against the effects of genetic drift, especially as the virus evolves within new populations [23] . various studies conducted worldwide using molecular assay (rt-pcr assay) for diagnosis of covid-19 infections ( table 1) . most of the studies were used at least two target assay in combination for diagnosis of covid-19 infections. in a study from germany they have chosen envelope and rna-dependent rna polymerase [31] . in another study from hong kong, china the researcher first used the nucleocapsid for screening followed by confirmation by the open reading frame 1b [33] . similarly cdc conducted a study in the united states by selecting two loci in nucleocapsid gene and found the good performance for detection of coivd-19 [32] .in view of the critical situations of covid-19 infections worldwide, various companies attempted to develop commercial kits for detection of sars-cov-2 rna by real time pcr. various institutes of indian council of medical research, new delhi (icmr) till date (17/04/2020) evaluated the performance of 31 such commercial kits and among these 14 kits were found satisfactory [39] .even though the rt-pcr is a tool to do definitive diagnosis of covid-19, but the sensitivity is reported to be lower than chest ct examinations. however; the chest ct alone does not differentiate between covid-19 pneumonia to other viral pneumonia [40] . another molecular method that is loop-mediated isothermal amplification (lamp) reaction, could serve as an alternative method to the rt-qpcr to detect covid-19. the lamp is a nucleic acid amplification technique, which amplifies the dna in isothermal condition with rapidity and high specificity. this method can be utilised for the diagnosis of covid-19 without the need of specialized equipments and trained analysts. in near future the point-of-care device based on lamp can be a potential diagnostic tool for the diagnosis of covid-19 infected individuals [41] . recently; prof. feng zhang et al given a crispr-cas13 (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats-and associated cas proteins13) based sherlock (specific high-sensitivity enzymatic reporter unlocking) protocols, which is accurate and rapid method for novel coronavirus (covid-19) [22] . kim et al in their study reported that they have constructed the next generation sequencing (ngs) library by amplifying the full-length genes of the isolates using the synthesized cdna and primers specific for sars-cov-2 [18] .further development and inclusion of these new technologies for the diagnosis of covid-19 can provide a better, accurate and rapid tool. these developments may also reduce the need of sophisticated equipments and specific training; this will help us to reach to a wide community for screening as well as for diagnosing them.in a present scenario the early diagnosis is very crucial to identify the infectious cases to prevent community transmission. in present scenario various technologies are available to provide better diagnostic services to the community in this outbreak. there is need to collect the right specimen on right time for proper diagnosis. due to high risk of infection, the challenges are to keep healthcare professional safe by having appropriate ppe kits. real time rt-pcr assay remain the molecular test of choice for etiologic diagnosis of the covid-19 cases; while antibody based immunological test are used as supplementary tools for screening the whole community and confirming with the molecular assay. both real time rt-pcr and immunological assay help us to tackle this major outbreak of covid-19, which impacted the life of people and global economy. the rapid test kits are in demand for providing rapid diagnostic services in an emergency situation as well at bed-side to the patients. in summary the proper utilization of available test in alone or in combination; we can detect the covid-19 cases as soon as possible and saves lives of human being.no funding sources.none declared.not required.uncited references q3 [42] . since mid-december 2019 and as of early february 2020, the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) originating from wuhan (hubei province, china) has infected over 25,000 laboratory-confirmed cases across 28 countries with about 500 deaths (a case-fatality rate of about 2%). more than 90% of the cases and deaths were in china [1] . based on the initial reported surge of cases in wuhan, the majority were males with a median age of 55 years and linked to the huanan seafood wholesale market [2] . most of the reported cases had similar symptoms at the onset of illness such as fever, cough, and myalgia or fatigue. most cases developed pneumonia and some severe and even fatal respiratory diseases such as acute respiratory distress syndrome [3] .the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov), a betacoronavirus, forms a clade within the subgenus sarbecovirus of the orthocoronavirinae subfamily [4] . the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) are also betacoronaviruses that are zoonotic in origin and have been linked to potential fatal illness during the outbreaks in 2003 and 2012, respectively [5, 6] . based on current evidence, pathogenicity for 2019-ncov is about 3%, which is significantly lower than sars-cov (10%) and mers-cov (40%) [7] . however, 2019-ncov has potentially higher transmissibility (r 0 : 1.4-5.5) than both sars-cov (r 0 : 2-5) and mers-cov (r 0 : <1) [7] .with the possible expansion of 2019-ncov globally [8] and the declaration of the 2019-ncov outbreak as a public health emergency of international concern by the world health organization, there is an urgent need for rapid diagnostics, vaccines and therapeutics to detect, prevent and contain 2019-ncov promptly. there is however currently a lack of understanding of what is available in the early phase of 2019-ncov outbreak. the systematic review describes and assesses the potential rapid diagnostics, vaccines and therapeutics for 2019-ncov, based in part on the developments for mers-cov and sars-cov.a systematic search was carried out in three major electronic databases (pubmed, embase and cochrane library) to identify published studies examining the diagnosis, therapeutic drugs and vaccines for severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) and the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov), in accordance with the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma) guidelines.there were two independent reviewers each focusing on sars, mers, and 2019-ncov, respectively. a third independent reviewer was engaged to resolve any conflicting article of interest. we used the key words "sars", "coronavirus", "mers", "2019 novel coronavirus", "wuhan virus" to identify the diseases in the search strategy. the systematic searches for diagnosis, therapeutic drugs and vaccines were carried out independently and the key words "drug", "therapy", "vaccine", "diagnosis", "point of care testing" and "rapid diagnostic test" were used in conjunction with the disease key words for the respective searches.examples of search strings can be found in table s1 . we searched for randomized controlled trials (rcts) and validation trials (for diagnostics test) published in english, that measured (a) the sensitivity and/or specificity of a rapid diagnostic test or a point-of-care testing kit, (b) the impact of drug therapy or (c) vaccine efficacy against either of these diseases with no date restriction applied. for the 2019-ncov, we searched for all in vitro, animal, or human studies published in english between 1 december 2019 and 6 february 2020, on the same outcomes of interest. in addition, we reviewed the references of retrieved articles in order to identify additional studies or reports not retrieved by the initial searches. studies that examined the mechanisms of diagnostic tests, drug therapy or vaccine efficacy against sars, mers and 2019-ncov were excluded. a google search for 2019-ncov diagnostics (as of 6 february 2020; table s2 ) yielded five webpage links from government and international bodies with official information and guidelines (who, europe cdc, us cdc, us fda), three webpage links on diagnostic protocols and scientific commentaries, and five webpage links on market news and press releases. six protocols for diagnostics using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) from six countries were published on who's website [9] . google search for 2019-ncov vaccines yielded 19 relevant articles.with the emergence of 2019-ncov, real time rt-pcr remains the primary means for diagnosing the new virus strain among the many diagnostic platforms available ( [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] ; table s3 ). among the 16 diagnostics studies selected, one study discussed the use of rt-pcr in diagnosing patients with 2019-ncov [11] ( table 1 ). the period and type of specimen collected for rt-pcr play an important role in the diagnosis of 2019-ncov. it was found that the respiratory specimens were positive for the virus while serum was negative in the early period. it has also suggested that in the early days of illness, patients have high levels of virus despite the mild symptoms.apart from the commonly used rt-pcr in diagnosing mers-cov, four studies identified various diagnostic methods such as reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (rt-lamp), rt-insulated isothermal pcr (rt-iipcr) and a one-step rrt-pcr assay based on specific taqman probes. rt-lamp has similar sensitivity as real time rt-pcr. it is also highly specific and is used to detect mers-cov. it is comparable to the usual diagnostic tests and is rapid, simple and convenient. likewise, rt-iipcr and a one-step rrt-pcr assay have also shown similar sensitivity and high specificity for mer-cov. lastly, one study focused on the validation of the six commercial real rt-pcr kits, with high accuracy. although real time rt-pcr is a primary method for diagnosing mers-cov, high levels of pcr inhibition may hinder pcr sensitivity (table 1) .there are eleven studies that focus on sars-cov diagnostic testing (table 1) . these papers described diagnostic methods to detect the virus with the majority of them using molecular testing for diagnosis. comparison between the molecular test (i.e rt-pcr) and serological test (i.e., elisa) showed that the molecular test has better sensitivity and specificity. hence, enhancements to the current molecular test were conducted to improve the diagnosis. studies looked at using nested pcr to include a pre-amplification step or incorporating n gene as an additional sensitive molecular marker to improve on the sensitivity (table 1 ).in addition, there are seven potential rapid diagnostic kits (as of 24 january 2020; table 2 ) available on the market for 2019-ncov. six of these are only for research purposes. only one kit from beijing genome institute (bgi) is approved for use in the clinical setting for rapid diagnosis. most of the kits are for rt-pcr. there were two kits (bgi, china and veredus, singapore) with the capability to detect multiple pathogens using sequencing and microarray technologies, respectively. the limit of detection of the enhanced real-time pcr method was 10 2 -fold higher than the standard real-time pcr assay and 10 7 -fold higher than conventional pcr methods in the clinical aspect, the enhanced real-time pcr method was able to detect 6 cases of sars-cov positive samples that were not confirmed by any other assay [25] sars-cov was detected in 11 of 17 (65%) samples from sars patients from day 2 to day 9 of the illness but in none of the 10 samples from healthy controls [33] • the real time pcr has a threshold sensitivity of 10 genome equivalents per reaction and it has a good reproducibility with the inter-assay coefficients of variation of 1.73 to 2.72%. • 13 specimens from 6 patients were positive with viral load range from 362 to 36,240,000 genome equivalents/ml. the real-time rt-pcr reaction was more sensitive than the nested pcr reaction, as the detection limit for the nested pcr reaction was about 10 3 genome equivalents in the standard cdna control.[34]real-time reverse-transcription pcr (rrt-pcr); rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp); open reading frame 1a (orf1a); loop-mediated isothermal amplification (lamp); enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa); immunofluorescent assay (ifa); immunochromatographic test (ict); nasopharyngeal aspirate (npa). with the emergence of 2019-ncov, there are about 15 potential vaccine candidates in the pipeline globally (table 3 ), in which a wide range of technology (such as messenger rna, dna-based, nanoparticle, synthetic and modified virus-like particle) was applied. it will likely take about a year for most candidates to start phase 1 clinical trials except for those funded by coalition for epidemic preparedness innovations (cepi). however, the kit developed by the bgi have passed emergency approval procedure of the national medical products administration, and are currently used in clinical and surveillance centers of china [40] .of the total of 570 unique studies on 2019-ncov, sars cov or mers-cov vaccines screened, only four were eventually included in the review. most studies on sars and mers vaccines were excluded as they were performed in cell or animal models ( figure 1 ). the four studies included in this review were phase i clinical trials on sars or mers vaccines (table 4 ) [44] [45] [46] [47] . there were no studies of any population type (cell, animal, human) on the 2019-ncov at the point of screening. the published clinical trials were mostly done in united states except for one on the sars vaccine done in china [44] . all vaccine candidates for sars and mers were reported to be safe, well-tolerated and able to trigger the relevant and appropriate immune responses in the participants. in addition, we highlight six ongoing phase i clinical trials identified in the clinicaltrials.gov register ( [48, 49] ); table s4 [50] [51] [52] . these trials are all testing the safety and immunogenicity of their respective mers-cov vaccine candidates but were excluded as there are no results published yet. the trials are projected to complete in december 2020 (two studies in russia [50, 51] ) and december 2021 (in germany [52] ).existing literature search did not return any results on completed 2019-ncov trials at the time of writing. among 23 trials found from the systematic review (table 5) , there are nine clinical trials registered under the clinical trials registry (clinicaltrials.gov) for 2019-ncov therapeutics [53] [54] [55] [56] [57] [58] [59] [60] [61] . of which five studies on hydroxychloroquine, lopinavir plus ritonavir and arbidol, mesenchymal stem cells, traditional chinese medicine and glucocorticoid therapy usage have commenced recruitment. the remaining four studies encompass investigation of antivirals, interferon atomization, darunavir and cobicistat, arbidol, and remdesivir usage for 2019-ncov patients (table 5) . seroconversion measured by s1-elisa occurred in 86% and 94% participants after 2 and 3 doses, respectively, and was maintained in 79% participants up to study end at week 60.neutralising antibodies were detected in 50% participants at one or more time points during the study, but only 3% maintained neutralisation activity to end of study. t-cell responses were detected in 71% and 76% participants after 2 and 3 doses, respectively. there were no differences in immune responses between dose groups after 6 weeks and vaccine-induced humoral and cellular responses were respectively detected in 77% and 64% participants at week 60.[47] molecules developed by the university scientists inhibit two coronavirus enzymes and prevent its replication. the discovered drug targets are said to be more than 95% similar to enzyme targets found on the sars virus. researchers note that identified drugs may not be available to address the ongoing outbreak but they hope to make it accessible for future outbreaks.[85]9the first affiliated hospital of guangzhou medical university "xue bi jing" (tcm) -chictr2000029381approved. recruitment of subjects has not started.[86] besides the six completed randomized controlled trials (rct) selected from the systematic review (table 6) , there is only one ongoing randomized controlled trial targeted at sars therapeutics [92] . the studies found from clinicaltrials.gov have not been updated since 2013. while many prospective and retrospective cohort studies conducted during the epidemic centered on usage of ribavirin with lopinavir/ritonavir or ribavirin only, there has yet to be well-designed clinical trials investigating their usage. three completed randomized controlled trials were conducted during the sars epidemic-3 in china, 1 in taiwan and 2 in hong kong [93] [94] [95] [96] [97] . the studies respectively investigated antibiotic usage involving 190 participants, combination of western and chinese treatment vs. chinese treatment in 123 participants, integrative chinese and western treatment in 49 patients, usage of a specific chinese medicine in four participants and early use of corticosteroid in 16 participants. another notable study was an open non-randomized study investigating ribavirin/lopinavir/ritonavir usage in 152 participants [98] . one randomized controlled trial investigating integrative western and chinese treatment during the sars epidemic was excluded as it was a chinese article [94] .there is only one ongoing randomized controlled trial targeted at mers therapeutics [99] . it investigates the usage of lopinavir/ritonavir and interferon beta 1b. likewise, many prospective and retrospective cohort studies conducted during the epidemic centered on usage of ribavirin with lopinavir/ritonavir/ribavirin, interferon, and convalescent plasma usage. to date, only one trial has been completed. one phase 1 clinical trial investigating the safety and tolerability of a fully human polyclonal igg immunoglobulin (sab-301) was found in available literature [46] . the trial conducted in the united states in 2017 demonstrated sab-301 to be safe and well-tolerated at single doses. another trial on mers therapeutics was found on clinicaltrials.gov-a phase 2/3 trial in the united states evaluating the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics (pk), and immunogenicity on co-administered mers-cov antibodies regn3048 & regn3051 [100] . however, particularly in the respect of improving clinical symptoms, elevating quality of life, promoting immune function recovery, promoting absorption of pulmonary inflammation, reducing the dosage of cortisteroid and shortening the therapeutic course, treatment with integrative chinese and western medicine treatment had obvious superiority compared with using control treatment alone.[94] microneutralization titres also correlated to the sab-301 levels in serum.single infusions of sab-301 up to 50 mg/kg appear to be safe and well-tolerated in healthy participants. [46] 4. discussionrapid diagnostics plays an important role in disease and outbreak management. the fast and accurate diagnosis of a specific viral infection enables prompt and accurate public health surveillance, prevention and control measures. local transmission and clusters can be prevented or delayed by isolation of laboratory-confirmed cases and their close contacts quarantined and monitored at home. rapid diagnostic also facilitates other specific public health interventions such as closure of high-risk facilities and areas associated with the confirmed cases for prompt infection control and environmental decontamination [11, 101] .laboratory diagnosis can be performed by: (a) detecting the genetic material of the virus, (b) detecting the antibodies that neutralize the viral particles of interest, (c) detecting the viral epitopes of interest with antibodies (serological testing), or (d) culture and isolation of viable virus particles.the key limitations of genetic material detection are the lack of knowledge of the presence of viable virus, the potential cross-reactivity with non-specific genetic regions and the short timeframe for accurate detection during the acute infection phase. the key limitations of serological testing is the need to collect paired serum samples (in the acute and convalescent phases) from cases under investigation for confirmation to eliminate potential cross-reactivity from non-specific antibodies from past exposure and/or infection by other coronaviruses. the limitation of virus culture and isolation is the long duration and the highly specialized skills required of the technicians to process the samples.where the biological samples are taken from also play a role in the sensitivity of these tests. for sars-cov and mers-cov, specimens collected from the lower respiratory tract such as sputum and tracheal aspirates have higher and more prolonged levels of viral rna because of the tropism of the virus. mers-cov viral loads are also higher for severe cases and have longer viral shedding compared to mild cases. although upper respiratory tract specimens such as nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal swabs can be used, they have potentially lower viral loads and may have higher risk of false-negatives among the mild mers and sars cases [102, 103] , and likely among the 2019-ncov cases.the existing practices in detecting genetic material of coronaviruses such as sars-cov and mers-cov include (a) reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), (b) real-time rt-pcr (rrt-pcr), (c) reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (rt-lamp) and (d) real-time rt-lamp [104] . nucleic amplification tests (naat) are usually preferred as in the case of mers-cov diagnosis as it has the highest sensitivity at the earliest time point in the acute phase of infection [102] . chinese health authorities have recently posted the full genome of 2019-ncov in the genbank and in gisaid portal to facilitate in the detection of the virus [11] . several laboratory assays have been developed to detect the novel coronavirus in wuhan, as highlighted in who's interim guidance on ncov laboratory testing of suspected cases. these include protocols from other countries such as thailand, japan and china [105] .the first validated diagnostic test was designed in germany. corman et al. had initially designed a candidate diagnostic rt-pcr assay based on the sars or sars-related coronavirus as it was suggested that circulating virus was sars-like. upon the release of the sequence, assays were selected based on the match against 2019-ncov upon inspection of the sequence alignment. two assays were used for the rna dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) gene and e gene where e gene assay acts as the first-line screening tool and rdrp gene assay as the confirmatory testing. all assays were highly sensitive and specific in that they did not cross-react with other coronavirus and also human clinical samples that contained respiratory viruses [11] .the hong kong university used two monoplex assays which were reactive with coronaviruses under the subgenus sarbecovirus (consisting of 2019-ncov, sars-cov and sars-like coronavirus). viral rna extracted from sars-cov can be used as the positive control for the suggested protocol assuming that sars has been eradicated. it is proposed that the n gene rt-pcr can be used as a screening assay while the orf1b assay acts as a confirmatory test. however, this protocol has only been evaluated with a panel of controls with the only positive control sars-cov rna. synthetic oligonucleotide positive control or 2019-ncov have yet to be tested [106] .the us cdc shared the protocol on the real time rt-pcr assay for the detection of the 2019-ncov with the primers and probes designed for the universal detection of sars-like coronavirus and the specific detection of 2019-ncov. however, the protocol has not been validated on other platforms or chemistries apart from the protocol described. there are some limitations for the assay. analysts engaged have to be trained and familiar with the testing procedure and result interpretation. false negative results may occur due to insufficient organisms in the specimen resulting from improper collection, transportation or handling. also, rna viruses may show substantial genetic variability. this could result in mismatch between the primer and probes with the target sequence which can diminish the assay performance or result in false negative results [107] . point-of-care test kit can potentially minimize these limitations, which should be highly prioritized for research and development in the next few months.serological testing such as elisa, iift and neutralization tests are effective in determining the extent of infection, including estimating asymptomatic and attack rate. compared to the detection of viral genome through molecular methods, serological testing detects antibodies and antigens. there would be a lag period as antibodies specifically targeting the virus would normally appear between 14 and 28 days after the illness onset [108] . furthermore, studies suggest that low antibody titers in the second week or delayed antibody production could be associated with mortality with a high viral load. hence, serological diagnoses are likely used when nucleic amplification tests (naat) are not available or accessible [102] .vaccines can prevent and protect against infection and disease occurrence when exposed to the specific pathogen of interest, especially in vulnerable populations who are more prone to severe outcomes. in the context of the current 2019-ncov outbreak, vaccines will help control and reduce disease transmission by creating herd immunity in addition to protecting healthy individuals from infection. this decreases the effective r0 value of the disease. nonetheless, there are social, clinical and economic hurdles for vaccine and vaccination programmes, including (a) the willingness of the public to undergo vaccination with a novel vaccine, (b) the side effects and severe adverse reactions of vaccination, (c) the potential difference and/or low efficacy of the vaccine in populations different from the clinical trials' populations and (d) the accessibility of the vaccines to a given population (including the cost and availability of the vaccine).vaccines against the 2019-ncov are currently in development and none are in testing (at the time of writing). on 23 january 2020, the coalition for epidemic preparedness innovations (cepi) announced that they will fund vaccine development programmes with inovio, the university of queensland and moderna, inc respectively, with the aim to test the experimental vaccines clinically in 16 weeks (by june 2020). the vaccine candidates will be developed by the dna, recombinant and mrna vaccine platforms from these organizations [109] .based on the most recent mers-cov outbreak, there are already a number of vaccine candidates being developed but most are still in the preclinical testing stage. the vaccines in development include viral vector-based vaccine, dna vaccine, subunit vaccine, virus-like particles (vlps)-based vaccine, inactivated whole-virus (iwv) vaccine and live attenuated vaccine. the latest findings for these vaccines arebased on the review by yong et al. (2019) in august 2019 [110] . as of the date of reporting, there is only one published clinical study on the mers-cov vaccine by geneone life science & inovio pharmaceuticals [47] . there was one sars vaccine trial conducted by the us national institute of allergy and infectious diseases. both phase i clinical trials reported positive results, but only one has announced plans to proceed to phase 2 trial [111] .due to the close genetic relatedness of sars-cov (79%) with 2019-ncov [112] , there may be potential cross-protective effect of using a safe sars-cov vaccine while awaiting the 2019-ncov vaccine. however, this would require small scale phase-by-phase implementation and close monitoring of vaccinees before any large scale implementation.apart from the timely diagnosis of cases, the achievement of favorable clinical outcomes depends on the timely treatment administered. ace2 has been reported to be the same cell entry receptor used by 2019-ncov to infect humans as sars-cov [113] . hence, clinical similarity between the two viruses is expected, particularly in severe cases. in addition, most of those who have died from mers-cov, sars-cov and 2019-ncov were advance in age and had underlying health conditions such as hypertension, diabetes or cardiovascular disease that compromised their immune systems [114] . coronaviruses have error-prone rna-dependent rna polymerases (rdrp), which result in frequent mutations and recombination events. this results in quasispecies diversity that is closely associated with adaptive evolution and the capacity to enhance viral-cell entry to cause disease over time in a specific population at-risk [115] . since ace2 is abundantly present in humans in the epithelia of the lung and small intestine, coronaviruses are likely to infect the upper respiratory and gastrointestinal tract and this may influence the type of therapeutics against 2019-ncov, similarly to sar-cov.however, in the years following two major coronavirus outbreaks sars-cov in 2003 and mers-cov in 2012, there remains no consensus on the optimal therapy for either disease [116, 117] . well-designed clinical trials that provide the gold standard for assessing the therapeutic measures are scarce. no coronavirus protease inhibitors have successfully completed a preclinical development program despite large efforts exploring sars-cov inhibitors. the bulk of potential therapeutic strategies remain in the experimental phase, with only a handful crossing the in vitro hurdle. stronger efforts are required in the research for treatment options for major coronaviruses given their pandemic potential. effective treatment options are essential to maximize the restoration of affected populations to good health following infections. clinical trials have commenced in china to identify effective treatments for 2019-ncov based on the treatment evidence from sars and mers. there is currently no effective specific antiviral with high-level evidence; any specific antiviral therapy should be provided in the context of a clinical study/trial. few treatments have shown real curative action against sars and mers and the literature generally describes isolated cases or small case series.many interferons from the three classes have been tested for their antiviral activities against sars-cov both in vitro and in animal models. interferon β has consistently been shown to be the most active, followed by interferon α. the use of corticosteroids with interferon alfacon-1 (synthetic interferon α) appeared to have improved oxygenation and faster resolution of chest radiograph abnormalities in observational studies with untreated controls. interferon has been used in multiple observational studies to treat sars-cov and mers-cov patients [116, 117] . interferons, with or without ribavirin, and lopinavir/ritonavir are most likely to be beneficial and are being trialed in china for 2019-ncov. this drug treatment appears to be the most advanced. timing of treatment is likely an important factor in effectiveness. a combination of ribavirin and lopinavir/ritonavir was used as a post-exposure prophylaxis in health care workers and may have reduced the risk of infection. ribavirin alone is unlikely to have substantial antiviral activities at clinically used dosages. hence, ribavirin with or without corticosteroids and with lopinavir and ritonavir are among the combinations employed. this was the most common agent reported in the available literature. its efficacy has been assessed in observational studies, retrospective case series, retrospective cohort study, a prospective observational study, a prospective cohort study and randomized controlled trial ranging from seven to 229 participants [117] . lopinavir/ritonavir (kaletra) was the earliest protease inhibitor combination introduced for the treatment of sars-cov. its efficacy was documented in several studies, causing notably lower incidence of adverse outcomes than with ribavirin alone. combined usage with ribavirin was also associated with lower incidence of acute respiratory distress syndrome, nosocomial infection and death, amongst other favorable outcomes. recent in vitro studies have shown another hiv protease inhibitor, nelfinavir, to have antiviral capacity against sars-cov, although it has yet to show favorable outcomes in animal studies [118] . remdesivir (gilead sciences, gs-5734) nucleoside analogue in vitro and in vivo data support gs-5734 development as a potential pan-coronavirus antiviral based on results against several coronaviruses (covs), including highly pathogenic covs and potentially emergent batcovs. the use of remdesivir may be a good candidate as an investigational treatment.improved mortality following receipt of convalescent plasma in various doses was consistently reported in several observational studies involving cases with severe acute respiratory infections (saris) of viral etiology. a significant reduction in the pooled odds of mortality following treatment of 0.25 compared to placebo or no therapy was observed [119] . studies were however at moderate to high risk of bias given their small sample sizes, allocation of treatment based on the physician's discretion, and the availability of plasma. factors like concomitant treatment may have also confounded the results. associations between convalescent plasma and hospital length of stay, viral antibody levels, and viral load respectively were similarly inconsistent across available literature. convalescent plasma, while promising, is likely not yet feasible, given the limited pool of potential donors and issues of scalability. monoclonal antibody treatment is progressing. sars-cov enters host cells through the binding of their spike (s) protein to angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) and cd209l [118] . human monoclonal antibodies to the s protein have been shown to significantly reduce the severity of lung pathology in non-human primates following mers-cov infection [120] . such neutralizing antibodies can be elicited by active or passive immunization using vaccines or convalescent plasma respectively. while such neutralizing antibodies can theoretically be harvested from individuals immunized with vaccines, there is uncertainty over the achievement of therapeutic levels of antibodies.other therapeutic agents have also been reported. a known antimalarial agent, chloroquine, elicits antiviral effects against multiple viruses including hiv type 1, hepatitis b and hcov-229e. chloroquine is also immunomodulatory, capable of suppressing the production and release of factors which mediate the inflammatory complications of viral diseases (tumor necrosis factor and interleukin 6) [121] . it is postulated that chloroquine works by altering ace2 glycosylation and endosomal ph. its anti-inflammatory properties may be beneficial for the treatment of sars. niclosamide as a known drug used in antihelminthic treatment. the efficacy of niclosamide as an inhibitor of virus replication was proven in several assays. in both immunoblot analysis and immunofluorescence assays, niclosamide treatment was observed to completely inhibit viral antigen synthesis. reduction of virus yield in infected cells was dose dependent. niclosamide likely does not interfere in the early stages of virus attachment and entry into cells, nor does it function as a protease inhibitor. mechanisms of niclosamide activity warrant further investigation [122] . glycyrrhizin also reportedly inhibits virus adsorption and penetration in the early steps of virus replication. glycyrrhizin was a significantly potent inhibitor with a low selectivity index when tested against several pathogenic flaviviruses. while preliminary results suggest production of nitrous oxide (which inhibits virus replication) through induction of nitrous oxide synthase, the mechanism of glycyrrhizin against sars-cov remains unclear. the compound also has relatively lower toxicity compared to protease inhibitors like ribavirin [123] . inhibitory activity was also detected in baicalin [124] , extracted from another herb used in the treatment of sars in china and hong kong. findings on these compounds are limited to in vitro studies [121] [122] [123] [124] .due to the rapidly evolving situation of the 2019-ncov, there will be potential limitations to the systematic review. the systematic review is likely to have publication bias as some developments have yet to be reported while for other developments there is no intention to report publicly (or in scientific platforms) due to confidentiality concerns. however, this may be limited to only a few developments for review as publicity does help in branding to some extent for the company and/or the funder. furthermore, due to the rapid need to share the status of these developments, there may be reporting bias in some details provided by authors of the scientific articles or commentary articles in traditional media. lastly, while it is not viable for any form of quality assessment and meta-analysis of the selected articles due to the limited data provided and the heterogeneous style of reporting by different articles, this paper has provided a comprehensive overview of the potential developments of these pharmaceutical interventions during the early phase of the outbreak. this systematic review would be useful for cross-check when the quality assessment and meta-analysis of these developments are performed as a follow-up study.rapid diagnostics, vaccines and therapeutics are key pharmaceutical interventions to limit transmission of respiratory infectious diseases. many potential developments on these pharmaceutical interventions for 2019-ncov are ongoing in the containment phase of this outbreak, potentially due to better pandemic preparedness than before. however, lessons from mers-cov and sars-cov have shown that the journeys for these developments can still be challenging moving ahead.supplementary materials: the following are available online at http://www.mdpi.com/2077-0383/9/3/623/s1, table s1 : example of full search strategy in pubmed, table s2 : google search: 2019-ncov diagnostics, table  s3 : summary of diagnostic assays developed for 2019-ncov, table s4 children admitted to emergency departments (ed) with fever and respiratory symptoms represent a major burden to the health care system, as well as significant anxiety and expense to parents and caregivers. physicians often order diagnostic tests and may prescribe antibiotics when they are unsure of the cause of the illness and are concerned about the possibility of serious bacterial infection. however, in most cases, fever and respiratory symptoms are caused by viruses. in addition, in children in whom a virus is found to be the cause of their illness, the risk of serious bacterial infection is very low. this review was conducted to assess whether a rapid viral test done in the ed changes what physicians do when treating these children. we found that in previously healthy children coming to the ed with fever and respiratory symptoms, a rapid viral test reduces the use of chest x-rays and that there is a trend toward less antibiotic usage, and blood and urine investigations. the true impact of this intervention on the latter three outcomes requires trials with larger enrollment numbers.acute respiratory infections (aris) are a serious public health issue and rank among the top five causes of illness and hospitalization in children. during influenza seasons, fever and respiratory infection symptoms make up to 25% of all reasons for a visit to an emergency department (ed) (silka 2003) . although aris can be caused by bacteria, they are most commonly caused by viral infections. a rapid diagnosis of a viral infection may lead to a decrease in the use of antibiotics, additional testing and possibly admissions. the most commonly implicated causal viruses are influenza (a and b), respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), human parainfluenza (1, 2 and 3) , rhinovirus and adenovirus. these viruses account for 35 to 87% of children with an ari. the variability in the range of positive viral diagnosis may be affected by the choice of viral tests used and their scope of viral detection (jennings 2004; weigl 2000) . there is a risk of concurrent bacterial infection in children with a confirmed viral ari. a study of children aged 3 to 36 months with recognizable viral infections showed a concurrent rate of bacteremia of 0.01 to 0.8% (greens 1999) . a prospective multicenter study of infants less than 60 days old with an ari showed a significant difference in the rate of urinary tract infection between rsv positive (5.4%) and negative infants (10.1%), a non-significant difference rate of bacteremia (1.1% and 2.3%) and no cases of bacterial meningitis among the 251 rsv positive infants and 8 cases out of 938 rsv negative infants (not statistically significant) (levine 2004). however, symptoms of viral ari overlap with those of bacterial infections (such as pneumonia, bacteremia and meningitis) and in some cases, are difficult to distinguish. without a confirmed viral diagnosis, medical assessment and diagnostic tests are often used before a decision on patient management, parental advice, and/ or hospital admission are made. these precautionary tests lead to intense use of human health resources (nursing, laboratory and radiology staff ) and hospital facilities. furthermore, these tests are often invasive, sometimes unnecessarily prolonging a child's visit to the ed, resulting in sub-optimal ed service provision and contributing to lengthy ed wait times and overcrowding.aris impose large costs on the health system, from a high number of physician visits, ed visits, hospitalization and antibiotic prescriptions. studies comparing health care utilization for aris in children 0 to 15 years old during influenza season and the rest of the year showed significant excess in physician visits (28,000 to 51,000/100,000 age specific population annually), ed visits (~1600/100,000 age specific population annually), hospital admission (300 to 9500/100,000 age specific population annually) and antibiotic prescription (31,000/100,000 age specific population annually). most of this burden came from children below three years of age (menec 2003; neuzil 2000) . a study comparing the costs associated with a visit to the ed versus a primary care provider, showed that the average cost for assessing a patient for an ari in the ed (excluding antibiotics cost) is $206 to $221 and in comparison is $101 to $106 in a primary care provider's office. up to 60% of patients with a common cold are treated with antimicrobials, which costs $37.5 million annually (rosenstein 1998), despite most aris being caused by viruses. the physician and nursing costs only contributed to 17.5% of ari management costs (martin 2000) . this suggests that extra investigations and antibiotic prescribing in the ed may be responsible for much of any unnecessary costs. during the sars outbreak in 2003, there was access to rapid respiratory viral diagnosis in acute care settings; (that is, provision of same-day identification of influenza virus a and b, parainfluenza virus 1, 2 and 3), rsv and adenovirus. this enabled rapid, informed patient management decisions and helped with triaging. this suggests a role for rapid viral diagnosis in alleviating the burden on eds and improving health service delivery and health resource allocation, in the situation of increased use of eds for ari symptoms. a prompt viral diagnosis might improve decision-making and reduces unnecessary hospital admittance, prescription of antibiotics, and further diagnostic investigations. this is supported by observational data from retrospective chart reviews of children admitted to hospital, with subsequent confirmed diagnosis of adenovirus infection, which revealed a change in management for 36%, including revision of antibiotic treatment and use of antiviral therapy (rocholl 2004) . similarly, chart reviews of children testing positive via a rapid influenza diagnostic test were less likely to be prescribed antibiotics in the ed (20% versus 53%; p = 0.04) and when admitted were on antibiotics for fewer days (3.5 versus 5.4 days; p = 0.03) (noyola 2000). children with an early diagnosis of influenza also had fewer blood tests (17% versus 44%; p = 0.02) and urine tests performed (2% versus 24%; p = 0.006), compared to those children with a late diagnosis (sharma 2002).advances in virology testing now allow for viral detection within 30 to 120 minutes by direct immuno-fluorescent antibody detection. these have been reported to have high sensitivity (up to 90%) and specificity (up to 99%) (vega 2005) . confirmation of specific diagnosis of viral respiratory infection is now accessible and reliable.better investigating the possible diagnosis of children presenting to the ed with fever and respiratory symptoms may improve their management by more rational decisions about other investigations and treatment.this literature has yet to be systematically reviewed. there may evidence of substantial reductions in unnecessary investigation costs and antibiotic prescribing for children with ari in the ed, by positively identifying a viral illness rather than attempting to exclude a more serious bacterial cause.to determine if the use of a rapid viral detection test for children with an ari in eds changes patient management and resource use in the ed, compared to not using a rapid viral detection test. we hypothesized that rapid viral testing reduces antibiotic use in the ed as well as reduces the rate of ancillary testing and length of ed visits.• randomized controlled trials (rcts) evaluating the use of rapid viral diagnosis in children admitted to the ed with an ari.we included:• studies of otherwise healthy children aged 0 to 18 years old; or• studies which reported separately on subgroups of children under 18 years of age, admitted to an ed with a clinical presentation consistent with an ari (fever and respiratory symptoms such as cough, runny nose, sore throat, or congested nose). evid.-based child health 5: 709-751 (2010) we did not consider:• studies including participants who are immunocompromized;• studies including participants who have underlying chronic severe respiratory conditions (cystic fibrosis, bronchopulmonary dysplasia); or• studies including participants with chronic heart conditions (such as uncorrected cyanotic heart lesions, or prosthetic valves).rapid viral diagnosis from nasal pharyngeal aspirates or swabs by direct or indirect immunofluorescent antibody test (idf, ifa), enzyme immunoassays (eia), optical immunoassay (oia) or molecular testing (multiplex pcr). rapid viral diagnosis implies that results are made available during the participants' stay in the ed. the intervention group will include participants who have rapid viral diagnostic testing; while participants in the control group will have had no rapid viral diagnostic test performed, or the treating physician will have had no knowledge about the test results.• antimicrobial prescription rate in the ed. a reduction of antibiotic use by 25% (rr 0.75) was considered clinically important.• length of hospital (ed) stay. a reduction of 30 minutes was considered clinically important.• rate of ancillary tests (any blood tests or chest imaging or urine investigations) requested. a reduction in ancillary testing of 25% (rr 0.75) was considered clinically important.• rate of physician visit (ed or office) within two weeks after discharge from ed. a relative increase in physician visit within two weeks of discharge from an ed of 10% (rr 1.10) was considered clinically important.• hospital admission rate. a reduction in admission rate of 25% (rr 0.75) was considered clinically important.• acceptability of nasal specimen collection sampling for rapid viral testing (discomfort level with invasiveness of the procedure).we searched the cochrane central register of controlled trials (central) (the cochrane library, 2009, issue 1) which contains the ari group's specialized register, medline (1950 to april week 3 2009 ), embase (1988 to week 16, 2009 ), medline in-process & other non-indexed citations (april 27, 2009 ), healthstar (1966 to 2009 ), biosis previews (1969 to 2009 ), cab abstracts (1973 to 2007 , cbca reference (1970 reference ( to 2007 and proquest dissertations and theses -full text (1861 to 2009) . search terms were adapted to accommodate the controlled vocabulary and search language for each electronic resource. in medline, these search terms were combined with the highly sensitive search strategy for identifying rcts (lefebvre 2008). the filter was modified for use in medline in-process & other non-indexed citations, embase, and healthstar. all search strategies included pediatric terms to restrict to pediatric studies. no language or date restrictions were applied to the search strategies. detailed search strategies are available in appendix 1, appendix 2, appendix 3, appendix 4, appendix 5, appendix 6, appendix 7, appendix 8 and appendix 9.included articles derived from the original search were provided by the principal researcher and were tracked forward using the cited reference search feature in web of science and the scopus citation tracker. clinical trials.gov was searched for additional unpublished trials. the pediatric academic society and society for pediatric research joint conference abstracts databases from 2003 to 2008 were searched for identification of meeting abstracts. two reviewers (qd, pe) searched the pediatric academic society and society for pediatric research joint meetings abstract archives from 2000 to 2007 for any other potential studies of rapid viral testing. all relevant abstracts were also found through the electronic databases.two reviewers (qd, pe) independently extracted and verified data entry for accuracy. we used the review manager (revman) 5 statistical package to conduct the analyses. pooled differences in rate of investigations and antibiotic use were analyzed using the mantel-hanzel test and expressed as risk ratio (rr) with 95% confidence interval (ci). pooled difference in ed length of visits was analyzed using the inverse variance method and expressed as mean difference with 95% ci. the random-effects model was applied to all statistical analyses.two reviewers (qd, pe) screened titles and abstracts of identified citations to exclude trials which are clearly not relevant or did not meet the inclusion criteria of the review. for all abstracts or titles deemed relevant or potentially meeting the criteria by either review author, the full article was retrieved for further examination. the two review authors assessed these articles to confirm that they meet inclusion criteria for the review.two review authors independently extracted data from the published studies using standardized data extraction forms. trial authors were contacted to obtain unpublished information, including outcome data that was not explicitly stated in the published papers. disagreements in data extraction was resolved by discussion and consensus.the review authors evaluated the methodological quality of each trial. review authors used the risk of bias tables higgins 2008. allocation concealment as described by schulz was assessed as clearly adequate, clearly inadequate and unclear (schulz 1995) .dichotomous data such as antibiotic prescription in ed (primary objective), ancillary tests performed in ed, admission to the hospital and physician visits or re-visits to the ed within two weeks of discharge from original ed visit were expressed as rr. continuous data such as mean length of stay in ed was expressed as mean difference (md).heterogeneity was tested for using the chi 2 statistic as provided by the revman 5 statistical package.we intended to use visual inspection of funnel plots to assess for publication bias and small study effects, but the small number of studies included in this review would make the interpretation of these plots difficult and of questionable meaning.we did not perform subgroup analyses as data were not consistently available by age groups.we performed a sensitivity analysis comparing studies where the risk of bias was deemed adequate for inclusion. given the invasive nature of specimen acquisition for rapid respiratory virus testing, the intervention cannot be blinded and therefore, no study was deemed free of bias. electronic database searches resulted in 1180 references (after duplicates were eliminated), of which six were prospective randomized trials of rapid viral testing in children. search from the pas conference proceedings only yielded references which were already recovered from the electronic search. we found one additional potential study from the clinical trials.gov registry but the many attempts at contacting the author to enquire about the status of this study were unsuccessful. snowballing, using scopus and web of sciences, and hand searching through references of included studies yielded one additional study of rapid viral testing in children (cohen 2007). a total of seven studies were carefully reviewed with four meeting all the inclusion criteria.bonner 2003 this was a single center rct assessing participants presenting to a large american tertiary center pediatric ed with fever and symptoms of an acute respiratory illness for less than 72 hours. the goal of the study was to assess whether prior knowledge of a positive influenza test changed physician decision-making and management of these participants. results from this study found a statistically significant lower rate of antibiotic prescription (risk ratio (rr) 0.66 (95% ci 0.45 to 0.96)), shorter mean ed length of visit (-10.9 min (95% ci -19.56 to -2.24)) and lower rate of chest radiography (rr 0.61 (95% ci 0.40 to 0.92)) in participants who's rapid influenza test results were made available to the treating physician. a trend for lower rate of blood and urine investigations was also found but this was not statistically significant. details pertaining to participants, outcome measures and limitations are found in the 'charateristics of included studies' tables.poehling 2006 this was a rct assessing participants presenting to a pediatric ed or acute care clinic with signs and symptoms of respiratory tract infections. data were analyzed and reported separately for these two populations. we only considered the study population enrolled from the ed. the goal of the study was to assess whether a rapid diagnosis of influenza affects the evaluation and treatment of children with acute respiratory illnesses. approximately 20% of their study population were deemed highrisk medical participants, as defined in the publication red book (cid 2003) , any patient for whom influenza vaccination is recommended (1. children with chronic disorders of the pulmonary or cardiovascular systems, including asthma; 2. children who have required regular medical follow-up or hospitalization during the preceding year because of chronic metabolic diseases including diabetes mellitus, renal dysfunction, hemoglobinopathies, or immunosuppression including immunosuppression caused by medications or by human immunodeficiency (hiv) virus; 3. children and adolescents who are receiving long-term aspirin therapy and, therefore, might be at risk for developing reye's syndrome after an influenza infection). the primary trial author was contacted for further clarification. of these 20%, only five participants had a condition which may have met our exclusion criteria (congenital heart disease, bronchopulmonary dysplasia of unknown severity and possible immune defect reported by parents but unrelated to chemotherapy). the rest had asthma which is not an exclusion criteria for our review. raw data excluding these five participants was obtained from the primary author and used for this meta-analysis. re-analyzed data showed a trend for lower rate of blood and urine investigations and chest radiography but a higher rate of antibiotic prescription in participants with rapid influenza results available to the treating physician, but none of these findings were statistically significant. details pertaining to participants, outcome measures and limitations are found in the 'charateristics of included studies' tables. iyer 2006 this was a prospective, quazi-randomized, controlled trial assessing participants presenting to a large, urban, tertiarycare pediatric emergency department. the goal of this study was to assess the effect of rapid influenza diagnosis on physician management of previously healthy febrile participants, aged two to 24 months, at risk for serious bacterial infection. despite the fact that this study only mentioned fever as an inclusion criteria, close to 90% of the children enrolled in the study also had symptoms of an acute respiratory illness. this study reported no significant differences in mean length of ed visit, laboratory testing, chest radiography or antibiotic use, and return to ed visit rates between the two study groups per original randomization. details pertaining to participants, outcome measures and limitations are found in the 'charateristics of included studies' tables. doan 2009 this was a single center, open-label, randomized, controlled trial assessing participants presenting to a large canadian tertiary center pediatric ed. the goal of the study was to measure the effect of a multi-viral rapid diagnostic test on the clinical management and resource utilization pertaining to healthy children who presented to the ed with signs and symptoms of a febrile acute respiratory infection.with respect to the primary end-point, there was no statistically significant reduction in the length of the ed visits. as well, no statistically significant difference was found in ordering of chest radiographs, blood tests, urine analysis, or antibiotic prescription. interestingly, though, there was a significant reduction in the rate of antibiotic prescription by primary care providers one week after discharge from the ed (rr = 0.36 (95% ci 0.14 to 0.95)). details pertaining to participants, outcome measures and limitations are found in the 'charateristics of included studies' tables.esposito 2003 this was a single center rct assessing children presenting to a pediatric ed with fever and signs/symptoms of a respiratory illness. the goal of the study was to assess the effect of a rapid diagnosis of influenza on the management of children with influenza-like illnesses. children meeting the inclusion criteria were randomized to undergo tonsillar/pharyngeal swabs for rapid influenza testing or standard care. results of influenza testing were made available to the treating physician within approximately 10 minutes, who then decided on further testing and management. endpoints analyzed in this study included: rates of routine blood examinations, chest x-rays, antibiotic prescription and days on antibiotics, admission to hospital, and antiviral drug use. in this study, participants with a positive influenza diagnosis were significantly less likely to receive routine blood examinations or be prescribed antibiotics when compared with those not receiving rapid viral testing. no significant differences were found between the two groups with respect to rates of chest x-rays or admission to hospital. if children were prescribed antibiotics, there was no difference in length of antibiotic use. no children were prescribed antivirals. this study was excluded due to the fact that children with underlying illnesses were included. the study included children with congenital heart disease, asthma, malignancy, neurological deficits, and cystic fibrosis. abanses 2006 this was a large single center rct assessing healthy participants aged three to 36 months presenting to a large urban pediatric ed (64,000 patient visits per year) with fever. the goal of the study was to assess how rapid influenza testing of febrile infants and children affected physician decision-making with respect to diagnostic testing as well as ed charges and patient time in the ed. although the inclusion criteria were based on fever, this paper was analyzed as a large proportion of children (> 60%) were found to have respiratory symptoms in the form of tachypnea. children meeting inclusion criteria were randomized into two groups. one group had rapid influenza test results available to the treating physician prior to assessment while the other group had influenza testing done only at the discretion of the treating physician after initial assessment. study endpoints, as stated above, were: rates of diagnostic testing, ed charges, and length of ed visit. although block randomization is mentioned, what is described is actually cluster randomization by 24 hour periods. despite the initial intent to conduct an rct, non-adherence to the protocol led to a significant number of participants not receiving the treatment they were randomly allocated to receive. a decision was made to analyze data as per actual treatment received, hence a convenience sample. although there is mention of itt analysis yielding no significant difference in the outcome measures between the two study groups, the results were not reported. due to the failed randomization, this study did not meet this review's inclusion criteria.cohen 2007 this was a multicenter cluster rct of 30 community pediatric offices in france; 16 offices were randomized to use of quickvue rapid influenza test and 14 were not. a total of 602 participants aged one to 17 years old with influenza-like illnesses (chills, upper respiratory symptoms, headaches or myalgia) and without focal infections, were enrolled. the primary objective was to compare oseltamivir use and secondary objectives included comparisons of clinical presentation, ancillary testing and antibiotic use between the two study groups. this study found that with participants enrolled in pediatric offices where rapid influenza testing was used, oseltamivir was used more frequently (37.9% versus 13.7% p < 0.0001). antibiotics (9.5% versus 3.9% p = 0.008) and chest radiography (4.0% versus 1.2% p = 0.035) was also more frequently used in the rapid influenza testing group. statistically and clinically significant differences in clinical features between the two study groups included a younger mean age (4.7 versus 5.7 years old p = 0.0001) and a larger proportion of asthmatic participants (15.9% versus 10.2% p = 0.04). this is the first rct of rapid influenza testing in community pediatric practices. this study was not included in this review because the setting was not in the ed. one particular concern with this study is the large number of analytical comparisons (well over 30) without corrections surrounding the statistical significance level.bonner 2003 and doan 2009 used computer randomization programs to block randomize participants to their study groups. poehling 2006 used a random number generator to randomize study days in blocks of four and six. iyer 2006 allocated participants to study groups using alternating days.this intervention does not lend itself to blinding.incomplete outcome data were all successfully retrieved by contacting individual study authors.there was no selective reporting found in the included trials.in the two trials where participants are individually randomized (bonner 2003; doan 2009) , as opposed to randomizing days like for the poehling 2006 trial, there is potential for contamination. if many children are rapidly diagnosed with influenza on a given day (in the intervention group), it is possible that children without rapid viral testing (in the control group) would be assumed by the treating physician to have influenza due to the commonality in their presentation with children in the intervention group. this would introduce a conservative bias, reducing the difference in effect between the two study groups and increasing a type ii error.all four studies reported the proportion of participants receiving or being prescribed antibiotics in the ed by study groups. three did not find a statistically significant effect despite a trend favoring rapid viral testing. bonner 2003 was the only trial to report a statistically significant effect for rapid influenza testing on antibiotic prescription (rr = 0.66 (95% ci 0.45 to 0.96)). pooled results showed a non-statistically significant trend for reduced antibiotic prescription in the ed favoring the treatment group (rr 0.89 (95% ci 0.71 to 1.12)). sensitivity analysis using the three trials deemed adequate (higher quality) by the method of higgins 2008 (bonner 2003; doan 2009; poehling 2006) did not find a statistically significant effect either (rr 0.86 (95% ci 0.61 to 1.22)).three studies reported on this outcome. only bonner 2003 showed a statistically significant effect, while doan 2009 and iyer 2006 only showed a trend favoring rapid viral testing. pooled results showed no statistically significant reduction in mean ed length of visit (mean difference = -10.6 min (95% ci -22.5 to 1.25)). sensitivity analysis using only the two trials deemed adequate by the method of higgins 2008 (doan 2009 and bonner 2003) , did not find a statistically significant effect either (mean difference: -19.47 (95% ci -51.38 to 12.44)).all four studies reported proportions of participants undergoing blood investigations. bonner 2003 and iyer 2006 reported complete blood count (cbc) and blood cultures separately. we anticipated substantial overlap between participants receiving cbc and blood cultures and have analyzed them as one outcome. authors were contacted and data for this outcome was provided to analyze them as one outcome. all four showed a trend for reduced blood investigations in the treatment group, which is not statistically significant. pooled results showed a lower rate of blood investigations in the treatment group, which was not statistically significant (rr 0.79 (95% ci 0.62 to 1.0)). sensitivity analysis of the three trials deemed adequate by the method of higgins 2008, however, we found a significant effect (rr 0.61 (95% ci 0.42 to 0.89)).all four studies reported the proportion of participants undergoing urine investigations. bonner 2003 and iyer 2006 reported urine analyses and urine cultures separately. we anticipated some overlap between participants undergoing urine analysis and urine cultures and have analyzed them as one outcome. authors were contacted and data for this outcome was provided to analyze them as one outcome. none of the studies found a statistically significant difference in rate of urine investigations between the study groups. pooled results showed no meaningful nor statistically significant effect of rapid viral testing on urine investigations in the ed (rr 0.97 (95% ci 0.79 to 1.19)). sensitivity analysis using the three trials deemed adequate by the method of higgins 2008 found similar results (rr 0.93 (95% ci 0.70 to 1.25)).all four studies reported on this outcome. three did not find a statistically significant effect despite a trend favoring rapid viral testing. bonner 2003 was the only one to report a statistically significant effect for rapid influenza testing on chest radiography (rr 0.61 (95% ci 0.40 to 0.92)). pooled results showed a statistically significant effect of rapid viral testing on chest radiography in the ed favoring the treatment group (rr 0.77 (95% ci 0.65 to 0.91)). sensitivity analysis of the three trials deemed adequate by the method of higgins 2008 found a similar but stronger effect (rr 0.59 (95% ci 0.43 to 0.81)).only two studies reported on this outcome (doan 2009; iyer 2006) . neither found a statistically significant effect and pooled results did not find a significant effect either (rr 1.00 (95% ci 0.77 to 1.29)). only doan 2009 was deemed adequate by the method of higgins 2008, hence a sensitivity analysis was not performed for this outcome.only one study reported this outcome (iyer 2006).none of the included studies provided data on this outcome.tests of heterogeneity were performed for all outcome measures. there was no suggestion of significant heterogeneity, but the small number of trials included in this review may have contributed to the lack of significance on these statistical tests.this meta-analysis demonstrated that the use of a rapid viral diagnostic test did not dramatically affect physician decision-making. the only exception to this was the fact that a rapid diagnosis of a viral infection decreased the rate of chest radiography use in the ed and then on sensitivity analysis for the rate of blood investigations. a weak trend toward reduction in antibiotics and ed length of visit was seen, but these were not statistically significant.the results of this meta-analysis suggest a benefit in using rapid respiratory viral testing mainly for reducing the rate of chest radiography and blood investigations, but the evidence surrounding antibiotics is still incomplete. although a weak trend for a reduction in antibiotic prescription rate was shown, this was not statistically significant and the results of individual trials on this outcome were conflicting, making the current evidence not yet applicable. most studies of rapid viral testing have been aimed at detecting influenza virus only, except for one, which used a multi-respiratory viral panel. while a multi-viral panel can capture a larger number of viruses, the test used by doan 2009 was laboratory bound and not as freely accessible to clinicians as the rapid influenza test, which can be performed at the bedside and therefore offers a much more rapid result to the treating physician. although point of care testing for rsv is available and has been shown to have high sensitivity (90%) and specificity (92%) mackie 2001 we have not found any trials using rapid rsv testing meeting the criteria for our review. considering that rsv and influenza formed 73% to 95% of the positive viral tests in the study by doan 2009, perhaps using point of care testing for influenza and rsv in the ed through future studies would provide more evidence to support the practice of rapid viral testing in the ed. the evidence we gathered through this review is still lacking information on key issues surrounding implementation of rapid viral testing in the ed. we have found no information on safety and side effects of this intervention, nor cost comparisons between the rapid viral test and the averted ancillary testing by using this intervention. it will be difficult to evaluate the value caregivers assign to averting blood sampling, radiography exposure and unnecessary antibiotics, as well as shortening their ed visit and may require a different approach from rcts.three out of four of the included studies are high quality rcts. the one quazi-rct(iyer 2006) was clearly stated as such, and the methodology was well described. we have therefore presented the results for individual outcomes (where possible) with and without the contribution of the quazi-rct. the bias from contamination, which may have been introduced with the two trials of individual subject randomization (bonner 2003; doan 2009), would be a conservative one and strengthens the validity of the significant findings in this meta-analysis.to the best of our knowledge, no bias was introduced during the review process.reasons for lack of effect on antibiotic prescription rates and urine investigations are unclear. although levine 2004 and byington 2004 reported lower rates of bacterial infections in febrile infants less then three months old who tested positive for viral infection, the rate of bacterial urinary tract infection in that group was not negligible (up to 7%). it is possible that physicians may still be apprehensive in dismissing the potential for a concurrent urinary tract infection, despite the presence of a virus and persist in ordering urine tests and prescribing precautionary antibiotics. urinary testing is dependant on obtaining a urine sample, which in young children may take a long time, hence prolong the ed length of visits. however, purcell 2002 reports rate of bacterial infection (all were urinary tract infections) in febrile rsv positive children up to two years old (1/3 were less then three months old) to be much lower at less than 1%, which puts into question this precautionary practice, at least in children over three months old.a number of rapid viral testing studies report subgroup analyses of participants with positive rapid viral results versus those with negative results. these demonstrated that a positive rapid viral diagnosis decreased the number of ancillary tests, antibiotics prescribed, and ed length of visits. while it is interesting to see that a positive result can decrease the amount of additional tests, the question is whether the rapid viral test is worth doing before one knows its result. as rapid viral diagnosis requires an invasive and uncomfortable test for the children (either through nasopharyngeal swabs or washings), it is important to determine how it may affect the outcome of the tested population as a whole. in the four studies mentioned above, the rate of positive viral diagnosis ranged from as low as 19% to 66% (19% to 52% for influenza testing alone and 66% for multi-viral testing). therefore, at least one-third of the children received an invasive test that may not have altered the course of their work-up or management. as one cannot definitively predict whether a child will have a positive test prior to doing it, this represents a large number of non-helpful tests, which will actually add to the burden presented by children with febrile respiratory illnesses.current evidence is insufficient, although promising, in supporting the widespread implementation of rapid viral diagnostic testing in the ed to reduce antibiotic prescription and ancillary investigations. the combined number of participants from the few available studies was not large enough to statistically detect a significant effect of rapid viral testing on our primary outcome and most of our secondary outcomes.as pediatric ed physicians become more comfortable managing febrile children with a confirmed viral diagnosis without further ancillary testing and precautionary antibiotics, further trials of rapid viral testing may demonstrate a more sizable impact which would be detected upon itt analyses, rather than just in subgroup analyses. a large rct is still needed as findings from this meta-analysis found opposing effects on antibiotic use in the ed between studies. while they also suggest a positive effect of rapid viral testing on blood investigations and ed length of visit, they lacked the power to reach statistical significance.future studies are also needed to assess the impact of this intervention on other secondary outcomes. these include adverse effects of the intervention, effects on hospital admissions, and the rate of other severe concurrent bacterial infections. in addition, it will be important to evaluate the cost effectiveness of this intervention before it is implemented more widely.rocholl c, gerber k, daly j, pavia at, byington cl. adenoviral infections in children: the impact of rapid diagnosis. randomized controlled trial participants previously healthy participants age 2 months -21 years old presenting to the alabama children's hospital emergency department with fever, respiratory symptoms, malaise or headaches of 72 hrs duration or less (n = 391).treatment group: results of nasopharyngeal swab for rapid influenza testing using fluoia test (turnaround time < 25 minutes) being revealed to treating physicians at initial patient assessment.control group: results of the rapid test were not available to the treating physician.proportion of participants undergoing laboratory testing, radiographs, antibiotics or antiviral use, length of ed stay. proportion of participants who had visits to a physician or new prescriptions for same illness post discharge from ed. length of school (daycare) or work time loss related to this illness.original published data was analyzed using participants with revealed negative rapid influenza test results as a control group. we obtained unpublished raw data to analyse participants into 2 study groups, those who had the rapid test results revealed to the treating physician (irrespective of test results) as the intervention group and those whose rapid inluenza test results were not revealed to the treating physician (control).adequate sequence generation? yes computerized randomization program in blocks of 4 participants (2 to intervention and 2 to control)allocation concealment? unclear randomization list was produced prior to the study. it is not mentioned whether individual allocation was concealed prior to enrolment.blinding? all outcomesthe impact of knowing the results of viral testing was the intervention being tested, and as such, could not be blinded.incomplete outcome data addressed? all outcomes yes 22 enrolled participants left before they were seen by the treating physician or received any treatment, hence could not contribute to the outcomes.free of selective reporting? yes all outcomes are reported. although published data was reported only per sub-group (by rapid viral testing result) , when contacted, the author supplied complete data for this review.free of other bias? yes no other significant bias was found.randomized controlled trial using days as the unit of randomization for treatment allocationchildren under the age of 5 years old with fever or acute respiratory symptoms during the 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 influenza season coming to vanderbilt pediatric emergency department (n = 305). this is a university-based pediatric ed in nashville, tennessee caring for approximately 30,000 children annually.three days per week, participants were enrolled into the study. study days were prospectively randomized in blocks of 4 and 6, using a random number generator, to the pointof-care rapid influenza testing and results made available to the treating physician prior to patient assessment versus standard testing with results made unavailable until the subject had been discharged form the ed. there were equal numbers of study days for each group.proportion of participants undergoing laboratory testing (urine and blood), chest radiographs, antibiotics and antiviral use.although this study enrolled 5 participants with chronic cardio-respiratory (bronchopulmonary dysplasia and congenital heart defect) or immune disorders of unknown severity (as reported by parents but not related to chemotherapy), which may meet our review exclusion criteria, the primary author was contacted and raw data excluding these 5 participants was obtained (n = 300). we used this data for the purpose of the metaanalysis.adequate sequence generation? yes block of days randomization by random number generator allocation concealment? unclear although participants could not have known which treatment was going to be in effect when coming to the ed, it is not specified in the publication whether participants were unaware of the treatment allocation until after consent for study partici-poehling 2006 (continued) pation was obtained.blinding? all outcomesthe impact of knowing the results of viral testing was the intervention being tested, and as such, could not be blinded.incomplete outcome data addressed? all outcomes unclear during the study period, 60 eligible children were not enrolled in the study. no mention is made of why these children were not enrolled.free of selective reporting? yes all outcomes are reported.no other significant bias was found.methods quazi-randomized controlled trial, using alternating days for treatment allocation participants children 2 to 24 months of age coming to the cincinnati children's hospital medical center ed with fever (n = 700).treatment group: nasal swab for rapid influenza testing using quickvue providing a result within 30 minutes. control group: nasal swab for rapid influenza testing using quickvue, but these were performed only twice daily to simulate routine laboratory testing turnaround and results were not available to the treating physician until the patient had been discharged from the ed.proportion of participants having blood culture, complete blood count, urine analyses, chest radiography, antibiotics use, hospital admission and return visits to the ed within 14 days of discharge. ed length of visits, visit-associated costs.adequate sequence generation? no alternate days used for treatment allocation allocation concealment? unclear although participants could not have known which treatment was going to be in effect when coming to the ed, it is not specified in the publication whether participants were unaware of the treatment allocation until after consent for study participation was obtained.iyer 2006 (continued) blinding? all outcomesthe impact of knowing the results of viral testing was the intervention being tested, and as such, could not be blinded.incomplete outcome data addressed? all outcomesduring the study period, 67 eligible participants were not enrolled in the study. thirty-six children were missed during the initial screening process (these were discovered during a retrospective review of daily patient logs). informed consent was not obtained on 19 participants. five participants left before evaluation by a physician and 7 were enrolled twice within one month. information was documented on only 11 of these participants, therefore it is unclear how the remaining 56 participants might have affected the outcome.free of selective reporting? yes all outcomes are reported.no other significant bias was noted.methods randomized controlled trial participants previously healthy children age 3-36 months old coming to the ed at british columbia children's hospital with fever and any respiratory symptoms (n = 199).treatment group: naso-pharyngeal aspirate for rapid respiratory virus panel (influenza a/b, parainfluenza 1/2/3, rsv, adenovirus) using direct immuno-fluorescence assay (light diagnostics simul fluor respiratory screening agent). control group: routine admission to ed. any test done was requested after assessment by treating physician.outcomes ed length of visit, proportion of participants undergoing laboratory testing (blood and or urine) radiographs and antibiotics use. these outcome measures were also assessed post ed discharge.two of the authors of this cochrane review are also investigators on this trial.adequate sequence generation? yes patients were randomized to either study groups using a computer randomization program in variable block size (2, 4, 6 or 8) .allocation concealment? yes computer program was only accessed at the time consent for study participation was obtained.blinding? all outcomesthe impact of knowing the results of viral testing was the intervention being tested, and as such, could not be blinded. abanses 2006 although set out to be an rct, when the treatment was not provided as per randomized allocation, these participants were re-assigned to the control group and vice versa and were analyzed as such (convenience sample). this study was no longer analyzed as an rct hence did not meet our inclusion criteria.this trial is set in community pediatric clinics, not in the ed.esposito 2003 this trial included children with congenital heart diseases (without specification about correction status) and significant chronic respiratory diseases (cystic fibrosis). on-site testing, emerging infectious diseases, crispr, pcr, serological tests, lateral flow assays; biosensors announced as pandemic on 13 march, severe acute respiratory-related coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is not only leading to an unexpected public health crisis worldwide (fauci et al., 2020) , but it is also becoming an unprecedented socio-economic burden (schoch-spana, 2020) . in this context, world health organization (who) was urging the international community to perform massive diagnostic testing to fight transmission of the virus and decrease number of undetected cases, since testing is also a valuable tool, aiding researchers to learn the epidemiology of the disease. moreover, diagnostics play a decisive role in making timely decisions on treatment and isolation of infected people, thereby, slowing or stopping the spread of the infectious diseases.testing along with the risk management and the healthcare system is a pivotal response in all outbreaks. extraordinary examples of this response are occurring in a few countries; for instance, south korea is now able to test around 20,000 citizens per day using aggressive testing campaigns enabled by drive-through and "phone booths" tests (south korean hospital's 'phone booth' coronavirus tests, 2020; south korea's "drive-through" coronavirus testing stations, 2020; testing times, 2020) , and german laboratories are currently carrying out about 400,000 coronavirus tests every week, (welle, 2020) which may be contributing to the lowest mortality rates due to covid-19 in the world. however, most of countries have a paucity of massive testing given supply problems (for example, specialized swabs, face masks and reagents) (thomas, 2020) or a disparity in terms of politics and public health measurements (apuzzo and gebrekidan, 2020; cnn, 2020.; wittenberg-cox, 2020) .the technology behind testing is biosensing, which aims to detect biological and (bio)chemical agents employing a biologically derived or a biomimetic recognition element while either undergoing a (bio)chemical reaction (for example, enzyme-based biosensors) or binding the target molecule (i.e. analyte) in a highly specific way. such a binding event can be then transduced to a measurable signal either directly (for example, by means of impedance measurements or surface plasmon resonance), or employing signaling molecules (i.e. labels) including enzymes, fluorophores or electrochemically/optically active compounds .once china published the coronavirus genetic code in early january, polymerase chain reaction (pcr)-based tests were developed around the world and covid-19 is conventionally being diagnosed by means of this gold standard method (chu et al., 2020;  "read online-handbook of covid-19 prevention and treatment.pdf," 2020). pcr tests are also crucial in order to take decisions related to contact tracing and isolation of specific citizens. it is worth mentioning that thoracic imaging, via computer tomography scans, portable chest x-rays and flexible bronchoscopy, is also valuable in diagnosis, therapy monitoring and discharge assessment related to covid-19 infection since as far as it is known, it is mainly a respiratory illness ("covid-19 and coagulopathy -hematology.org," 2020; "read online-handbook of covid-19 prevention and treatment.pdf," 2020; udugama et al., 2020) .pcr involves amplification of minute traces of genetic material; i.e., the ribonucleic acid (rna) of the virus, leading to highly specific and sensitive detection. however, pcr tests are generally performed in centralized diagnostic services by highly skilled personnel and their results may take from 4 hours up to 3 days. apart from this, pcr tests are prone to the following limiting factors: (i) sampling error: nasopharyngeal swab is suitably performed to take mucus from the ventilatory system; however, this may give rise to false negatives as optimal sampling moment is still ambiguous. (ii) besides, as a sample preparation (including cell lysis and nucleic acid purification) for pcr analysis is required, not only the number of the tests but also the number of extraction kits is a limiting factor for ramping up covid-19 testing. ("shortage of rna extraction kits hampers efforts to ramp up covid-19 coronavirus testing," 2020) (iii) generally, pcr samples require specialized handling and transportation.genetic material may be denatured during inadequate transportation, bringing also about false negatives. (iv) quality of reagents utilized by different pcr kit manufacturers may also affect consistency among results. (v) standard pcr methods may lack of sensitivity, potentially giving rise to false negative results in covid-19 patients with unapparent clinical symptoms. for patients in recovery, this resulted in the heatedly debated issue with the "reinfection", or more accurately "re-detectable positive" patients, as confirming tests with moresensitive methods delivered again positive results . (vi) because of the nucleic acid amplification employed, special primers and probes for each target are necessary which limits pcr's flexibility of scaling up for other nucleic acids in an easy and rapid manner. (vii) this previous point could even be a problem for the same target since sars-cov-2 rna is likely to undergo mutations (kupferschmidt et al., 2020) . therefore, sequencing of genetic material of the virus should be continuously monitored and confirmed to ensure accuracy of this method. in this regard, other biosensing technologies offer a complementary approach to standard pcr-based tests not only in terms of sensitivity, but also in terms of diagnostics and therapeutic decisions. moreover, the biosensing community is actively working to improve portability, time and cost of pcr-based sars-cov-2 detection (nunez-bajo et al., 2020) as well as to create easy-to-use pcr-based microfluidic devices with an integrated sample preparation ("state funds the development of rapid tests for coronavirus," 2020). interestingly, an international company envisions an alternative approach by detecting covid-19 within the exhaled breath condensate using the combination of pcr and lfa technology since it is an airborne droplet infection ("the detection of covid-19 on the breath followed by pcr, 2020". in contrast to pcr, isothermal amplification of genetic material (at constant temperature) enables to develop point-of-care devices for the rapid detection of nucleic acids. a remarkable example of an approved technology for covid-19 determination is shown by the company abbott, which delivers results in around 13 minutes ("abbott launches molecular point-of-care test to detect novel coronavirus in as little as five minutes -mar 27, 2020").the possible ways to target sars-cov-2 via different biomolecules are summarized in figure 1 . for the covid-19 testing, apart from the aforementioned viral rna, novel coronavirus exhibits spike proteins which are immunogenic (grifoni et al., 2020) ; hence, immune system is able to produce immunoglobulins to trigger an immune response against the pathogen. importantly, these immunoglobulins are not only valuable to detect covid-19, but also for its potential therapy . immunoglobulin m (igm) antibodies are produced during the onset of the infectious disease (between 4 and 10 days), whereas immunoglobulin g (igg) response is produced later (around 2 weeks). ("immunoglobulin m antibody -an overview | sciencedirect topics," 2020; "read online-handbook of covid-19prevention and treatment.pdf," 2020) figure 1 . schematic illustrating the structure of sars-cov-2 and related targeting sites (biomolecules) that can be used for the covid-19 detection. not to scale.in order to overcome the aforementioned issues with pcr-based systems, researchers around the world are pushing hard to develop different methods and devices, allowing an easy, rapid, affordable and highly sensitive and selective quantification of nucleic acids in low-resource settings (such as doctors' practices, or directly at home). for this purpose, a promising and powerful tool is the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (crispr) technology, mainly employed in gene editing (li et al., 2019; zuo et al., 2017) . thanks to its different crispr-associated (cas) enzymes, that can be programmed by single-guide rnas (sgrnas) or crispr rnas (crrnas), crispr technology enables to target all types of nucleic acids for a wide range of various targets, including bacteria, viruses, micrornas and cancer mutations, in a simple and easily scalable way (only by changing the target-specific sgrna/crrna) (bruch et al., 2019b; li et al., 2019) . current crispr-tailored approaches are based on two different detection modes, binding-or cleavage-based, shown in figure 2 . (bruch et al., 2019c) . in cleavage-based approach, after the recognition event of the target gene of sars-cov-2, the cas/crrna complex gets activated and cleaves the surrounding labelled reporter rnas (rerna), resulting in a concentration-dependent signal change. for the binding-based crispr detection, a catalytically deactivated cas/crrna complex, specific to the target sequence of covid-19, is immobilized on the sensor surface (for example, on a graphenebased field effect transistor as previously applied for detecting genetic mutations (hajian et al., 2019) ). upon recognition of its target, the resulting signal can be read out via a handheld device.mammoth biosciences and sherlock biosciences, leading companies in the field of crispr diagnostics, have already presented their crispr-powered assays to enable rapid and lowcost tests for sars-cov-2 employing conventional lateral flow assays (lfas) (sheridan, 2020) . using the cas12 effector (capable of targeting single-stranded dnas and rnas) and orf1ab gene of covid-19 with detection limits of 10 and 100 copies per µl, respectively, in less than 1 hour, employing recombinase polymerase amplification (rpa) along with cas13a enzyme (targeting single-stranded rnas) . this approach is not validated yet with patient samples.however, these systems still employ a target amplification (such as lamp or rpa) (broughton et al., 2020; shen et al., 2020) ; which covers up the crispr's great versatility as different primers and probes for each target are required. in this regard, two amplificationfree biosensing systems using crispr technology have recently introduced: the crispr-chip for electrical detection of genetic mutations using cas9 (hajian et al., 2019) and the electrochemical crispr-biosensor for microrna analysis employing cas13a (bruch et al., 2019a) . both groups have announced their interest to extend their systems for an amplification-free on-site covid-19 testing ("cardean transistors tm made available to companies and government agencies willing to build handheld coronavirus detection devices," 2020; "diagnostics with molecular scissors -is this also possible for on-site covid-19 tests?," 2020). besides, crispr-biosensor's group would like to target two characteristic genome sequences (e gene and rdrp gene) of sars-cov-2 simultaneously, using a multiplexed microfluidic chip. in principle, crispr-powered approaches allow for an easy adaptation to any nucleic acids and thus, can address potential mutations of sars-cov-2 in a timely manner. as another nucleic acid amplification-free approach, an optical biosensor combining plasmonic photothermal effect and localized surface plasmon resonance has been recently demonstrated to discriminate similar gene sequences with high analytical sensitivity (qiu et al., 2020) .another convenient way of sensing is the use of substrates (i.e. sensor material) functionalized with recombinant viral antigens which can be exploited to bind the aforementioned immunoglobulins. with this, it is possible to detect the presence of the novel coronavirus (via igm) or to provide a history of past infections (via igg) as these antibodies are much longer present in the blood (vogel et al., 2020) . in this regard, lfas, well-known as at-home pregnancy and ovulation tests, offer an equipment free, user-friendly and rapid platform for optical on-site testing and are the masterpiece of biosensing and nanotechnology, so far (marquez and morales-narváez, 2019). moreover, as lfa utilizes cellulose-based materials (such as paper), it is amenable to mass production at very low costs (morales-narváez et al., 2017). hence, commercial lfas targeting the aforementioned immunoglobulins even simultaneously have already been developed and approved around the world, including australia, china, germany, singapore, south korea and usa (sheridan, 2020) . these devices are now a valuable tool to monitor the course of sars-cov-2 infection using a drop of human serum, plasma or even whole blood, offering qualitative results within 15 minutes at the point of care; for example, at home or primary care (sheridan, 2020) . interestingly, collective positive tests facilitated by lfas could lead to spot herd immunity regions, thereby possibly abandoning lockdowns. moreover, germany is planning to issue "immunity certificates" allowing citizens with positive antibody tests to stop their lockdown early (bienkov, 2020) . however, highly sensitive approaches enabling a quantitative testing are also demanded since the measurement of the virus-related immunoglobulin levels can be employed as diagnostic criteria for suspected cases with negative pcr results ("read online-handbook of covid-19 prevention and treatment.pdf," 2020). in addition, determination of breadth and kinetics of immune responses can be meaningful to study non-severe cases of novel coronavirus, thereby forecasting infection outcome (thevarajan et al., 2020) . although, employment of serological tests to determine covid-19 immunity is still under debate (feuer, 2020; mallapaty, 2020) , -likewise, the protection capability of face masks was cautiously discussed by who (devlin and campbell, 2020 ) -we believe that serological test will be a crucial tool to execute serosurveys (stadlbauer et al., 2020) , thereby, offering relevant information to take measures aimed at ceasing lockdowns and getting back to common life gradually.other biosensing strategies using antibodies to selectively capture the whole virus exist. a very recent example, convat project, supported by the european union, aims at the optical detection of the whole virus in 30 minutes to determine the viral load (viral content per ml) in saliva samples, whose result would be then followed via pcr in the same platform ("laura lechuga, investigadora del csic: 'llevamos tiempo reclamando que hay que invertir más dinero en prevención y análisis,'" 2020). similarly, graphene-based field-effect transistors, enabling portable devices, have been engineered to determine covid-19 viral load in clinical nasopharyngeal samples, using a specific antibody against its spike protein (seo et al., 2020) . viral load, which is conventionally determined using quantitative real-time pcr, is not only important to determine the severity of the infectious disease, but also to monitor viral dynamics in infected patients and a therapy response . hence, viral load determination may help to facilitate decisions driven by personalized medicine, thereby, effective clinical procedures can be applied. nevertheless, antibody-based approaches mainly suffer from their relatively slow (typically a few weeks) development when compared with nucleic acid tests against a new infection as well as from their timeconsuming and expensive production. depending on the specificity of the employed antibodies, they may also suffer from false positives caused by potential cross-reactivity with other coronaviruses. importantly, existing literature summarizes current commercialized technologies focused on covid-19 diagnosis and compare their strengths and weaknesses (mallapaty, 2020; sheridan, 2020) .detection of additional biomarkers, different than immunoglobulins, is another approach to perform effective assessment of clinical progress and provide alertness on severity or critical trends of covid-19 infection. they are also valuable as a blueprint to formulate therapeutic procedures. the first affiliated hospital, zhejiang university school of medicine, a top hospital in china with zero fatalities, recommends the surveillance of the following inflammatory response biomarkers for the sars-cov-2 infection: c-reactive protein, procalcitonin, ferritin, d-dimer, il-4, il-6, il-10, tnf-α and inf-γ. it is worth mentioning that low total number of lymphocytes at the onset of the disease is also an indicator of poor prognosis, whereas severe infections display a gradually decreased number of peripheral blood lymphocytes ("read online-handbook of covid-19 prevention and treatment.pdf," 2020) . hence, lymphocyte analysis is also an effective resource in this emerging infectious disease. the clinical relevance of some of these biomarkers are discussed in table 1 . in this context, the biosensing community is urged to create affordable, rapid, sensitive and multiplexed systems amenable to mass production in order to detect these biomarkers simultaneously. besides, biosensing devices incorporating artificial antibodies (such as molecularly imprinted polymers) or other innovative antibodies (ex., shark antibodies) (matz and dooley, 2019) would be of great value in emerging infectious disease diagnostics, since they are amenable to withstand harsh conditions during handling and delivery. il-6 and il-10: dramatically increased levels severe condition of covid-19 infection. a ("covid-19 and coagulopathy -hematology.org," 2020; "read online-handbook of covid-19 prevention and treatment.pdf," 2020).all in all, as early career scientists and members of the biosensing community, facing the most dramatic situation ever experienced in xxi century, we believe that we will undergo other disease outbreaks caused not only by viral but also bacterial pathogens, and the world has to rethink the way we cope with such situations. thus, we offer the following seven recommendations:1. investment in pandemic preparedness in terms of diagnostic tools is pivotal to prevent the spread of emerging infectious diseases. this should be a joint and even an international task of different entities, including governments, funding agencies, academia and industries. we believe timely and large-scale testing based on reliable biosensing technology might lead to avoid or soften stringent measures such as lockdowns, border closing and travel bans, as shown in the example of south korea or iceland.collaborative networks should be formed and involve not only experts in biosensing but also in biosecurity and their corresponding facilities, as well as robust biotechnology companies ready for mass production. actually, getting their central innovation opportunities in testing not dominated by already established methods (like pcr), the biosensing community will play a critical role to control, slow, hinder or prevent such pandemic outbreaks.in case of stringent measures such as border closings, each country should be prepared (i.e. sustainable and independent) in terms of manufacture of biosensing technology and protection equipment. for instance, germany develops various kind of machines for the production of protection equipment but even germany, itself, has a limited activity to fabricate its own protection materials such as masks and protective clothing, leading to shortages of these items.the aforementioned collaborative networks should be ready to develop new diagnostic tools or adapt the existing ones rapidly and the governments should offer fast-track approval programs (such as the food and drug administration -fda) to examine those tools rapidly.biosensing devices for testing infectious diseases should rigorously satisfy the following requirements: they must be (i) disposable, offering reliable mass production, (ii) accessible and affordable, allowing large-scale population screening, (iii) easy-to-use by minimally trained users or even by the patients themselves, (iv) equipment-free or operated with an inexpensive and portable readout unit, (v) rapid, enabling short sample-to-result times (less than an hour), (vi) able to work with low sample volumes and easily accessible samples (for example, blood from a finger prick or non-invasive swab samples), (vii) highly selective and sensitive (if possible, without target amplification), delivering accurate results in accordance with central laboratory findings, (viii) with an integrated sample preparation (including lysis and isolation for nucleic acid testing, or plasma separation for proteomics), (ix) easily scalable and flexible to detect different targets using the same platform (such as crispr-powered systems), and (x) capable of multiplexing, simultaneous detection of different analytes including controls (dincer et al., 2017) . ideally, these systems should also be able to perform multi-omics simultaneously (for instance, the detection of nucleic acids along with immunoglobulins) 6. internet-of-things, connecting sensors via databases with healthcare workers to realize a decentralized healthcare, is also an important tool to provide valuable insights in terms of emerging infectious disease scenarios and dynamics, determination of herd immunity regions, as well as epidemiology and big data. in order to secure all these information, blockchain technology, known from cryptocurrencies like bitcoin, could be applied for internet-of-things.general population should be trained in advance to perform effective self-sampling (for example, to collect nasal swabs) as well as self-testing (especially, for lfabased immunity testing in order to estimate population coverage). in this regard, it would be helpful to have some classes in the high or secondary school, or seminars in companies where the general public gets familiar with issues like sample collection and performing self-tests (similar to fire drills).on 30 january 2020, the world health organization (who) declared a global public health emergency [1] over the outbreak of the new coronavirus, called the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov), which originated in wuhan city, in the hubei province of china. on 11 february, who officially named the disease as the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) [2]. human-to-human transmission (figure 1) has been confirmed by who and by the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) of the united states [3], with evidence of person-to-person transmission from three different cases outside china, namely in the us [4], germany [5], and vietnam [6]. covid-19 has continuously spread to 104 countries; the number of confirmed infections reached 109,343 on 9 march 2020 [7], and the death toll in china has overtaken the sars epidemic of 2002–2003 and has risen to 3,100 [2]. to slow down the spread of covid-19, at least 50 million people in china have been placed under lockdown [8]. on 8 march 2020, italy also undertook the same measures, with the northern part of the country placed under lockdown, affecting 16 million people [9]. the definition of coronaviruses is listed in table 1. the reproduction number r0 (i.e., the average number of secondary cases generated by a typical infectious individual) is estimated to be 2.68, and the doubling time is estimated to be 6.4 days [10].the manifestation of the covid-19 infection is highly nonspecific, including respiratory symptoms, fever, cough, dyspnea, and viral pneumonia [20]. thus, diagnostic tests specific to this infection are urgently required to confirm suspected cases, screen patients, and conduct virus surveillance.in this scenario, a point-of-care (poc) device (i.e., a rapid, robust, and cost-efficient device that can be used onsite and in the field, and which does not necessarily require a trained technician to operate [21]) is crucial and urgently needed for the detection of covid-19. figure 2 shows the dramatic impact of early detection of infectious diseases in controlling an outbreak [22,23,24]. such a poc device can be used in (but is not limited to) an emergency situation, such as the diamond princess cruise ship case. recently, it was reported that the diamond princess cruise ship has been quarantined in yokohama, japan, due to a serious spreading of covid-19 on this cruise, with at least 454 infected cases out of 3,700 passengers and crew (reported by who [7], 17 february 2020). the detection of covid-19 may not have been prompt enough as they did not have enough test kits to diagnose all the passengers on the ship in order to timely respond to the rapid spreading of the disease [25].the current standard molecular technique that is now being used to detect covid-19 is the real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr). this protocol has been documented and available online on the who website since 17 january 2020 [26]. the testing procedure includes: (i) specimen collection; (ii) packing (storage) and shipment of the clinical specimens; (iii) (good) communication with the laboratory and providing needed information; (iv) laboratory testing; (v) reporting the results. this rrt-pcr technique requires sophisticated laboratory equipment that is often located at a central laboratory (biosafety level 2 or above) [4,26,27]. sample transportation is inevitable. as a consequence, the time required to obtain the results can be up to 2 or 3 days. in the case of a public health emergency such as the covid-19 outbreak, this time-consuming process of sample testing is not only extremely disadvantageous, but also dangerous since the virus needs to be contained. in addition, commercial pcr-based methods are expensive and depend upon technical expertise, and the presence of viral rna or dna does not always reflect acute disease [28,29,30]. furthermore, using pcr, codetection with other respiratory viruses is frequently encountered in coronaviruses (covs), and the contribution of positive cov pcr results to disease severity is not always explicitly exhibited [28,29,30]. furthermore, as of 2 february 2020 in the united states, as mentioned in the interim guidelines for collecting, handling, and testing clinical specimens from persons under investigation (puis) for 2019 novel coronavirus, the diagnostic testing for covid-19 can be conducted only at cdc. from 4 february 2020 onwards, covid-19 tests can also be done at laboratories designated by cdc. likewise in china, where the outbreak is ongoing, samples had to be sent to beijing for testing, as reported on 31 january 2020 [31]. on 4 february 2020, china’s own cdc deployed a mobile biosafety laboratory to wuhan in the hubei province to assist with the response [32,33]. on 5 february 2020, an emergency test laboratory (biosafety level 2) run by bgi genomics, global heartquare: shenzhen, china was set up in wuhan in the hubei province to assist the covid-19 epidemic [34].in order to overcome the current time-consuming and laborious detection technique using rt-qpcr, an alternative molecular amplification technique should be deployed. loop-mediated isothermal amplification (lamp) reaction is a novel nucleic acid amplification technique that amplifies dna with high specificity, efficiency, and rapidity under isothermal conditions. this method uses a set of four specially designed primers, and a dna polymerase with strand displacement activity [35] to synthesize target dna up to 109 copies in less than an hour at a constant temperature of 65 °c. the final products are stem-loop dnas with multiple inverted repeats of the target, bearing structures with a cauliflower-like appearance. lamp has high specificity and sensitivity and is simple to perform; hence, soon after its initial development it became an enormously popular isothermal amplification method in molecular biology, with application in pathogen detection. lamp uses strand-displacement polymerases instead of heat denaturation to generate a single-stranded template; hence, it has the advantage of running at a constant temperature, simultaneously reducing the cumbersomeness of a thermocycler as well as the energy required. lamp technology is proven to be more stable [36] and more sensitive [37] in detection compared to pcr. other advantages of lamp compared to those of pcr are shown in table 2. we believe that the lamp assay could be a potential candidate for the point-of-care device application in the detection of covid-19. an example of using lamp in a point-of-care device for the detection of a zoonotic virus causing respiratory symptoms such as the avian influenza virus (aiv) is the vivaldi (veterinary validation of point-of-care diagnostic instrument) project [38]. with poc devices such as the vetpod [38] (veterinary, portable, onsite detection), in the vivaldi project, detection time can be less than 1 h. besides poc devices using disposable polymer chips and lamp assays, as in the vetpod of the vivaldi project, a lateral flow strip (lfs) would also be a suitable candidate for the rapid and on-site detection of covid-19. a device such as covid-19 igm/igg rapid test of biomedomics is a good example [39]. the sensitivity of the covid-19 igm/igg rapid test is 88.66%, which is expected to be lower than the sensitivity of tests based on lamp-reaction assays (>95%). therefore, a combination of lfs and lamp into one device could be an excellent candidate for poc testing of covid-19.furthermore, alongside detecting and containing the virus, for the sake of a public health response regarding the dynamics of the outbreak, the socio-economic impact of covid-19 is equally in urgent need. who announced that to fight the further spread of covid-19, the international community has launched a us$675 million preparedness and response plan from february through april 2020 [43]. in 2003, the sars-cov virus pulled the world’s output down by $50 billion. the early estimation for the cost to the global economy as a result of the outbreak of covid-19 is about $360 billion [44]. this is because china’s gdp shares were approximately 17% globally as of 2019, which was about four times higher than in 2003, and the confirmed infected cases (at the time of doing the economic estimation, i.e., at the beginning of february 2020) are more than 2 times larger than the total of sars. given that the number of infected cases (109,343 confirmed cases) is currently approximately 14 times larger than sars cases [45], and that the death toll due to covid-19 has surpassed that of the sars epidemic, the economic impact of covid-19 might be much larger than $360 billion.furthermore, in order to win the battle against this outbreak, information on the epidemiological characteristics, such as the identification of the animal reservoirs [46] (figure 1) and the risk factor of the disease, is also essential. the intermediate host carrying the disease is important to identify not only for the current epidemic, but also to eliminate a future outbreak. together with the all aforementioned factors, the race for a vaccination against covid-19 is equally essential. although at this stage there is no registered treatment or vaccine for covid-19, zhang has recently mentioned some potential interventions [47], such as nutritional interventions (vitamin a, b, c, d, e, and other trace minerals such as zinc and iron). due to the high percentage of identicality in the sequence (up to 82% of the genome structure) between sars-cov-2 and the sars-cov virus, immuno-enhancers and other specific treatment that have been applied for sars could also be considered [47] to use for the treatment of sars-cov-2. first, in wuhan, china, sars-cov2 arose as a new viral infection, and is currently named coronavirus disease 2019 . newcoronavirus (mers-cov) and sars-cov are different strains of coronaviruses belonging to the β-coronavirus cluster (p. . sars-cov2, the chief pathogen of the human respiratory system, is the third zoonotic coronavirus disease and the third major medical crisis with a different genome from sars-cov.sars-cov2 is mostly transmitted by respiratory system droplets, gastric tract, and close human interaction, and is located in the nasal mucosa, mouth, and lungs of exposed individuals. of note, middleaged and elderly individuals, as well as patients with chronic or autoimmune underlying diseases, are most susceptible to be infection by sars-cov2. incredibly, coronavirus has become a critical challenge in global public health due to rapid development and extreme spread by active carriers in human-to-human transmission (riou & althaus, 2020) . clinically, covid-19 brings about very severe respiratory infections and lethal sickness the same as sars and mers. besides respiratory system injury, covid-19 hurts various organs, including the kidney, liver, gastrointestinal, and neurologic systems (yin & wunderink, 2018) . structurally, the coronavirus is characterized as an enveloped, nonsegmented, and single-stranded safa tahmasebi and elnaz khosh contributed equally to this study. rna virus. the structure is composed of an envelope (e), nucleocapsid (n), membrane (m), and spike (s) proteins. both e and m proteins have a central role in virus assembly and release of the virus (schoeman & fielding, 2019; sheikh, al-taher, al-nazawi, al-mubarak, & kandeel, 2020) . the s protein, an immense multipurpose viral transmembrane protein, induces immune responses by mediating the virus attachment to host receptors (f. li, 2016) . the n protein, a multifunctional protein, is identified as a viral rna silencing suppressor. the n protein has a substantial role in viral transcription and replication and is involved in packaging the encapsidated genome into virions. regarding the overexpression and high immunogenicity of n protein, it can be considered as a potential diagnostic target for sars-cov2 detection (hurst, koetzner, & masters, 2009 ).after exposure, the virus enters into target cells and acts by binding to its receptor, the so-called angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). ace2 is present on type i and ii alveolar epithelial cells of healthy lung tissue. also, it has been reported that organ failure can occur all over the body if organ cells express ace2. the interaction between sars-cov2 and ace2 leads to overexpression of ace2 resulting in alveolar cell detriment, interstitial and alveolar edema, respiratory system failure, and ards (y. . among various laboratory abnormalities, lymphopenia with or without leukocyte irregularities is commonly observed as a major para-clinical criterion of covid-19 infected patients (l. . according to sars-cov2 immunopathogenesis, lymphopenia is characterized by a decrease in lymphocytes, particularly cd8+ t cells and a slight increase in neutrophils (wan et al., 2020) .moreover, it has been found that sars-cov2 can indirectly infect immune cells, mostly t cells, and macrophages, and elicits their destruction. increased frequency of infected immune cells, lymphopenia, and high levels of inflammatory cytokines are considered as the most related elements to covid-19 immunopathogenesis . in this regard, elevated levels of pro-and inflammatory cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor-α (tnf-α), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (g-csf), macrophage inflammatory protein (mip-1a), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (mcp-1), interferon gamma-induced protein-10 (ip-10), interleukin-1 (il-1), il-2, il-6, il-7, and il-10 have been documented in covid-19 patients with severe conditions, which generate the cytokine storm. it seems that the cytokine storm is the primary phenomenon of virus pathogenesis leading to inflammation, lung injury, ards, and other organ failures (wan et al., 2020) .hence, there is a critical need for the detection of the infected or suspected cases as soon as possible to apply the appropriate treatments for covid-19 and prevent the spread of virus. for this reason, in this review, we will focus on the im- the importance of different diagnostic methods of covid-19 has been emphasized in many studies. several studies have been designed or are underway to investigate the efficacy of covid-19 diagnostic methods, and have been listed in table 1 and igg antibodies or viral antigens. recently, the use of serological tests to rule out or confirm the infection, specifically in negative naats has been suggested due to the ease of use, quick presentation of results, as well as acceptable specificity and sensitivity. contrarily, viral culture does not need to be used for detection due to the research aspect of culture. however, it can be applied to determine the contagiousness of the infection, the presence of the virus at different surfaces, and study the efficacy of various treatments on cultured cells.in the following, we have described in detail the different types of diagnostic methods in the two general clinical and para-clinical categories.sample collection is an important procedure that should be done correctly to achieve accurate diagnostic results. with regard to the transmission of the sars-cov2 through the respiratory tract, fecaloral, and body fluids, anal swabs, oral swabs, and blood samples are different methods of sample collection for diagnosis of the novel coronavirus (w. zhang et al., 2020) . a recent study has analyzed repeated sample collection from positive cases, which showed that 15 infected patients still had a virus after days of receiving treatments. they further reported that they might have more positive oral swabs on the first day of sampling, and more positive anal swabs on the late period of sampling. notably, prolonged positive stool samples are not correlated with the severity of the disease, and some positive zhang et al., 2020) . also, they evaluated the levels of igm and igg antibodies in samples on day 0 and day 5. the positive rate of igm shifted from 50% to 81%, and the positive rate of igg shifted from 81% to 100%. on the basis of a high detection rate of antibody titers, it is beneficial to assess both serological and molecular tests in suspected patients.one of the latest studies has analyzed 1,070 samples collected from different sites of 205 infected patients. the specimens were collected from the pharynx, urine, feces, sputum, blood, and nasal. the centers for disease control (cdc) have reported that the newly prevalent virus has mild to severe clinical manifestations in many cases and sometimes leads to death (cdc). in the suspected patients, symptoms almost appear as fever, cough, fatigue, pneumonia, and respiratory distress; whereass some symptoms such as rhinorrhea, diarrhea, hemoptysis, headache, and phlegm-producing cough are rare in these patients (adhikari et al., 2020 in the lung to the medullary cardiorespiratory center through synapseconnected routes. it seems that the infection of the nervous system could be a reason for the respiratory failure of the coronavirus.according to research, the average time interval from the onset of initial symptom to dyspnea is 5 days, that to admission in hospital is 7 days, and that to receive intensive care is 8 days. this latency time interval is enough for the virus to penetrate the nervous system and they selected the orf1b and n genes as highly conserved targets.sars coronavirus nucleic acids wereconsidered as positive controls.as a result, the respiratory specimens of two infected patients 8 | tahmasebi et al.showed positive results after detectionby two rt-pcr assays, in which the n gene assay revealed significant sensitivity 10 times more than the orf1b gene in positive specimens. overall, the findings of this study suggest using the n-rt-pcr as a screening assay and the orf1b-rt-pcr as a confirmatory assay.from decades ago, pooling diagnostic tests have been developed to optimize detection time, save on reagents, and quickly detect large numbers of suspicious or contaminated cases in infectious disease.beneficially, intricate equipment and additional training are not required in the use of these tests (nguyen, bish, & aprahamian, 2018) .pooling has been evidenced for rt-qpcr, which would allow to rt-pcr to detect the low-concentration rna with further optimization (arnold et al., 2013) . it should be noted that there is a possibility of a positive rt-pcr result in covid-19 recovered patients. with this point of view, a study evaluated four treated covid-19 patients from wuhan, china, by rrt-pcr to confirm whether they could return to work. the patients' recovery was confirmed by rehabilitation criteria, including normal temperature over 3 days, relieved respiratory difficulties, and confirmed ct imaging based on recovered acute exudative lesions.finally, confirmation of two separated negative rt-pcr results led to hospital discharge and discontinuation of quarantine. accordingly, rt-pcr assays were carried out on throat swabs of patients using biogerm kits, 5-13 days after hospital discharge, and discontinuation of quarantine, all of which were positive (lan et al., 2020) . surprisingly, the results revealed that a proportion of rehabilitated patientscan be virus carriers and should continue the quarantine protocol for about 5 days more. also, the rt-pcr assay should be reevaluated to confirm the complete remission of treated patients.several advantages of rt-pcr assays make them potent and effective diagnostic techniques for covid-19 infection. the rt-pcr assay is identified as a practical diagnostic approach used to confirm the covid-19 positive cases (roberts et al., 2015) . it has the capability of precise and reproducible determination of infected cases.also, it can be employed to quantify the presence or absence of viral rna and viral load in patients' specimens. in plasma therapy, selection and confirmation of covid-19 recovered patients, as appro- according to a report, in one sars-cov2 infected patient with both rt-qpcr and ngs, the positive results were not confirmedby tahmasebi et al.| 9rt-qpcr testing within 3 weeks before obtaining the balf . this data suggests the high fnr or inconsistency of r laboratory screening tests (laboratory findings) based on assessing the biological and chemical factors in blood would be helpful for better determination of covid-19 infected patients, although they do not have higher specificity and sensitivity (table 3) moreover, a higher level of d-dimer was also detected in patients with severe conditions (bangash, patel, & parekh, 2020; f. zhou et al., 2020) . the procalcitonin level is mostly normal in covid-19patients, but a higher-level was reported in bacterial co-infection.increased levels of pro-and inflammatory cytokines in the serum of infected covid-19 patients also were reported in several studies, which is considered as the main reason for the cytokine storm (c. huang et al., 2020) . in addition to the laboratory findings as mentioned above, detecting the lymphocyte subsets and their levels in the blood samples of patients would provide valuable information for better diagnosis of infection. in a study, wan et al. (2020) in a systematic review and meta-analysis study (pormohammad et al., 2020) , investigating the available laboratory data among 2,361 sars-cov2 patients, the results demonstrated 13.3% leukocytosis, 26% leukopenia, and 62.5% lymphopenia. furthermore, among 2,200 patients, increased levels of platelets (thrombocytosis) and crp were reported in 91% and 81% of patients, respectively. also, a case report study by w. han et al. (2020) neutrophils. consequently, despite the nonspecific findings of blood count and parameters in diagnosing covid-19 infected patients, these laboratory findings would be helpful in early detection of infected cases in combination with highly specific and sensitive approaches, such as ct imaging and rt-pcr assay. following the exposure to sars-cov2, the host immune system releases the igm and igg antibodies against the virus. first, igm appears in the initial exposure to response to sars-cov2 antigens and is involved in the primary immune responses; however, igg is also engaged in secondary immune responses. igm is the first produced antibody with low concentration, low affinity, and limited maintenance time, which is disappeared at the end of the infection.contrarily, igg is later secreted with high concentration, affinity, and maintenance time, and also persists after infection recovery.accordingly, igm detection indicates acute infection, and igg is a diagnostic index of previous, middle, or late infection. thereby, developing elisa tests for detecting these anti-sars-cov2 antibodies would help early detection of positive cases at least a few weeks after infection onset. interestingly, a large number of suspected cases can be identified in a short time with simple facilities and acceptable sensitivity/specificity rates, as well as a low rate of false-negative results.in one study, w. zhang et al. (2020) another study by liu, liu, wang, and zheng (2020) was performed to analyze the diagnostic values of igm and igg antibodies against the n protein of sars-cov2 in 238 hospital admitted patients with confirmed or suspected sars-covid-19 infection.surprisingly, the elisa findings indicated that suspected cases were positively contaminated by sars-cov2. they also detected the igm and igg in 194 cases, with a 81.5% positive rate, which was considerably more than the rt-pcr assay (64.3%). additionally, it was found that elisa detected suspected patients who had negative rt-pcr results with a 78.8% positive rate for igm and igg.w. measured the produced igm, and igg antibodies against nucleocapsid protein (rn) and spike protein (rs) of sars-cov2 in 214 covid-19 confirmed patients using the elisa.successfully, rn-based igm and igg were detected in 68.2% and 70.1% of patients, respectively. besides this, rs-based igm and igg were discovered in 77.1% and 74.3% of patients, respectively. findings also reported that positive rates of igm/igg were 80.4% and 82.2% for rn-and rs-based detections, respectively. furthermore, it was found that rs-based detection of igm had a higher sensitivity than rn-based detection.in an investigation by amanat et al. (2020) , elisa was developed using recombinant antigens originating from the spike protein (sp) of sars-cov2. they showed that screening and identification of covid-19 seroconverters were possible as early as 3 days following the symptom onset with high sensitivity and specificity. as expected, no reactivity was observed in individuals who were not exposed to sars-cov2 and were completely naive for sp. by reliance on these details, exposed/immune and naive people can be easily distinguished. in a related study by stadlbauer et al. (2020) , a detailed protocol was provided for the expression of antigens derived from the spike protein that can be used as a substrate for setting up elisa and other immunological assays. they claimed that the presented protocol was adapted to local needs, including research, diagnostic, and clinical laboratories. with respect to the applications of elisa in detecting the anti-sars-cov2 igm/igg antibodies based on the findings mentioned above, it is considered as an applicable serological assay for the detection of covid-19 with high sensitivity and specificity.in one study, long et al. (2020) whereas, after 20-22 days, the igm had an around 94.1% positive rate. they also found that the igm and igg titers were gradually increased within 3 weeks after onset of the symptoms; however, igm indicated a slight decrease after more than 3 weeks. moreover, it was understood that in patients with a severe condition, igg and igm titers were more remarkable than those with the non-severe condi- in another investigation, the lfa, a qualitative immunoassay, is another potent serological technology used to detect the covid-19 infected cases with a rapid, simple, and low-cost procedure. lfa acts based on a paper-based platform for quantifying multiple analytes in a sample within according to a study conducted for an antigen rapid test, the findings demonstrated the high sensitivity of detecting the n antigen derived from sars-cov in the early stages of the infection, which was a useful early diagnostic approach for sars-cov (che et al., 2004; di et al., 2005) . in a pre-peer reviewed study (diao et al., 2020) , a cohort of 239 participants with suspected sars-cov2infection was included to detect the viral antigen. accordingly, the nucleocapsid protein (np) of sars-cov2 was evaluated in nasopharyngeal swab and urine sample within 10 minutes using a fluor- infections, it confirms the advantage of early detection of the serological tests compared with rt-pcr. also, the importance of specimen quality for the serological assays is less stringent compared with rt-pcr assays. importantly, false-negative results derived from sampling quality are fewer in using antibodies for serological diagnosis (xiao, wu, & liu, 2020) . on the basis of this, it has been suggested that using serological assays provides the facility of early diagnosis of positive cases even with an improper sample collection and unsatisfied molecular examinations.as another benefit, a broad scale of infection diagnosis is achieved using the elisa technique that detects the antibodies by automatic devices. moreover, elisa provides the feasibility of identifying a large number of infected cases in a quick turnaround time.the other limitations of rna-based assays that led to the critical necessity to use elisa include requiring upscale and expensive lab facilities, restrictive biosafety levels, low or middle detection sensitivity and specificity, different sampling locations, and technical experts. another essential issue is the ease of using serological tests in the clinical laboratory of any hospital, as opposed to the molecular approach that requires a specific and well-equipped laboratory.notably, reporting on the very mild or asymptomatically infected cases, as a large population without viral rna-based testing, is another critical aspect that should be considered. hence, detection of the specific igg antibody, as a large-scale seroepidemiological study, would help understand the true scale of human-to-human transmission and report the accurate rate of covid-19 infected cases (xiao et al., 2020) . promisingly, these types of applicable diagnostic tests would contribute to the early detection of infected or suspected cases and prevent the spread of the virus.recently, the new abbott id now covid-19 test has received emergency use authorization (eua) from the fda to detect the novel coronavirus (sars-cov2), as the fastest available molecular tahmasebi et al.| 15 point-of-care test. the abbott id now test is identified as a rapid, isothermal, and instrument-based, system that can be used for the qualitative identification of infections. interestingly, this approach has a unique isothermal nucleic acid amplification technology that provides molecular results in a short time, which lets clinicians make evidence-based clinical decisions during a patient visit. accordingly, it has been reported that the abbott id now assay presents positive results in as few as 5 min and negative results within 13 min, based on the rrt-pcr assay. moreover, for the detection of influenza a&b, strep a and respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), id now is the pioneer molecular point-of-care platform (abbott, 2020) .with regardto the current outbreak of the novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) worldwide, arisen from wuhan, china, it is critically required toidentifypractical strategies for precise diagnostic methods and appropriate treatment choices. the rapid human-to-human transmission of sars-cov2, even by asymptomatic carriers has led to an intensive health disaster. the most common clinical manifestations of the disease are fever, cough, and dyspnea. some complications such as ards, acute kidney injury, and liver damage may also occur during the process of the disease, which can cause death, subsequently.additionally, the elevated levels of pro-and inflammatory cytokines elicit the cytokine storm phenomenon, which has proved to be a prominent reason for respiratory system destruction.the typical laboratory abnormalities in covid-19 patients include lymphopenia, hypoalbuminemia, and increased levels of crp, esr, ldh, ast, alt, and d-dimer. although the characteristics of clinical features and abnormal laboratory finding results can guide healthcare workers toward a primary diagnosis, the final detection of the covid-19 patients is confirmed by spiral lung ct scans, molecular assays, and serological tests. mostly, bilateral and peripheral ggos and/or occasional consolidations have been observed in radiological findings of lung involvements. indisputably, initial chest ct could be performed as a potential diagnostic modality in symptomatic cases, especially at the early stages of the disease. of note, it should be considered that some suspected patients may have no ct findings; therefore, repeated ct imaging and other diagnostic techniques would assist in ruling out or confirming the suspected individuals. the other applicable confirmation methods are rna-based molecular assays, among which the rrt-pcr test is a gold-standard approach.despite the rapid and definite diagnosis of the infected cases, high-fnr, lengthy procedure, and the necessity of intricate equipment restricts the utilization of the rt-pcr assays compared with ct imaging. recently, serological techniques have been developed as another quick diagnostic test based on detecting sars-cov2specific igm/igg antibodies with high sensitivity and specificity. besides this, it is worth noting that the accurate process of sample collection, sampling clinical specimens from multiple sites, and different detection rates of positive specimens should be considered to achieve the most accurate test results for covid-19 diagnosis.in conclusion, the profound comprehension of various application aspects of the diagnostic approaches, their advantages and disadvantages, as well as their appropriate administration could lead to taking efficacious steps forward to prevent the virus outbreak, manage the current pandemic state, contribute to infected patients' recovery, and subsequently promote public health.the authors would like to dedicate this study to healthcare workers, which are struggling with the novel coronavirus.the authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be considered as a potential conflict of interest.s. t. and e. k. h. contributed to data gathering, writing the primary draft of the manuscript, and designing figures and tables. a. e. contributed to the hypothesis, correspondence, scientific and structural editing, and verifying the manuscript before submission.n/a orcid abdolreza esmaeilzadeh http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5402-3967the novel sars-coronavirus 2019 (ncov-19) that causes the disease covid-19, name given by the who on 30th of january and declared a public health emergency as the condition adapted to a pandemic situation. globally, there are 5,657,529 confirmed cases of covid-19, which includes 356,254 total deaths.(1) the report of ministry of national health services, regulations and coordination field epidemiology and disease surveillance division (fedsd), national institute of health (nih), islamabad reported the current scenario of disease burden as a total of 64,028 confirmed cases and death cases were 1,317 till may 28, 2020. (2) while 40,406 cases still had the status of active cases. the disease spread in 213 countries and territories around the world. ( 3) the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) have reported sars-cov-2 as a respiratory virus, hence transmission is adhered to "respiratory droplets" when an infected or asymptomatic carrier coughs or sneezes and prevention is only possible by maintaining at least a six-foot distance between individuals. the virus also spreads by close contact, touching a surface or object that is already contaminated and then touching your own nose or mouth.(4) the most common symptoms of covid-19 are fever, dry cough, tiredness followed by less common symptoms such as aches, sore throat, diarrhea, conjunctivitis, headache and loss of taste or smell. patients with serious symptoms observe difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, chest pain or pressure, loss of speech or movement in clinical settings.(5) developing countries needed surveillance of such an outbreak in order to combat the pandemic situation for prompt public health intervention and prevention. a robust and accurate point-of-care diagnostic device is designed for achieving public health objectives of disease diagnosis and epidemiologic surveillance. point-ofcare (poc) testing devices are used for rapid and timely diagnosis for various infectious diseases and do not require a trained or expert professional. poc testing is a portable molecular test with the advantage of its availability at physician offices and other urgent healthcare-type settings. in the era of public health emergency, poc testing will significantly contribute towards low cost, robust and economical diagnosis and early detection of covid-19, as well as decreasing the cases of an infectious disease in controlling the outbreak. at present reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) is dominant for the diagnosis of ncov-19. while there are other methods used by different poc testing devices with most frequent and accurate being loop mediated isothermal amplification (lamp) assay in closed tube with colorimetric detection and serologic detection of covid-19 igm/igg by rapid test device. this review focuses on a poc device integrated with the mobile phone in contributing public health response and control as well as highlighting the use of lamp assay as a method of covid-19 diagnosis.articles providing essential literature on poc diagnostics for covid-19 and lamp assay as a molecular technique for the diagnosis of infectious agents. our search terms and data base appropriate syntax are "sars corona virus", "covid-19", "point of care diagnostics". we included preprint, peer reviewed and retrieved full text articles and examined the citation chain for each article to be included.the current diagnostic technique indicating current infection, which is use as the referenced method globally is the reverse real-time pcr assay (rrt-pcr) which require sophisticated lab setup, expensive instrument, well trained and qualified staff, transportation efforts and deals with a broad variety of clinical specimens such as nasal swab, pharyngeal swab, broncho alveolar lavage fluid, sputum, feces, fibro bronchoscope brush biopsies and blood. (6)(7) antibody testing in serum indicates previous infection of covid-19 which involves the lateral flow method indicating in vitro qualitative detection of both igm and igg antibodies. (8) prof. jinzhao song(9) conducted a study in mid-february and reported a single and two-stage, novel closed-tube covid-19 assay at home, clinic or points of entry based on nucleic acid detection and amplification. their method includes loop mediated isothermal amplification and is performed in a closed tube with calorimetric detection. using bioinformatics tools, they designed primers for the conserved region of the viral genome such as open reading frame 1ab (orf1ab) gene. for higher sensitivity, they address a two stage isothermal method known as dubbed penn-ramp. (9)they reported 10 times higher sensitivity with respect to lamp and pcr on purified processed nucleic acid; however, their study was performed on synthetic samples and requires actual patient samples.yang t et al.(6) reported their invention of a poc diagnostic device for covid-19 in their research paper published on 18 march 2020. they integrate the mobile phone with a paper-based poc testing device and also the method of pcr was loop mediated isothermal amplification. the concept behind their method of nucleic acid detection was adopted from previous research. (10) they combine a paper-based poc device and lamp technology integrated to a mobile phone app as an accessible covid-19 diagnostic tool that a self-quarantined patent easily collects a nasal swab sample and performs this user-friendly test on such a device. the result will be shared through the mobile app to clinicians or the public health concerned. trieu nguyen reported (7) in their opinion report on 14 march 2020 about poc testing as paving the road for rapid detection of virus which proposed poc diagnostic as a potential candidate for detecting covid-19 as well as a response to the outbreaks. they integrate a mobile phone app with loop mediated isothermal amplification technology (lamp) on a paper-based poc device. lamp has the advantage of being highly sensitive, easy and time efficient, characterized by a reaction catalyzed in isothermal condition. the technology uses strand displacement rather than the conventional heat denaturation principle and therefore the reaction has an advantage to be run on constant thermal environment. lamp uses four different primers i.e., forward inner-outer primer and backward inner-outer primer which are complementary to the template sequence. using strand displacement polymerases enzyme catalyze chain elongation with a displaced strand forming a cauliflower-like loop dumbbell structure. these loop structures contain multiple sites for the initiation or synthesis of other copies by providing binding sites for another set of primers. a swab sample containing covid-19 was transferred in tube and a specific reagent added for lamp reaction. after the reaction, the colorimetric reaction is detected on a mobile phone app specially designed to detect colorimetric changes on paper and the result is shared with the patient as well as with the public health department for epidemiologic surveillance. having high sensitivity and specificity, lamp technology is now a popular method in the detection of pathogens in molecular biology.point-of-care (poc) testing devices are used for rapid and timely diagnosis for various infectious diseases and do not require a trained or expert professional. poc testing is a portable molecular test with the advantage of its availability at physician offices and other urgent healthcare-type settings. in this era of public health emergency, poc testing will significantly contribute towards low cost, robust and economical diagnosis, and the early detection of covid-19 as well as decreasing the cases of an infectious disease in controlling the outbreak. a rapid, accurate and cost-effective detection device with little requirement will benefit the individual and government by reducing transportation needs, lowering the spread of infection as well as mitigating the cost of testing.rapid and accurate testing significantly contributes towards epidemiologic surveillance and future outbreaks of such infectious diseases. in-house testing of reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) is endorsed by the who and cdc and adopted by many reference laboratories. (11) (12) however, in such a challenging time, when health care resources are insufficient to combat the situation due to having increasing numbers of patients infected seeking care, poc testing shall be regarded as essential for testing viral genome nucleic acid thereby reducing the chances of spreading the infection to distant areas and eluding the consequences of delayed reporting of infectious disease such as covid-19. various studies reported the dramatic effect of late reporting of infectious disease as stated by elisabeth reijn et al. (13) that timely and accurate diagnosis will radically contribute towards effective public health response as well as averting secondary cases and outbreaks of infectious diseases. timeliness for infectious diseases is an important factor as delay mostly occurs in a situation of referring the cases by the general practitioner or diagnosing cases to the local municipal health service. netherlands health care providers are strictly gratified for reporting to the surveillance department of infectious diseases in order to control secondary cases and develop prevention guidelines and precautionary measures. a poc device integrated with a mobile phone app for infectious disease creates a road map towards operative epidemiologic surveillance and public health intervention in the form of active or passive immunization or post exposure rehabilitation such as in the case of covid-19.a highly reliable, accurate diagnostic poc testing device with high sensitivity specificity, positive predictive and negative predictive values is required in order to combat different infectious diseases in the future and in the current situation of the covid-19 pandemic in both developed and underdeveloped countries around the globe. mobile phone integration with the testing device eliminates the transportation requisite, economic burden, and mitigates the spread of infection. stakeholders should take the initiative of installing the project on large scale validity and reliability of a poc testing device with disposable kits for diagnosis of various infectious diseases having the capacity to deal with an extensive spectrum of clinical samples.the author(s) declare that there are no conflicts of interestthis work received no specific grant from any funding agencyfollowing the first reports of coronavirus disease-19 (covid-19) by china to the world health organization (who) on 31st december 2019, more than 4,302,774 novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) cases have been reported by authorities in 212 countries and territories by 12th may 2020 the outbreak and spread of covid-19 worldwide, highlights the critical need for developing rapid and accurate diagnostic testing methods for emerging human coronavirus (cov) infections testing is crucial to track the spread of disease during a pandemic, and to swiftly permit public health interventions including isolation, quarantine, and appropriate clinical management of afflicted individuals the key components of viral diagnostic tests are (1) collection of the appropriate sample (blood, nasal swab, and throat swab), (2) availability of the genetic and proteomic sequences of the novel virus for analysis, and (3) rapid and accurate laboratory testing methods the current gold standard for the molecular diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infection is the real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) for the qualitative and quantitative detection of viral nucleic acids other relevant laboratory methods include enzyme-linked immunoassays (eia) for viral antibody and antigen detection, and serum viral neutralization (svn) assays for antibody neutralization determination the challenges faced in developing a diagnostic test for a novel pathogen are the ability to measure low viral loads for early detection, to provide low or no cross-reactivity with other viral strains and to deliver results rapidly several point-of-care molecular devices are currently being integrated for fast and accurate diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infections this review discusses the current laboratory methods available to test for coronaviruses by focusing on the present covid-19 outbreaklaboratory testing methods for novel severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2)coronavirus disease-19 (covid-19) is caused by a novel coronavirus (cov) that was originally reported in wuhan, hubei province, china in december 2019 (world health organization, 2020a) . the international committee on taxonomy of viruses named the virus severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). infection by sars-cov-2 causes a respiratory illness that varies in severity from mild upper respiratory symptoms akin to the seasonal flu, to severe progressive respiratory failure that requires intensive care and can lead to death. asymptomatic carriers of the virus have also been reported and pose a significant public health threat due to their ability to unknowingly spread the virus (chan et al., 2020a) . sars-cov-2 represents the third cov in this millennium to cross species from animals to humans and cause a severe respiratory disease after middle-east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) in 2012 (zaki et al., 2012) , and sars-cov in 2003 (drosten et al., 2003; ksiazek et al., 2003) . this novel cov has now been identified as the seventh cov that is transmissible between humans (including hcov-229e, hcov-oc43, hcov-nl63, and hcov-hku1) (salata et al., 2019) . on 30th january 2020, the world health organization (who) declared the sars-cov-2 epidemic a public health emergency of international concern and was upgraded to a pandemic on 11th march 2020. at least 4,302,774 confirmed cases and 289,561 deaths worldwide were reported as of 12th may 2020 (worldometers.info/coronavirus/). diagnostic testing is critical during a pandemic as the ability to track the spread of sars-cov-2 is essential for effective disease management and control.sars-cov-2 is a positive-sense, single-stranded rna (ssrna), group iv virus. the genome was sequenced from the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of a patient (genbank: mn908947) and shared through the global initiative on sharing all influenza data (gisaid) platform on 12th january 2020 . the ∼30 k base pair genome is highly similar to the human sars-cov and bat cov-sars-like genomes with 14 open reading frames (orfs) that encode structural, replication and non-structural accessory proteins, as depicted in figure 1 . molecular modeling studies demonstrate that like sars-cov, sars-cov-2 is surrounded by a lipid bilayer membrane, containing structural membrane (m) and envelope (e) proteins that interact to form the viral envelope (durrant et al., 2020) . this layer also contains spike glycoproteins (s) that give the characteristic "corona" appearance of this family of viruses. the spike proteins bind specific host cell receptors to facilitate host cell attachment and entry (graham and baric, 2010) . the nucleic acid-associated protein binds the rna genome and forms the nucleocapsid (n). other proteins include replication and non-structural accessory proteins that are listed figure 1 | schematic representation of sars-cov-2 genome. sars-cov-2 contains a positive-sense, positive-stranded mrna genome with a 5 ′ capped mrna sequence (c) and a 3 ′ poly-a tail. the coding genes are: orf1a, orf1b, spike (s), orf3a, orf3b, envelope (e), membrane (m), orf6, orf7a, orf7b, orf8, orf9b, orf14, nucleocapsid (n) , and orf10.in table 1 . reports of different strains of sars-cov-2 suggest an early split from the sars-cov-2 lineage and/or the virus is mutating. ongoing research provides insight into the unique and conserved features of the genome and proteome of sars-cov-2 to track mutations and generates evidence about the evolution of the virus (phan, 2020; wang et al., 2020) . this is important as these changes may affect key structural and non-structural components of sars-cov-2 that can render some diagnostic tests ineffective or less sensitive and can also impact the selection of epitopes for the development of new tests.the spread of sars-cov-2 is primarily by respiratory droplets that arise from individuals that harbor the virus. symptomatic individuals with the disease are one source of virus, but a major public health concern is transmission by mildly ill or asymptomatic individuals during the incubation period. rapid viral diagnostic testing for sars-cov-2 is critical to identify these individuals and facilitate the implementation of protective measures such as social distancing, quarantine and isolation that help to mitigate the spread of the virus in the community. the development of rapid and accurate tests that detect antibodies post-infection provide information about an individual's exposure to the virus and can be used to monitor the possibility of immunity, relapse or reinfection. this supports interventions to protect higher risk populations from developing more severe illness and can be used to investigate the efficacy of passive antibody therapies for covid-19 infection. this review describes the available testing methods for sars-cov-2 and brings to light the importance of laboratory testing to control this disease and prepare for possible future disease threats.detection of sars-cov-2 by real time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) upper and lower respiratory samples are collected for detection of hcov. nasopharyngeal swabs are high priority specimens for sars-cov-2, and low priority specimens include oropharyngeal swabs, bronchoalveolar lavage, tracheal aspirates, and sputum (cdc, 2020a).rna is extracted from clinical specimens using approved viral isolation kits .rna is reverse transcribed to cdna and subsequently amplified using a real-time quantitative pcr instrument. who announced various primer and probe sets for sars-cov-2 previously developed in china, germany, hong kong, japan, thailand, and usa (world health organization, 2020b; table 2 ). primers targeting different sections of the virus genetic sequence including the envelope e gene, the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) gene, and the n gene corman et al., 2020; world health organization, 2020b) .targeting the e gene is reported for highest sensitivity, followed by the rdrp gene for confirmation . some laboratories have multiplexed pcr tests consisting of multiple primer and probe sets located at different regions in the sars-cov-2 genome. these assays can be designed to contain primer sets targeting multiple genes simultaneously (rdrp/hel, s, n) (chan et al., 2020b) , or to detect different regions in a single target such as the n gene (u.f.a.d. administration, 2020 table 2 ). the use of multiplex assays is potentially beneficial as this can improve sensitivity in cases of loss or degradation of viral rna during specimen collection and nucleic acid extraction, or in the event of mutation of the virus genome. these assays use in vitro synthesized rna derived from transcripts (e.g., betacov_wuhan_wiv04_2019, gisaid access number: epi_isl_402124) as positive controls and to generate standard curves. an internal control using rnase p (rp) verifies the presence and quality of nucleic acid in samples and molecular grade nuclease-free water is used as a negative amplification control. a negative patient sample serves both as a negative extraction control to monitor cross contamination across samples and to validate test reagents.rt-pcr is the frontline diagnostic test for covid-19 that is capable of analyzing thousands of specimens in a single day and shows a testing sensitivity of 95% . the anticipated limit of detection of the sars-cov-2 rt-pcr test is <10 copies/reaction which allows early detection of low viral titers. gene amplification indicates a positive result for the presence of sars-cov-2 rna and should correlate with clinical observations, patient history, and epidemiological information.false positive results could be generated by cross-reactivity of primers with nucleic acids arising from co-infection with other viruses or bacteria. in these cases, the agent detected may not be the definite cause of disease. matching of the sars-cov-2 rt-pcr primers and probes using reliable libraries (e.g., blast) is necessary to ensure there is no homology with other covs like sars-cov from 2003 or other organisms such as staphylococcus aureus and candida albicans. false positives can also occur if reagents in a laboratory become contaminated, which is a major concern, particularly with the high volume of testing encountered during a pandemic. a negative patient sample is useful to identify this error in testing. false-negative results could potentially arise from mutations occurring in the primer and probe target regions in the sars-cov-2 genome. negative results do not preclude sars-cov-2 infection, and results should be validated with different primer sets against the same gene target and combined with patient history and other clinical data to accurately determine patient infection status.provisions for testing laboratories, the use of approved tests and validation of results with governing authorities to develop master protocols for use by multiple investigators must be in place to achieve rapid testing capacity. the output for number of tests per day and number of individuals tested per day relies on the laboratory capacity, trained staff, reagents, supplies and equipment. large quantities of specific high-grade reagents are needed to perform tests and supplies can be quickly depleted in a pandemic. this impacts the turnaround time for rt-pcr diagnostic testing that ranges between 2 and 5 days. strategies to rapidly scale up testing for novel hcovs must be considered for future diagnostic testing.eia assays are diagnostic methods used to identify antibodies in patient blood sample or nasopharyngeal swabs. enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (elisas) for antibody detection against sars-cov-2 measure the host humoral response including igm, igg, and iga to define previous exposure to the virus (guo et al., 2020; okba et al., 2020) . igm is the first immunoglobulin that is produced in response to an antigen and is primarily detected during the early onset of disease (3-7 days). igg is the most abundant immunoglobulin that is produced in response to an antigen (7-25 days) and is maintained in the body after initial exposure and may have a protective role for acquired immunity. the iga immunoglobulin plays a crucial role in the immune function of mucous membranes. the sars-cov-2 s glycoprotein that mediates attachment and entry into cells is surface exposed and is a key target for the production of host neutralizing antibodies (walls et al., 2016) . this feature has made the s protein the focal target of antibody and vaccine development. the n protein in hcovs functions as an antagonist of interferon (kopecky-bromberg et al., 2007; mcbride et al., 2014) and viral encoded repressor (vsr) of rna interference (rnai) that facilitates viral replication, and is also a key target for antibody design (leung et al., 2004) . recombinant antigens derived from the receptor binding domain of s protein (rs) as well as recombinant n protein (rn) are being developed as suitable diagnostic targets to detect igm, igg, and iga antibodies. dual detection of igm/igg and igg/iga immunoglobulins is under development for use in conjunction with nucleic acid detection for detecting active infection and to define previous exposure to sars-cov-2.systemic blood samples are collected from individuals for extraction of serum.purified rs or rn are immobilized to the surface of a multiwell-plate as capture antigens. controls and inactivated sars-cov-2 serum samples are incubated with the antigen for sars-cov-2 antibody-antigen binding. a labeled secondary antibodyconjugate (e.g., horseradish peroxidase) is bound to the sars-cov antibodies for signal detection by substrate addition, and quantification.antibody tests provide the advantage of a simple method of detection of sars-cov-2 antibodies and are convenient to compare multiple samples from a single patient. positive rates of detection for sars-cov-2 igg in patients by elisa measurements are 85.4% and 75.6-93.1% for igm (guo et al., 2020) . jin et al. (2020) reported sensitivities of serum igm and igg antibodies for detection were 48.1 and 88.9%, and specificities were 100 and 90.9% with the highest sensitivity for antibody tests recorded 2 weeks after first symptoms of disease. the lower igm sensitivity may be because the igm response occurs early then decreases and does not offer a strong detectable signal, while igg signals may be more readily detected and present beyond 20 days. the incorporation of unique immunoglobulin labels may increase the sensitivity of rapid antibody tests for respiratory viruses (li r. et al., 2018) . results from antibody testing could inform infection status and define previous exposure to sars-cov-2. antibody detection is also used to identify recovered patients as human donors for the generation of convalescent patient serum or plasma as an investigational treatment for critically ill patients (shen et al., 2020) .the results of sars-cov-2 antibody tests may vary by apparent disease periods by time after symptom onset as well as on the reliability of diagnostic assays. it is not yet known when igm or igg antibodies specific to the sars-cov-2 virus will become detectable during an infection, how long antibodies persist following infection and the extent of protection of neutralizing antibodies against subsequent infection with the virus.the overall sensitivity and specificity indicate the possibility of false negatives and false positives in this testing method. since the risk for recurrent infection with sars-cov-2 is not known for covid-19, detection of one or two antibodies (igm and/or igg) does not necessarily guarantee immunity against reinfection. negative results do not rule out sars-cov-2 infection, particularly in those who have been in contact with the virus and positive results may be due to past or present infection with sars-cov (guo et al., 2020) and possibly non-sars-cov strains (gaunt et al., 2010) . it will be critical to conduct stringent evaluation of antibody diagnostic assays to determine the accuracy and reliability of results.recombinant systems are routinely used to express recombinant proteins to develop antibody assays. however, proteinexpression systems can result in significant discrepancies between recombinant and native viral proteins. for example, the use of e. coli competent cells produces proteins that lack critical post-translational modifications in human cells (e.g., glycosylation) that can alter epitopes and protein conformation (gupta and shukla, 2018) . consequently, this can compromise sensitivity and specificity of antigens for diagnostic assays. the use of mammalian expression systems to express recombinant proteins will produce antigens with post-translation modifications that more closely resemble human native proteins (bandaranayake and almo, 2014) leading to higher sensitivity and specificity of assays.serological assays are currently under accelerated development for diagnosis of hcov infections. commercial reagents need to be validated by clinical trials using samples from patients with confirmed infections of sars-cov-2, and approved by the regulatory review process. nonetheless, a rapid and sensitive platform for identification of antibody titers will also support screening to identify and minimize the risk of viral spread to others, as well as for epidemiological studies and vaccine evaluation studies. the us fda allows the use of rapid antibody tests for sars-cov-2 under emergency use authorization (eua). this expedites the assessment and optimization of these diagnostic tests, with the expectation that any test is sufficiently experimentally validated before it is made available to patients. if these tests do not provide accurate results, this can impair prevention efforts and delay appropriate treatment during the global pandemic response.several research laboratories have used the eia platform to develop lateral flow immunoassays (lfia) for the rapid qualitative detection of sars-cov. this is designed as a simple, portable diagnostic strip to measure either sars-cov-2 antibodies or antigens. as viral titers are often low in nasal swabs and serum or plasma, detection of antigens may be more challenging in comparison to detection of antibodies. serological antigen assays can target s1 and s2 domains of the s protein that binds angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace-2), an integral transmembrane protein in the lung alveolar epithelium that serves as the initial attachment site for sars-cov-2, or n proteins.the design of the lateral flow test is that of a strip/dipstick containing immobilized test reagents, enclosed in a cassette. drops of a patient's blood are deposited on the strip which contains a coating of purified monoclonal antibody (mab) or recombinant antigen that is localized at specific regions on a nitrocellulose membrane. the mab targets a viral antigen; the recombinant antigen is recognized by antibodies that are present in infected patients. the strip also contains labeled detector antibodies that bind the same antigen. a positive antibody result indicates binding between the coating antigen and patient antibodies and binding by the detector antibody. this generates a colored signal. a positive antigen result indicates binding between the coating antibody and patient antigen.two drops of blood are sufficient for detection of sars-cov-2 and antibodies by this method. this technique delivers results in ∼15 min, and uses visual detection by the naked eye in comparison to rt-pcr (2-5 days). detection of antibodies shows previous viral exposure while detection of antigens indicates active carriers of sars-cov-2 virus. the specificity and sensitivity of lifas are comparable for antibody and antigen assays.tests to detect sars-cov-2 in patients by identifying viral antigens are more challenging to develop than tests to detect the neutralizing antibodies against sars-cov-2 (see below), as purified monoclonal antibodies must be generated against target antigens. further, these assays need to be assessed and optimized using blood from infected patients.the rapid development of some antigens for assays are led by the use of "prototype" pathogens and in silico models of antibody-antigen interactions that are used to generate artificial antibody libraries (shao et al., 2007) . antibody phage display technology can be applied to discover antibodies against antigens (ledsgaard et al., 2018) . these can be rapidly generated to produce prototypes of diagnostic tests for validation studies that expedite assessment and optimization, before the final commercial diagnostic kits are available. integrating fast, portable tests with epidemiological surveillance will also provide quick and reliable information to public health authorities monitoring the spread of sars-cov-2.the svn assay is a serological test that measures the ability of a patient's antibodies to neutralize infectivity of sars-cov-2 and attenuate infection. this assay is considered the most reliable for the assessment of protective antibody and can inform the use of convalescent plasma as a passive antibody therapy for covid-19 infection particularly in severely ill patients. although there is limited clinical data, early studies suggest that transfusion of convalescent plasma can suppress sars-cov-2 viral replication and protect an individual from infection (guo et al., 2020; shen et al., 2020) . the svn assay is not used for routine diagnosis but is frontline for this special indication.plasma is prepared from systemic blood samples collected from covid-19 convalescent donors. written informed consent is required from both the donor and recipient.several cell lines are suitable for sars-cov-2 transduction including vero (monkey kidney cell line), huh7 (human hepatoma cell line), 293t (human kidney cell line) (nie et al., 2020) . serial dilutions of patient convalescent serum are added to known strains of virus (betacov/shenzhen/szth-003/2020 strain virus, gisaid access number: epi_isl_406594) (shen et al., 2020) . the mixture is inoculated into a susceptible cell monolayer and incubated for virus adsorption. the cytopathic effect can be measured by microscopic examination (shen et al., 2020) after a 5-day incubation or fluorescence (nie et al., 2020) or plaque formation, following 24 h of incubation. the neutralizing antibody titer is the highest dilution of serum that reduces activity of sars-cov-2.the svn assay is a highly robust and reproducible test that may be applied to detect sars-cov-2 neutralizing antibodies in convalescent plasma samples to identify the best candidates for treatment. neutralizing activities along with viral load and antibody titers can be simultaneously monitored in paired plasma samples in patients receiving convalescence plasma, to establish algorithms for determining patient and donor factors that predict clinical efficacy.the accessibility of the live sars-cov-2 strain is regulated, which limits the development of laboratory testing by svn. while inexpensive, it is a manual assay and requires careful in-house standardization and quality control.the preliminary case report of positive responses of 5 severely ill patients with covid-19 who were treated in the shenzhen third people's hospital, china, using plasma from recovered individuals was recently published (shen et al., 2020) . the convalescent plasma contained functional igg and igm anti-sars-cov-2 neutralizing antibodies that inhibited viral growth in cell cultures. notably, the snv assay reliably measured the increases in the patients' neutralizing antibody titers between 1 and 12 days after plasma transfusion. this study was not evaluated in a randomized clinical trial and there are limitations to the data interpretation. nonetheless, these findings demonstrate the utility of the svn assay for evaluating anti-sars-cov-2 neutralizing antibodies for future convalescent plasma assessment in more rigorous clinical investigations involving a larger cohort of patients with severe covid-19 illness.methods for the rapid detection of nucleic acids are being used to develop applications in clinical diagnostics of sar-cov-2.this method amplifies dna or rna target sequence in a streamlined and exponential manner for detection, and in contrast to pcr, does not require thermal cycling. a wide variety of nucleic acid detection assays have been developed including loop-mediated isothermal amplification (lamp), a single-tube technique for the amplification of dna and reverse transcription-lamp that combines reverse transcriptase and lamp to detect rna (rt-lamp; notomi et al., 2000) , recombinase polymerase amplification (rpa; , helicase-dependent amplification (hda; vincent et al., 2004) , strand displacement amplification (sda; walker et al., 1992) , and nucleic acid sequence-based amplification (nasba; compton, 1991) . these assays incorporate isothermal methods to enable primer binding followed by amplification using a polymerase with strand-displacement activity that separates the strand that is annealed to the target sequence for detection. amplified gene products can be detected by photometry. isothermal nucleic acid amplification is utilized in several commercial molecular diagnostic platforms and is considered the fastest available molecular laboratory and point-of-care test for the detection of novel sars-cov-2.the rt-lamp method has been shown to effectively detect sars-cov-2 in clinical samples from individuals with covid-19 (yan et al., 2020) . multiple loop primers targeting the orf1ab gene and the s gene were used for dna strand displacement activity and target amplification that achieved detection of 20 copies/reaction and 200 copies/reaction, respectively. these results were comparable to rt-pcr amplification. the reported 100% sensitivity and 100% specificity and the mean time for detection was under 30 min, demonstrates this is a definitive testing method.this method detected total viral rna derived from cell culture supernatant and 19 nasopharyngeal swab samples (8 positive and 11 negative) for sars-cov-2 (behrmann et al., 2020) . this approach integrates isothermal methods for reverse transcription followed by recombinase activity that mediates primer (targeting the n gene) binding to the homologous sequence in dsdna. subsequent amplification by polymerase mediated primer extension achieved 100% diagnostic sensitivity and specificity. this method offers potential advantages over rt-pcr for speed, scale and portability, allowing evidence-based clinical decisions to be made during a patient visit.the crispr assay functionality is being applied for detection of dna or rna using nucleic acid pre-amplification combined with crispr-cas enzymology for specific recognition of sequences.the crispr/cas13a system is a recently discovered crispr-rna (crrna) guided detection method that is specific for rna and is being applied for sars-cov-2 detection. a key feature of this approach is the cas13a (formerly named c2c2) enzyme that recognizes and binds targeted rnas in a sequence-specific manner followed by non-specific trans-endonuclease cleavage of non-targeted rna ("collateral" cleavage) for signal amplification and nucleic acid detection. the cas13a assay can be paired with target nucleic acid amplification for more sensitive results using an isothermal exponential amplification technique, most commonly rpa. this coupled technique is termed sherlock (specific high-sensitivity enzymatic reporter unlocking) and allows fluorescence, colorimetric, lateral flow, and other readout approaches to enable the rapid detection of a variety of targets (kellner et al., 2019) .unlike in vivo crispr tools, the cas13a protein must be recombinantly expressed and purified. the endonuclease activity of purified cas13a uses crrna targeting sequences in the s gene and orf1ab in sars-cov-2 rna. target site-recognition activates trans-cleavage of reporter probes resulting in increases in fluorescence output signals and confirming the presence of viral rna. using synthetic sars-cov-2 the reported performance of this method for detection of target sequences is 20-200 am (kellner et al., 2019) . the cas13a/crrna platform has been adapted for lateral-flow assays and could have wide applications as a sars-cov2 detector in both research and in the clinic. assays can be designed as a paper dipstick test that delivers signals in 30-60 min using. this is a very promising technology and these positive advances in science offer immense hope for future disease control.next-generation sequencing (ngs) enables complete sequencing of the ∼30,000 nucleotides of the sars-cov-2 genome. ngs provides a method for identification of sars-cov-2, for environmental monitoring and surveillance testing, while also providing insight into strain origin and viral evolution. each sequence is deposited into the gisaid epicovtm database and to date, there are over 17,000 sars-cov-2 sequences from global ngs efforts.rna is extracted from clinical specimens, as for rt-pcr, and further purified to remove human cytoplasmic and ribosomal rrna.rna is fragmented followed by cdna synthesis. through the use of a set of highly specific, universal cov primers, all genomic segments are amplified and the dna amplicons are sequenced to deliver highly accurate sars-cov-2 typing in <24 h. virus titer, efficiency of human rrna depletion, and the number of reads per sample impact the number of virus-specific reads obtained and accurate coverage of the viral genome.collectively, global ngs data suggest that sars-cov-2 genome is relatively stable, although mutations are being identified in symptomatic individuals that are not present in the original strain in wuhan, china. two recent ngs studies report a large base pair deletion consisting of 81 nucleotides in sars-cov-2 orf7a in a virus sample from a us patient (holland et al., 2020) , and point mutations that may suggest a more infectious strain of the virus than the original strain (korber et al., 2020) . the orf7a gene encodes an accessory protein that is involved in viral infection and host cell death (schaecher et al., 2007) . these findings require investigation in other patient samples and to determine whether such mutations are selected in asymptomatic or symptomatic individuals. although ngs is one of the most comprehensive approaches figure 2 | molecular structure of sars-cov-2 and summary of the available laboratory tests and their target molecules. sars-cov-2 has a lipid bilayer membrane that contains envelope (e) and membrane (m) proteins that make up the envelope. spike (s) glycoproteins project from the surface of the virion. nucleocapsid protein (n) is composed of the protein that is associated with the viral genetic material. rt-pcr, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction; eia, enzyme immunoassay; lfia, lateral flow immunoassay; svna, serum virus neutralization assay; inaa, isothermal nucleic acid amplification; crispr, clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats; ngs, next generation sequencing; rt-lamp, reverse transcriptase loop-mediated isothermal amplification; rpa, recombinase polymerase amplification. for identifying sars-cov-2, this method is relatively expensive, with multiple sample preparation steps and is not used for large-scale testing.regulating authorities provide interim guidance on the handling of specimens associated with sars-cov-2 (cdc, 2020b). samples for testing can be performed in a bsl-2 laboratory with unidirectional airflow and bsl-3 precautions, and respiratory protection and a designated area for personal protective equipment changes are recommended. isolation of sars-cov-2 in cell culture and initial characterization of viral agents recovered in cultures of patient samples should be conducted at biosafety level 3 (bsl-3), with regulatory approval and guidance. figure 2 and table 3 summarize the main laboratory tests for detection of components of sars-cov-2 and the humoral response to the virus, and depict key features of these approaches. given the public health emergency that the expanding covid-19 outbreak presents, more widespread testing is needed to investigate the disease (e.g., prevalence in the population, severity in age groups), and to identify individuals who are infected but have few or no symptoms. detailed epidemiological data sets will better establish the rates of severe infection and death among infected populations.ongoing research is critical to optimize existing antibody tests to determine whether immunity prevents recurrent infection and to investigate the efficacy of passive antibody therapies for covid-19 infection. the identification of novel disease biomarkers may be valuable for understanding what makes people susceptible to covid-19 infection and in predicting the severity and progression of disease, researchers could request approval to analyze stored samples of human blood or in animals that might be a natural reservoir of the virus. specifically, guidance would be needed to direct blood and plasma collection centers to allow access of samples from covid-19 patients.the covid-19 pandemic showcases how quickly information needs to be shared as responders address rapidly evolving situations. establishing communication across laboratories worldwide helps to develop master protocols and establish reference panels for use by multiple investigators. this will aid in coordinating the collection and use of data, and regulatory infrastructure. having a range of tests also puts less pressure on one manufacturer or supply chain, as different suppliers may use different materials. this could help alleviate difficult decisions to limit testing to the most vulnerable patients which can have great public health consequences.rd'c and vs contributed to concept and writing of manuscript. ac contributed to writing, and prepared tables and figure for this manuscript.this work was provided in part by nemours/the fund.as the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) epidemic spreads, specific, rapid, and practical diagnostic tests will become increasingly critical, both for the control of the epidemic and for the management of patients. at present, outside east and southeast asia diagnosis depends on a clinical case definition that includes travel to, or exposure to sick contacts who have traveled to, specific parts of the world (1 ) . as the epidemic matures, however, such epidemiologic connections will be increasingly difficult to demonstrate, and a clinical case definition that depends on this information will become increasingly irrelevant. in east and southeast asia, the rapidly expanding epidemic makes specific viral diagnosis even more essential. in such an evolving situation, the report by poon et al. from hong kong (2 ) , in combination with the published diagnostic technologies of that group and others in europe and the united states (3) (4) (5) , takes on extraordinary importance. moreover, the development and publication of a rapid test for the sars coronavirus in clinical samples, just weeks after the first reports of the emergence of the disease (6 ) is extraordinary.as a historical footnote, this technologic tour de force is in extreme contrast to the diagnostic tests that led to the first descriptions of coronaviruses over 35 years ago. at that time, the most rapid diagnosis was by production of cytopathic effect after subpassage in tissue culture (7 ) , but most coronaviruses were recognized only with the use of human embryo tracheal organ cultures, and viral presence was detected by cessation of ciliary motion, by electron microscopy of nutrient media, or most cumbersome of all, by inoculation and production of colds in human volunteers (8, 9 ) . in fact, difficulty of diagnosis has dogged the field of human coronaviruses and hampered progress throughout its history.the test described by poon et al.(2 ) looks good. it appears to become positive before antibodies first appear, as we would expect from a sensitive test for virus. in the limited studies described, it performed quite well, although not as well as we could have hoped (sensitivity of 79% and specificity of 98% in relation to acute-to-convalescent seroconversion). from melting curves it was judged that the viral sequence did not vary from patient to patient, which bodes well for any pcr-based technique. clearly the test requires validation in larger series of cases and non-cases to refine estimates of its performance. this is particularly critical with regard to its specificity, because rapid viral diagnosis is likely to play an extremely important role in areas where sars is not actively epidemic. in such settings, false positives have the potential to fuel panic, and the test will be used much more often in those who do not have sars coronavirus infection than in those who do. of almost equal importance will be the demonstration that the test can be exported to other laboratories without loss of sensitivity or specificity.to judge the real value of this test and therefore to use it optimally, we need much more information. what are the best specimens to obtain from patients? the germans found that sputum contained a far stronger pcr signal than upper respiratory tract samples (5 ); poon and his colleagues (2 ) tested only nasopharyngeal aspirates. it could be that if sputum had been used instead, the sensitivity of the test would have been closer to 100%. when, during the course of illness and infection, do samples become positive? when do they become negative? what is the distribution of virus in the body? is it in the blood? when? is it in the urine? it appears to be present in the stool, but there is almost no information on either the quantity or the timing and duration of shedding.a pcr-based diagnostic test for an infectious disease has advantages and disadvantages. it can be expected to be very sensitive. it allows a read-out in a matter of hours. it also has the potential to be quantitative. on the other hand, it is expensive, and it requires technology and trained technologists often not available in the locality of the disease. in addition, it says nothing about the infectiousness of the virus that is found. like other tests for the virus, however, it can be anticipated that it will become positive early in the course of the illness, allowing the guidance of therapeutic and management decisions, as well as early institution of precautions to control contagion. if it turns out that it is very sensitive during the course of the disease, the value of a negative test may be even greater than that of a positive test, in its capacity to relieve patient, family, and community anxiety.moreover, a test for virus can give valuable information for those trying to contain the epidemic, both locally and globally. this test, as well as tests for infectious virus, need to be applied to a large number of cases in a prospective manner to make educated guesses about when during the course of the illness infected individuals are likely to be contagious. case reports of sars have described the presence of fever before the beginning of respiratory symptoms (10, 11 ) . is virus in respiratory secretions at this stage? is it there even before the fever begins? in studies of the "old" coronaviruses in human volunteers, virus could be isolated from nasal secretions before the onset of respiratory symptoms (12 ) . is that true here? the same questions can and should be asked about fecal shedding.we already know that antibody to the sars coronavirus appears relatively late in the course of infection. there is no information available yet, however, on the time of appearance of igm antibody, and this may prove to be an important adjunctive test in the early identification of infections.an ideal test for virus will be not only rapid, sensitive, and specific, but also inexpensive and technologically simple, so that it is available at the point of care even in editorial clinical chemistry 49, no. 6, 2003 small hospitals or in communities in the developing world. no tests designed to detect virus in clinical samples have satisfied all these criteria, but antigen detection tests probably come the closest. the academic, biotechnical, and epidemiologic forces around the world should be frantically working to create specific and sensitive monoand polyclonal antibodies to this virus and assembling antigen detection tests that will move us quickly into the next era of diagnosis. specific diagnosis will help to lessen fear. this test, and those that follow it, will make a major contribution to public health and the care of patients with respiratory infections as the sars coronavirus spreads through the world.the world is currently impacted by the novel coronavirus disease . the world health organisation (who) coordinates the global efforts to manage the impacts and it declared covid-19 as a global pandemic on march 11, 2020 [1] . the scale of the impacts is unprecedented, and studies have suggested that it might take more than a decade for the world to recover, societally and economically [2] and might significantly compromise the progress of sustainable development agenda (sdgs) 2030. on march 27th, the g20 countries pledged $5 trillion to defend the global economy against covid-19 [3] , while the united nations (un) launched the global humanitarian response plan for covid-19 [2] .the pandemic started in the city of wuhan, hubei province, china and has brought many new challenges to public health in various countries. the world has experienced global public health crises in the last 20 years caused by novel virus infections, such as hiv, influenza a virus subtype h1n1, influenza a virus subtype h5n1, sars-cov1, mers-cov, and ebola. progress in disaster science 6 (2020) 100091 ☆ final version is to be available in progress in disaster science on 12 april 2020, pre-proof is available online on 4 april 2020, 100091 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ s2590061720300284.⁎ corresponding author at: united nations university-institute for the advanced study for however, the epidemiological novelty of covid-19, which caused by a strain of coronavirus (the sars-cov2), revealed our lack of preparedness given its sudden and rapid spread that caught many governments around the world unprepared. on march 26th, who issued six prioritised strategies, to be undertaken by governments to cope with the pandemic. the strategies were as follow: expand, train and deploy health-care workers; implement systems to find suspected cases; ramp up production of tests and increase availability; identify facilities that can be transformed into coronavirus health centres; develop plans to quarantine cases; and refocus government measures on suppressing the virus [1] . lowering and delaying the epidemic peak is important. uncontrolled measures will lead to the rapid increase in the number of cases, reach the peak earlier and require more capacity of healthcare systems to respond, while stringent control measures implemented early will help to lower the number of cases, delay reaching the peak and need considerably lower capacity of the healthcare systems [4] .indonesia is the fourth most populous country in the world, and thus is predicted to suffer greatly and over a longer time period, when compared to other less-populous countries [5] . when the novel coronavirus sars-cov2 hit china most severely during the months of december 2019-february 2020, indonesia reported no case of infection at all. only on march 2, 2020, president joko widodo reported the first confirmed two cases of covid-19 infection in indonesia. as of april 2, the country has reached 1790 confirmed cases, 113 new cases, with 170 number of deaths, and 112 number of recoveries [6, 7] .this paper is one of the first policy-response-focused academic publications aimed at providing a brief reporting, analysis and evaluation of current rapid responses to covid-19 in indonesia. to allow for rapid publication and dissemination of information, this paper does not intend to provide an exhaustive list of the responses, but it aims to capture current government-led responses in the middle of the crisis. this paper can be viewed as 'real-time evaluation' as it provides insights and lessons for all stakeholders to improve and adjust existing policy options mainly at national level from april 2020 till the end of the crisis. there are three objectives of this paper. first, to highlight key response strategies and actions in responding to covid-19 emergencies in indonesia. second, to analyse the gaps and opportunities in these responses. third, to put forward recommendations toward rapid, comprehensive and more systematic approaches in the short-and longer-term.the methodology includes rapid analysis based on media content analysis including governments speeches and reports as well as observation of various social media platforms available from january to march 2020. we especially targeted online media contents from the website of www. covid-19.go.id, mass media as well as participant observations in social media platforms (e.g. facebook postings from governments and relevant stakeholders). this paper is interdisciplinary in nature, with authors coming from various disciplines. this is a collaborative work following calls of co-authorships by the first author on march 26th, 2020. all authors are indonesian scholars and experienced practitioners, with broad expertise on health/public health, basic biology, disaster governance, law, engineering, public policy, environmental science, culture and community advocacy, and risk communication. we aim to have a balanced analysis between those from natural and social scientists, focussing our analysis on the policy-relevant responses. some authors are involved in response activities or providing government advice, both nationally and locally.the structure of the paper is as follows. section 1 provides context, rationale and aim of the paper. it briefly presents covid-19 impacts to date (as of 31 march 2020). we present our report on the key health strategies taken by the national government in section 2. we further analyse the role of different organisations in section 3. we review the roles of key ministries at the national level, responses at the provincial and local government level, along with roles of other major organisations and those at the community level (section 4). this is complemented with our analysis of these responses, focussing on the gaps and limitations. finally, in section 5, we outline the recommendations for improving current responses, grouped into health-related and wider recommendations.this section reports on key responses in indonesia. we first discuss the existing institutional framework on responding to health emergencies. we then focus on the early and rapid detection and diagnosis of infections.the initial zero case reported by indonesia prior to the global pandemic declaration by the who, is questionable by many (e.g. [8] ). during this period, despite reports of increasing numbers of infection from all countries surrounding indonesia at that time, indonesia did not issue any form of travel restrictions and specific quarantines of travellers coming in/coming back to indonesia, even from severely hit countries such as china. on january 27, 2020, indonesia issued a travel restriction from hubei province, which was at that time, the epicentre of global covid-19, while at the same time evacuated 238 indonesians from wuhan. after the initial and subsequent reports of infections, indonesia started to realize the direness of the situation, and has since issued various policies and actions to tackle covid-19, including appointing 100 domestic general hospitals as referral hospitals (rumah sakit rujukan) on march 3, 2020. to cope with the everincreasing number of covid-19 patients, the number of referral hospitals was increased to 227 on march 18, 2020. however, despite such efforts, the number of victims keeps increasing rapidly. the ministry of health of indonesia provides live data on covid-19 impacts in indonesia [6] . a coordinated information for covid-19 coordination is presented on this newly established website of https://www.covid19.go.id/. fig. 1 shows the front page. to date, there are 20 dedicated websites by the provincial governments.data transparency in the early response has been criticised by several mainstream media. at least since 11 march 2020, the public had started to critically demand data transparency toward the government, which such plea emerged in digital news media [10, 11] of which during the time there were already 27 cases reported. the lack of data transparency might have caused the underreporting of the actual number of cases, or, the dissemination of probably the actual number of cases detected, but not the number of actual infections, which could be undetected because of, for example, the lack of proper diagnoses. such misinformation could severely impede the government's future responses. this indicated the possibility that such efforts were not enough.presently, rt-pcr (reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction) is the only acknowledged method to rapidly and accurately detect covid-19 infection in humans [12, 45] . first, the enzyme reverse transcriptase is used to change the rna, which is the genetic material of sars-cov2, from nasopharyngeal swab samples, to dna (the reverse transcription step). next, using specific primers, a section of the synthesized dna originated from the virus was amplified using the polymerase chain reaction (pcr) method. only swab samples containing both human and virus rna will show positive results.earlier mass media reports in indonesia during the onset and peak of epidemics in wuhan, china, suggested that there was zero infection in the country. this happened for a few months, even when various reports had shown that indonesia's neighbouring countries had reported at least one infection. the lack of rapid scientific surveys deployed by the government to make swift decisions and actions has caused many pseudo-scientific "explanations" for the cause spreading in indonesia, as seen in the mass and social media, ranging from racial superiority to religious and paranormal reasons (e.g. [13] ). however, later reports strongly indicated that zero case was scientifically improbable, for example as suggested by harvard university [8] and later severely criticised by the indonesian minister of health [14] . various international mass media and foreign bodies outside indonesia even became very stringent and went as far as questioning the abilities of indonesian scientists and medical practitioners, as well as the presence of enough technical facilities and skills to detect and diagnose the disease. further investigations reported that many of the suspected covid-19 persons were only diagnosed clinically and not tested using the pcr method, including indonesians evacuated from wuhan. this could be one of the reasons for the (most likely incorrect) report of zero infections, during the initial period of this global pandemic. at present, through extensive coordination among different institutions, indonesia has started to do pcr analyses on suspected citizens. however, when compared to other countries such as japan, korea, and china, the number is not enough to reflect the most likely actual present condition of infection in indonesia.on march 19, 2020, president joko widodo announced that indonesia will conduct massive testing by conducting rapid detection tests on the citizens [15] . this test will use recently developed testing kits, which are based on serology [16] . results will be out in 10-30 min, which is much faster than the pcr test (about 1-8 h, depending on the method). further news from the mass media suggested that the indonesian government has ordered 500,000 testing kits from china. the mass media have reported the results of the first batch of tests conducted in jakarta: 121 positive, and 10,338 negatives [16, 17] . the problem is, although testing kits have been developed and even sold by various companies, none of the kits have passed clinical testing, without any clinical assessment on the actual specificity and sensitivity. some reports have indicated that other coronaviruses, or even dengue, might give false positive results. moreover, unlike the pcr test, which targeted the presence of actual genetic materials of sars-cov2 in samples, immunoreaction-based testing targets the presence of antibodies in the bodies of patients. the antibodies for sars-cov2 are known to be present from 5 to 14 days after symptoms appear, which means the antibody-antigen-based test cannot detect any infection prior to symptoms appearance, and thus might give false negative results. meanwhile, the test might also detect antibodies presence on recovering or cured patients, and thus giving another false positive result. indonesians shouldn't be used as guinea pigs, giving these pharmaceutical companies free nation-wide clinical trials. therefore, such data must be handled very carefully, since a recent report by the business insider suggested that such rapid tests using serology-based rdt are only 30% accurate [16] .indonesia needs to quickly and ambitiously collect information in order to obtain the big picture of present nation-wide covid-19 distributions. this information will be important when deciding actual policies. therefore, immunoreaction-based rapid detection kits (rdt) can actually be useful if carefully used. for example, the test could be conducted as the first line of rapid public diagnoses, to select those who must take the more expensive and elaborate, but more accurate, pcr test. only those tested positive by rdt must be required to do pcr test. meanwhile, those tested negative, must take the test multiple times, up to at least three times, after an interval of 5 to 7 days, considering the incubation period of the virus. also, because the result of this test will be very useful not only for global covid-19 countermeasures, and for the private sectors producing the test kits, indonesia must negotiate her position so that she will also benefit from using the rdt kits.in late march 2020, the indonesian task force for covid-19 (gugus tugas percepatan penanganan covid-19) issued the guidelines for medical rapid response and public health aspects of covid-19 in indonesia. the guide targets the medical force and general public in terms of informing the means to mitigate the impacts and death rates. information includes protocols for rapid tests using rdt, lab testing, patient handling, and outreach/communications means. the protocols for rapid testing and lab testing recognize three levels of risks: without symptoms (asymptomatic), person under surveillance (odp/orang dalam pemantauan), and patient under surveillance (pdp/pasien dalam pengawasan). the test involves isolation of the suspected person, rapid testing, and ultimately, when required, pcr.indonesian public health association (iakmi) also regularly issued key recommendations for the task force that in general supported government measures and advocated for evidence-based policy. in one instance circular (20 march 2020) iakmi encouraged the government to strengthen the role of the primary health care system and facilitate community-based responses of covid-19 including education and surveillance. recommendations were also made by indonesia's association of specialist doctors for clinical pathology and medical lab (pds patklim). for instance, they issued cautions on possible caveats in interpreting the results of serologybased rdt tests for covid-19 and suggested that negative results must be repeatedly tested by the same method over time, and positive results retested by pcr [16] . these emphasize that rapid tests should be viewed mainly to implement broader surveillance and epidemiological studies, in (source: [9] ). order to understand the breadth of covid-19 infection in indonesia (pds patklim, circular 19 march 2020).this section presents key responses by different governmental organisations. we start with analysing regulatory and institutional frameworks for health emergency responses in indonesia. we then discuss the formation of the indonesian special task force for covid-19, a very important step in the response.most countries are caught unprepared to the speed and scale of impacts from the covid-19. several national regulations have been produced by the government at different levels from the president to ministerial levels during january-march 2020. table 1 (ordered chronologically) summarises the rules and regulations produced to guide national and local response in indonesia. the table shows that most of the regulations were issued after 13 march when the president established the task force. the head of national disaster management agency (bnpb) was appointed as the commander. prior to this decree, national level response had been minimal as indicated by only two sectoral regulations were issued. first was the health ministry declaration of novel 2019-ncov as a disease that outlines potential transform of covid-19 into an outbreak and what can be done on 4 february 2019. second, a national declaration of the specific emergency situation of covid-19 by the head of bnpb on 28 february 2020.one of the most important one is the president's directives 4/2020 (instruksi presiden nomor 4/2020) specifically instructing for refocusing of development activities, reallocation of government budget, and procurement of goods and services for rapid and accelerated response to covid-19 (refocussing kegiatan, realokasi anggaran, serta pengadaan barang dan jasa dalam rangka percepatan penanganan corona virus disease 2019) (see president directive (inpres) 4/2020 from table 1 ).the president directive has major points of calling for rapid and active strategies related to budget reallocation, ensuring food security, strengthening health sector through basic health services and national insurance scheme (bpjs) for covid-19 patients, changes teaching delivery and cancellation of national exam of schools, strengthening local governments and local economy, reduction of taxes for selected commodities, implementation of various economic and fiscal strategies for ensuring those affected receive certain compensations [9] . some of these policy directions have been followed up at ministerial levels as can be seen in the rest of this section. both central and local governments are working together with related stakeholders to execute the president's directives as mentioned above. it is however unclear whether we can say that the recommendations have been implemented since they have been only issued 2 weeks ago.however, such directive (inpres 4/2020) was not strong enough to create national scale imperatives to rapidly end the spread of covid19. therefore, pressures have been made by many stakeholders. and finally, after long overdue, the president of indonesia issued one decree and two fundamental regulations on the last day of march 2020 as this article goes to print. these regulations include: first, regulation on national budgeting policy and the stability of budgeting system for covid-19 pandemic disaster and/or managing threats for national economy and/or the stabilisation of budgeting system; second, a declaration of community health emergency situation for covid-19; third, big scale social restriction for accelerating covid-19 eradication (table 1) .a coordinated response is extremely important. the first significant regulation is the formation of the task force for rapid response to covid-19 (gugus tugas percepatan penanganan covid-19) on 13 march 2020. this suggests that despite gaps in top leadership as it took more than 10 days after the first confirmed cases in early march 2020, the establishment of the task force provides better inter-agency coordination and response mechanisms. this task force is led by the head of bnpb, general doni monardo. mr. achmad yurianto is the task force spokesman, who is also both a medical doctor and the current health ministry's disease control and prevention director-general.managing an epidemic is not a natural mandate of bnpb. however, given the presidential preference and decision, the head of bpbp has been tasked as the chief of the task force (see section 3.2). overall, we are not able to provide an evaluation of bnpb given the lack of time for observation. however, it is worth noting that in addition to their key roles in the task force, the national disaster management agency (bnpb) has been tasked to collaborate with ministry of health to disseminate the information of covid-19 through different media platforms including sms blasts; established a rapid response team; provide logistics, materials, and health facilities; conduct surveillance for new potential cases of covid-19; and collaborate with the indonesia national armed forces, indonesia national police, and ministry of health. bnpb is equipped with approximately 176 officials who will join the existing team of pusat pengendalian operasi penanganan bencana/the center for disaster management operation.complacency has plagued the ministry from being proactive and able to lead the pandemic at national levels. despite being heavily criticised for being reluctant by the informed public and academics from within and outside the country, the ministry of health has been one of the first ministerial level agencies to formally respond to covid-19 since 4 february 2020.elsewhere in indonesia, the health system capacity has been under capacity to cope with the pandemic at the moment. the legacy of the national committee for avian influenza control and pandemic influenza preparedness [18] could not be seen in the present crisis. such lack of preparedness can be seen throughout the six building blocks of the health system ranging from health service delivery, workforce, information system, access to essential medicines, health system financing and leadership and governance. therefore, starting from 4 february, there was no clear indication of acceleration response to covid-19 until first confirmed cases.at the moment, despite criticisms for being not agile enough, the moh has been playing critical roles as the national spokesperson of the covid19. starting from february till 31 march 2020, at least 6777 tests had been conducted for covid-19 suspects out of which 1677 have been confirmed positive. until the first half of march 2020, there were only 1100 tests carried out and 117 were confirmed positive. while starting from 16 march 2020, there are at least 5600 tests were done with 1560 were confirmed positive. overall the testing has been very slow as the government has been quite passive in conducting diagnostic testing. health infrastructure, especially health laboratories in indonesia has been identified by one of the weakest problems in indonesia health system [18] . the spread of covid-19 has revealed these health infrastructure gaps. for example at present, the indonesian moh has designated only 48 laboratories across indonesia to do covid-19 diagnostics (www.litbang.kemkes.go.id).the ministry of finance, headed by former world bank's managing director, sri mulyani indrawati has made four major decisions namely tax-incentives policy, labour protection, rescheduling of loan repayment from small and medium enterprises (smes) and reallocation of fiscal policy at local government levels [19] . while new policies have been issued in the last week of march 2020, at this point of time, there is limited information on both the implementation of both financial and monetary responses from the ministry of finance. however, we provide some overview of the policies and their promises for future reference.first, decision to expand labour insurance (bpjs tenaga kerja) to cover covid-19 related job losses. this policy is a form of protection for workers via 3-months cash transfers program where an affected worker is entitled to rp. 1 million per month. second, there is provision for minimum business protection measures -including a big push for the banking to relax payments from certain business groups that are too risky to be removed from supply chains [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] . the spread of the covid-19 virus has the greatest impact on the financial and investment business sector including the most affected one such as aviation, tourism, hotel, restaurant, shipping and transportation. third, through the so-called counter-cycle policy, the government decided to relax fiscal policy, namely by widening the 2020 state budget deficit to around 2.5% of gdp from originally planned at 1.76% of gdp. widening the deficit means that there will be added spending.the president of indonesia recently highlighted the 'agenda to fight the two wars', namely the war against covid-19 and the prevention of economic crisis. the bank of indonesia (bi) has a vital role to play in ensuring policy measures to anticipate the impact of the coronavirus on the financial market, and to mitigate macro-economic impacts. key policies to stabilize the financial market due to the coronavirus has been introduced: bi will continue to monitor developments in financial markets and the economy, including the impact of the corona virus and continue to strengthen the policy mix and coordination with the government and relevant authorities, to maintain economic stability, encourage economic growth momentum, and accelerate structural reforms [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] .as a democratic country, using the military and police forces is not a popular option. however, the indonesian national armed forces (tni; tentara nasional indonesia) participation in the war against covid-19 is necessary. we are not able to assess their effectiveness exhaustively and fairly here, but we can briefly highlight their involvements. for example, the use of military assets and personals is essential in this response where military aircrafts have been used to help with the logistical response at times where no civilian system can provide such support. tni has been involved in the preparation of emergency hospitals in some locations from wisma atlet (jakarta), natuna, pulau sebaru, pulau galang pangdam. therefore, their roles in this non-traditional war have been essential. interestingly, we also observed an emerging paradigm of non-traditional view of security forces, in social media and mainstream media during the last few weeks. in this view, frontline medical workers including doctors and nurses have been viewed as 'armies', combatting in the war against covid-19. since enforcement to ensure social distance and other mitigation measures are in place, we also observed that the role of the police has been critical in enforcing mitigation measures. the head of the police (kapolri) issued a mandate letter (no. mak/2/iii/2020) on 19 march 2020 to prohibit mass gatherings or group activities both in public and private environments.one of the most vulnerable groups are people in remote and disadvantaged regions in indonesia where the health system and access to health service remains limited. the good news is that in the last five years, the central government has created a nation-wide incentive for village development through the village development fund (add). at the moment, as instructed by the president and responded directly by the ministry of village, regional disadvantage and transmigration, is to allow village governments (ca. 80,000) to shift existing funds for cash for work. therefore, this is subject to future studies and investigations on how village governments can truly help covid-19 affected communities by using the funding from add.in this section, we review roles and responses, focussing on that of religious and socio-economic organisations, as well as communities. we acknowledge that there are many other groups that have contributed to the responses such as those from international, non-government organisations, civil-society groups but not discussed in this paper.while religions provide comfort and sense of security throughout the history of human civilisation, their roles in pandemics can be both productive and counterproductive at the same time. as a religious country, indonesia has experienced both good and inconvenient experiences in regard to religious views of covid-19. human fellowship characterised by routinised human contacts and gatherings around their house of prayers has been the key features of religious tradition from abrahamic religions (islam and christian) as well as hindu and buddhism as well as countless of faith-based traditions in indonesia. their fellowship has been a source of dense social capitals that shape their worldview and source of inspiration and wisdom not only in today's pandemic but also in the past. covid-19 brings new imperatives of social-cultural change by default. therefore, when covid-19 hit the world, the agenda for social distancing and isolation have been seen as an attack on the culture and tradition that lasted for some millennium.despite their unique adherents and to some degree counter-productive response in times of epidemic, religions should be seen as a solution and not a problem. we provide a brief overview of potential religions for countering covid-19 pandemics. we have observed some (if not all) religious public gatherings in march 2020 amid covid-19 that later led to the spread of covid-19. from the perspective of disaster governance, where managing risk beyond government centric paradigm [25] , religious organisations must be seen as governing power that can be equally powerful as governments given the capacity of their institutions, resources and members.as the country with the highest number of muslims in the world, the government of indonesia cannot ignore the religious factors and roles in handling the spread of covid-19 [26] . three largest islamic organisations such as mui, nahdlatul ulama, and muhammadiyah have developed their governing structure in a state-like structure, consisting of multi-level institutions from national to village levels.governments do not have all the resources to mass-campaign covid-19 mitigation alone. in fact, the government must rely on these organisations to use their resources (schools, health facilities, volunteers and clerics) and structures to conduct rapid promotion and education on covid-19.indonesian ulema council (mui) has real potential power to shape narratives that help islamic communities in indonesia to follow certain safety 'dakwah' (imperatives). in times of perils where 'social-distancing' has been promoted and sounded like an act against the traditions, mui has been trying to introduce new imperatives aimed to mitigate covid-19 from spreading. the mui fatwa commission has issued fatwa no. 14 of 2020. the fatwa explained the implementation of worship in the covid-19 pandemic situation with the aim of safety and preventing the spread of the disease among muslims [27] . mui further forbids actions that cause panic or cause public harm, such as buying up and hoarding basic necessities including protection masks. the mui fatwa also states that people who have been exposed to sars-cov2 must isolate themselves so that s/he won't infect others. those who have been exposed to the virus can replace friday prayers with zuhr prayer at their respective residences. for the management of corpses exposed to covid-19, the mui stipulates that bathing and caving must be in accordance with medical protocols and carried out by competent authorities with due regards to the provisions of the shari'a. meanwhile, burials need to follow the standard procedures [27] . muhammadiyah formed covid-19 command center and allocated hospitals [28] . muhammadiyah has transformed itself to be one of the most agile promoters of health-based and hospital-based emergency response. mdmc has been instrumental in the disaster response system in indonesia. such institutions provide clinical services to covid-19 patients in their hospitals.the indonesian council of churches (pgi) proactively called congregants not to come to churches on sunday worships and did services through the internet [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] . pgi also calls on all churches to form posts to deal with the corona virus outbreak. a case of the synod assembly council of western indonesian churches (gpib) on 26 february 29, 2020, had four participants tested positive for coronavirus. pgi prepared volunteers to clean the house of worship by spraying it with disinfectant liquid [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] .majelis buddhayana indonesia and the indonesian buddhist tzu chi foundation have been instrumental in post-disaster response in indonesia including covid-19 response. the foundation in collaboration with the indonesian chamber of commerce (kadin) have been able to fundraise us$ 31.25 million (idr 500 billion); they have distributed items such as insulation clothing, masks, goggles, gloves, as well as ventilators for the ministry of health along with several hospitals nationwide.the drops in tourist arrivals during late february and march 2020 have made the tourism industry one of the first and hardest hit businesses sectors [29] . the indonesian hotel and restaurant association (phri) reported a loss of about us $ 1.5 billion due to the corona virus outbreak since january 2020. the indonesian travel agent association (astindo) reported that since february 2020, there was relatively no income for the travel agent industry. the loss experienced by the travel industry in the form of 80% of potential passenger cancellations is likely to continue to grow in the future. nationwide, indonesian business sectors including tourism have limited business continuity plans and management (bcpm).lack of business preparedness has long been an overdue issue but barely addressed by both the sector and the government. at the moment, there is no clarity on how to help this sector to survive and recovery after covid-19 due to other competing priorities from the government. tax incentives by the government could help but long-term recovery of the sector needs serious thinking.digital platforms such as gojek, tokopedia, bukalapak, halodoc, and ruangguru have provided facilities and support in working from home, learning from home and praying or worshiping at home according to their respective fields of service [30] . gojek and halodoc have provided facilities for monitoring and checking health from home. while bukalapak, tokopedia, gojek and grab open opportunities to work from home, ruangguru which facilitates the learning process from home.mainstream media has been at the front to correct the government's slow response since january till today [31] . recently, on march 24, 2020, the first content was published with the hashtag #amandirumah, as well as the launch of the hashtag #medialawancovid19 [32] . this content is created in multiplatform which will be broadcast simultaneously on tuesday morning on various television channels, radio, newspapers, cyber media and social media. with this awareness, it is expected that the rate of spread of the corona virus can be inhibited. with this pattern, it is hoped that the available educational publication material can multiply and be utilized by all national and local media.initiatives to share information and educate the public against covid-19 were carried out by journalists and the media industry. the objective of such a media movement is to spread a variety of educational content on a massive scale in an effort to combat the spread of the corona virus in indonesia. this initiative was attended by more than 50 national and regional media from various platforms, namely television, radio, print media, cyber media and social media in indonesia [32] . this initiative arose spontaneously from the media and was independent, without affiliation and funded by any party. that way, journalistic work can still run as it should, by continuing to uphold the principle of independence. through this networked work, it is hoped that various important messages in the fight against the spread of the corona virus can be spread widely and reach all levels of society quickly.the three most frequent changes in public behaviour are staying at home, washing hands more, and applied social distancing [33] . while some communities are more mindful of the risks than others, communities' responses should be seen as key to end this pandemic. they should be seen as a part of solutions and not the problem. in the earlier phase of the outbreak, it seemed obvious that the government's scepticism and hesitance, or even denial of the potential pandemic occurring in indonesia, had direct impacts and drifted communities away from favourable risk perceptions toward the pandemic. this is coupled by relatively low awareness and drills on pandemics, although a number of socializations had already been facilitated for example by the ministry of health in the past.people's perception of covid-19 risk might be low despite complex and rapid flow of information in the last since january 2020. it took time for the general public to process information on covid-19 and take serious action to protect themselves. in the earlier phase of the pandemic, scientific or non-indigenous terminologies (e.g. corona, covid-19, the confusion of the differences between outbreak, epidemic and pandemic, etc) were used in introducing the risk, hence created distance on how such pandemic can affect one's life. later on, simplified technical terms related to covid-19 were introduced into local language as initiated by some academics and experts. english terminologies such as "social distancing" have been literally adopted by governments and the general public.slow progression of information and the disclosures of suspects or patients with positive diagnosis also created a lack of senses of emergency and perceived risk. this indicated how the government response had in fact contributed in shaping community's risk perception. the very low perceptions of risk, at least in the early phase also shaped unfavourable responses, which later on created immense problems for the government when deciding whether or not extreme measures should be taken to contain the virus spread. when school is closed nationwide, some families decide to go for mass family holiday and to go back to their hometown. in this sense, the context evolved in a vicious cyclical way that hinder appropriate responses both by the government and communities. although later on, also due to extremely high exposure of the narratives in all types of media, the covid-19, pandemic, and corona, also terms such as wfh (work from home) as the relatively contemporary terminologies had slowly entered the public acceptance as the new norm. these are shown in the attitude of communities to follow the self-isolation or stay at home advice. the government is still adopting a position of holding off from nationwide lockdown.nevertheless, the self-isolation process is also a new norm, of which has almost never been a reflection of indonesian general and sub-cultures, which is different from japan for example. these are multiplied with numbers of informal workers, and types of professions that simply do not allow a person to work from home to earn their living. we have seen social media postings where some communities in indonesia provided food for their infected neighbour in house isolation. community self-screening for outsiders and health checks have also been conducted, for example, in some communities in lombok island as many migrant workers returned back from malaysia and other countries. however, the limitation of technical knowledge and tools impedes the effectiveness of the initiatives.public misinformation and lack of communication among government levels triggered a misleading interpretation through instant social media tools e.g. wa, facebook etc. (herbal medication can beat viruses quickly which brings to skyrocketing prices in particular commodities such as garlic, onions, ginger). even more, some quick guidelines on how to make instant hand sanitizer and disinfectant are publicly spread in the community. some activities to prevent the proliferation of viruses such as sunbathing have been implemented routinely by some communities and government entities.resilience is the key to enable rapid, successful, sustained coordinated approach and responses toward covid-19 and future crises and emergencies (see e.g. [34] ). it is about the resilience of nations, communities, though not only physical and mental health, but also in its economy, physical and social infrastructure as well as those of nature and the environments.as the who [1] outlined, there are six priority strategies for countries to implement: expand, train and deploy health-care workers; implement systems to find suspected cases; ramp up production of tests and increase availability; identify facilities that can be transformed into coronavirus health centres; develop plans to quarantine cases; and refocus government on suppressing the virus. specifically, for indonesia, we underline these following recommendations:1. active tracing to close contacted patients and do massive rapid tests + socializing for staying at home and physical distancing as well for them. identifying and mapping every single infected person with close contacts will be helpful for contact tracing and mass rapid test. 2. coordinating, collaborating, and utilizing all of pcr laboratories (research institutes, universities, hospitals, clinics, local government) to support pcr-based diagnoses. more attention must also put on health infrastructure development including health laboratory development in all provinces. 3. rapid detection tests (rdt) using kits based on antibody detections are known to be far less accurate than the pcr-based tests. therefore, such tests must be conducted very thoughtfully, and the results must be handled with care. for example, multiple tests up to at least three times must be conducted for those tested negatives, while pcr tests must be done on those tested positive. however, because of the rapidity, obtained data can be used as a ballpark in order to get a broad view about the range and scope of covid-19 spread. preferably whenever possible, rapid pcr methods using the most current techniques (e.g. microfluidic rt-pcr), which is much faster (ca. 45 min until result) than the conventional methods (3-8 h) , should be adopted, rather than the serologybased rdt. 4. increase the number of referral hospitals adequately and equip such hospitals for treatment properly. this includes to properly set up treatment facilities (e.g. respirators, isolation chambers), diagnostics facilities (e.g. pcr machines, diagnostics kits), medicine and pharmaceuticals, management, medical doctors, specialists, nurses, health volunteers, and safety and protection equipment for frontline practitioners (e.g. safety goggles, protection masks, hazardous materials suits). 5. incentive and disincentive. incentive should be given to those who voluntarily report their symptoms to hotline/referral hospitals. disincentive must be implemented to those who are still available out there without any relevant reason. 6. mass spraying of disinfectant on the road, house, park, schools should be reconsidered since it may have little or no effect and may harm the inhalation of the people. 7. develop proper health infrastructure including a proper government health laboratory system, which might include, not limited to, resources of private diagnostic labs, research institutes, and universities, in all provinces, to allow local covid-19 testing without delays. we suggest that the moh and dohs at local levels should be more aggressive to expand the coverage of the whole six building blocks of the health system. 8. furthermore, in the long term, covid-19 reveals the need to mainstream the one-health approach where animal and human health development should be integrated in order to achieve sdgs. current approach that separates both health systems has proven not effective as revealed by covid-19. the covid-19 case has yet to be tied with indonesia's elephant in the room, namely rampant wildlife trade at multiple scales. for example, domestic wildlife markets especially in java (e.g. [35] ) are ongoing, as are animals as source of drugs including traditional chinese medicines business in sumatra, and bushmeat consumption, including endangered bats in north sulawesi. there are delicate issues, because it is a matter of traditional food and part of the culture. allowing all these to continue without reserve goes contrary to the safety principles against the wildlife to human infections (zoonoses) [36] . systems need to be built to ensure safety (e.g. by testing for known pathogens) to prevent novel zoonotic pandemics [37] .proactive, no-regret approach save life, strengthen disasters -humanitarian coordination and decision-making capacity for sub-national governments during crisis and emergency situationthis pandemic proves a difficult time for rapid large-scale decision making for all governments worldwide. presidential, nation-wide decisions are changing minute-by-minute. leaders are faced with criticisms when deciding on whether to impose nation-wide lockdowns for example. this study shows that lockdowns have already saved thousands of lives [38] . adaptive risk governance is about coping with complexity, uncertainty and ambiguity [39, 46] .the country should strengthen its disasters-humanitarian coordination to manage the pandemic and broader emergencies, across and between levels, but also regionally within the asean [40] . indonesia has great experiences managing disasters with coordinated approach by the government, un-ocha in indonesia or asean through the aha center have been coordinated effectively [41, 47] . moreover, indonesia still needs to be ready should an earthquake or floods occur including their potential occurrence amid covid-19.djalante et al. [40] showed that focuses were mainly made at the national government response, with limited and varied focus on cross sectors and cross government levels. it is important to mandate local governments to urgently form their own special task force (gugus tugas percepatan penanganan covid-19 tingkat provinsi dan kabupaten/kota) to accelerate responses and to achieve coordinated and coherent responses, involving key government offices and agencies, especially health, and communications and information. sub-national governments also need to start proactive tracing and mass rapid tests for suspected persons. some even decided to close entrance to their areas.resilience is about the ability to absorb impacts, reorganise, learn, adapt, and transform [42] . it is about having the capacity to sustain development from expected and surprising change and diverse development pathways development [42] . country and business leaders are moving urgently to protect their nations and organisations. immediate action is critical, but we also need to embrace broader sustainability of all of society. on march 31, the un launched a new plan to deal with the potential socio-economic impacts of the covid-19 pandemic, calling on everyone to "act together to lessen the blow to people" [2] . three global measures were outlined: (1) global stimulus package to the amount of double-digit percentage points of the world's gdp, focussing on developing countries; (2) regional mobilisation to consider impacts, monetary coordination, fiscal and social measures, with involvement from private and financial sector,; (3) national solidarity needs to prioritize social cohesion and provide fiscal stimulus for the most vulnerable along with support to small-and mediumsized enterprises, decent work and education. this is extremely relevant for indonesia. the economy needs to have the capacity to absorb the impact and focus on the most vulnerable people. millions of jobs will be lost, with global assessment from the international labour organization (ilo), five to 25 million jobs will be eradicated, and the world will lose $860 billion to $3.4 trillion in labour income [43] . health and unemployment insurance and social protection are necessary, to also support business (large, medium, small scales) to prevent job losses. 5.4. utilise science-based multi-disciplinary decision making/advisory, supported by big data/open science/citizen data, ensure transparency and strategic crisis and risk communication, and involve social influencers, especially to encourage general public to undertake self-isolation and health precautionswe note that the covid-19 task force has included scientists and recognised science-based, data-driven advisory and decision making. the role science advisory has been notable in helping the governments to respond. this important progress needs continuity. multi-disciplinary advice by health/public health researchers and practitioners, social scientists, economists, legal experts, modellers will lead to better understanding of the contexts and potential impacts. big data, artificial intelligence, open-science and citizen-data can accelerate current responses. countries such as singapore, south korea, and china have attributed their aggressive monitoring through the use of these technologies.governments at different levels can prepare and manage their crisis and risk communication strategy by anticipating not only information overload in social media but create a system where both pro and anti-government hoaxes can be minimised. transparency is key to managing pandemic as it provides a condition where infected persons can be quickly identified and treated accordingly in a timely fashion. central and local government must develop an integrated strategy of crisis and risk communication strategy [44] that allow people to be informed to minimise any irrational behaviours such as 'panic' buying at local markets. it is also important to build the capacity of high-level officials at local level governments (provincial and districts) on decision making and crisis communication during crises situations. a good start has been made with provinces developing their own databases and websites sharing monitoring data for each the provincial jurisdiction.it is commendable that social media has played a good part, e.g. advocating economic solidarity (increasing neighbourhood spending for informal workers). interesting short videos raising awareness for self-isolation were made by members of the public, including by najwa shihab (renowned news anchor) and nadiem makarim (minister of education). more recently the awareness videos were made in local languages (javanese, sundanese and sasaknese). however, many times also the social media has been invaded by dangerous hoaxes e.g. promoting chloroquine as a reliable drug to fight covid-19, or alcohol-based hand sanitizer (and not soap) as the most effective prevention. the government has developed a hoax buster http://www.covid10.go.id/hoaks, albeit with limited amounts of information. civil society such as anti hoax society group (masyarakat anti fitnah) is also developing their own hoax buster such as https://turnbackhoax.id/.community-based responses may help to reduce pressure on local governments to provide relief responses. the government also needs to ensure an inclusive approach, considering vulnerable groups include people with disability. the un secretary-general launched the global humanitarian response plan, which explicitly includes persons with disabilities. in his remarks during the launch, the secretary-general highlighted the situation of persons with disabilities in relation to the response, as well as planning for the future [2] . organisation such as arbeiter-samariter-bund (asb) have long advocated for such an inclusive approach.in conclusion, this paper has presented recent responses to covid-19 in indonesia. most importantly, we outlined key health-related strategies and roles of different agencies in the responses. we complemented this with our analysis on the gaps and limitations in the current strategies. we put forward recommendations to improve the efficiency of the responses. we coupled them with wider considerations on how the current covid-19 responses be used as a window of opportunities to strengthen the state of health, and place indonesia in the path for healthy people and the planet.influenza viruses and can cause similar symptoms, diagnosing influenza on the basis of clinical presentation alone is difficult, with reported sensitivity ranging from 38% [4] to 79% [5] . rapid influenza antigen tests (point-of-care tests) might prove useful, because they have a fast turnaround time (10-15 min) and require minimal training to perform. however, there are few data on the diagnostic accuracy of rapid influenza antigen tests for pandemic influenza a/h1n1 virus [6] . soon after the onset of the pandemic influenza a/h1n1 outbreak, we received reports of poor performance of rapid influenza antigen tests. we report our findings of the clinical accuracy of 3 commonly used rapid influenza tests for diagnosis of pandemic a/h1n1 influenza.methods. during the period from 1 may 2009 through 2 june 2009, a convenience sample of 84 positive, nonduplicate nasopharyngeal specimens were tested using 3 different rapid antigen test kits: bd directigen ez flu a+b test (becton dickinson), binaxnow influenza a&b (inverness medical), and quickvue influenza a+b test (quidel). testing was performed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, and each test result was interpreted by at least 2 of the study authors.nasopharyngeal specimens were collected from patients presenting with influenza-like illness using a sterile polyester nasopharyngeal swab and were transported to the microbiology laboratory in m4rt viral transport medium (remel). only specimens that were positive for respiratory viruses using the luminex xtag rvp (luminex) were included. the luminex xtag rvp is a multiplex rt-pcr assay that allows for the simultaneous detection of 17 respiratory virus types/subtypes, including metapneumovirus, coronaviruses, influenza a virus subtypes h1 and h3, influenza b virus, parainfluenza virus types 1-4, respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, and rhinovirus. all specimens were refrigerated, and rapid antigen tests were performed р48 h after specimen receipt. specimens included 60 nasopharyngeal samples positive for pandemic influenza a/h1n1 virus, with results confirmed using the cdc's rt-pcr assay for pandemic influenza a/h1n1 virus. control specimens included 24 nasopharyngeal specimens positive for other respiratory viruses, as follows: adenovirus ( ), coro-n p 1 navirus ( ), concurrent coronavirus and rhinovirus ( n p 3 n p ), metapneumovirus ( ), rhinovirus ( ), concurrent 1 n p 4 n p 4 rhinovirus and parainfluenza virus ( ), parainfluenza virus n p 1 ( ), and respiratory syncytial virus ( ). n p 7 n p 3 we calculated the sensitivity and specificity for each rapid antigen test. we determined the prevalence of pandemic a/ h1n1 influenza over the study period; this was used to calculate the positive predictive value (ppv) and negative predictive value (npv). patient charts were reviewed, if available, for potential factors that may have been associated with rapid antigen test result; these included patient age, duration of symptoms before presentation, inpatient or emergency department versus outpatient status, and the median number of rt-pcr fluorescence intensity (mfi) units. data analysis was performed using spss, version 16.0 (spss). the mann-whitney u test was used for comparison of continuous variables, and x 2 and mcnemar tests were used for categorical independent and paired variables, respectively. p values !.05 were considered to be statistically significant. this study was approved by the institutional review board of rush university medical center (chicago, il).results. the majority of patients with pandemic a/h1n1 influenza were children and young adults; the median age was 12.5 years (range, 7 months to 58 years). a total of 34 patients (57%) were assessed in the emergency department, and 26 patients (43%) were seen in physicians' offices. twenty-two (65%) of 34 patients evaluated in the emergency department were subsequently hospitalized. information for the duration of illness before presentation was available for 38 of 60 patients. the majority of patients (76%) presented р3 days after developing symptoms influenza-like illness (mean interval, 2.8 days; range, 1-9 days). control patients had a median age of 7 years (range, 4 months to 66 years); 14 control patients (58%) presented to the emergency department, and 10 (42%) were outpatients.the analytic performance of the 3 rapid antigen tests, compared with that of the luminex xtag rvp are presented in table 1 . the overall respective sensitivity and specificity of the bd directigen ez flu a+b test were 46.7% (28 of 60 specimens) and 100%; for the binaxnow influenza a&b test, 38.3% (23 of 60 specimens) and 100%; and for the quickvue influenza a+b test, 53.3% (32 of 60 specimens) and 100%. the quick-vue influenza a+b test was significantly more sensitive than the binaxnow influenza a&b test ( ), but there was no sig-p ! .01 nificant difference between the other rapid antigen tests. during the study period, the overall prevalence of pandemic a/h1n1 virus was 17.9% (95% confidence interval, 8.24%-27.6%) among all specimens submitted for respiratory virus rt-pcr testing. on the basis of this prevalence, the calculated ppvs were 100% for all 3 tests, and the calculated npvs were 89.6%, 88.2%, and 90.8% for bd directigen ez flu a+b test, binaxnow influenza a&b, and quickvue influenza a+b test, respectively. patient age and duration of symptoms prior to collection of the respiratory specimen did not correlate significantly with the results of rapid antigen tests ( ). a higher mfi unit with rt-pcr (which p 1 .05 correlates with higher viral load) was significantly associated with positive results for all rapid antigen tests ( ) (table 2) . p ! .01 discussion. rapid antigen tests are commonly used in many hospital laboratories, emergency departments, and doctors' offices. most influenza rapid antigen tests are lateral flow chromatographic immunoassays in which patient samples are applied to a chromatographic strip that contains monoclonal antibodies against influenza a and b viruses. on-site diagnosis of influenza by point-of-care tests has been shown to limit antibiotic prescriptions, use of blood cultures, and chest radiography and ultimately to reduce patient costs [7] . however, rapid antigen tests have demonstrated a wide range of sensitivities for detection of seasonal influenza viruses, ranging from 69%-96% for the bd directigen ez flu a+b test [8, 9] , 64.9%-73% for the binaxnow influenza a&b test [8, 10] , and 19.7%-85% for the quickvue influenza a+b test [11, 12] .we found that the 3 rapid antigen tests had low to modest sensitivities for diagnosis of pandemic influenza a/h1n1, although all tests demonstrated excellent specificity, with no cross-reactivity against other cocirculating respiratory viruses. possible reasons for the low sensitivities in our study include the fact that the sample collection technique was not standardized and that specimens were refrigerated and only tested after completion of rt-pcr, which may have led to antigen degradation. however, we think that this is unlikely, because our findings are consistent with those of a similar study by ginocchio et al [6] in which rapid antigen tests had a sensitivity of only 17.8% for pandemic influenza a/h1n1 virus, compared with the luminex xtag rvp. an alternative explanation may be related to differences in test sensitivity for detection of pandemic influenza a/h1n1 virus, compared with seasonal influenza viruses. in a study that used titered pandemic influenza a/h1n1 virus grown in cell cultures, rapid antigen tests required 1-1.5-log higher viral loads than did human seasonal virus for a positive result [13] .other limitations of our study include the fact that we employed a known convenience sample of positive specimens. because of the widespread interest regarding the clinical performance of rapid antigen tests for detection of pandemic influenza a/h1n1 virus, we used a convenience sample of positive specimens to allow for a quick yet relatively accurate assessment of these tests. in addition, all specimens were decoded, and both investigators performing the tests were blinded to the rt-pcr results. finally, because the design of our study did not permit an accurate determination of the npv and ppv, we calculated these values on the basis of the prevalence of novel influenza h1n1 during the study period. these values would clearly vary according to the prevalence of disease, and the ppv would be highest during the peak of an outbreak, with increased numbers of false-positive results when disease prevalence is low (table 1).despite modest sensitivities, rapid influenza antigen testing could prove to be useful because of the tests' speed, portability, and ease of performance. clinicians should be aware that patients presenting with an influenza-like illness and a negative rapid antigen test result should undergo further laboratory testing. however, a positive rapid antigen test result would allow presumptive diagnosis of novel influenza h1n1 virus infection and should lead to timely institution of infection control measures, treatment, and prophylaxis. finally, as we approach the 2009-2010 winter season, it is desirable for manufacturers to develop sensitive rapid antigen kits that can also differentiate seasonal influenza a viruses from pandemic influenza a/h1n1 virus in view of their different antiviral susceptibilities.from late december 2019, coronavirus infectious disease (covid‐19) epidemics spread from wuhan, china, to all over the world, including italy. 1 ,  2 ,  3  to date, real‐time reverse transcription‐polymerase chain reaction (rt‐pcr) in respiratory samples is the current gold standard method for the diagnosis of covid‐19. 4 ,  5  however, molecular testings are time consuming and require specialized operators, factors that limit their use in real life when the rapid diagnosis is required for fast intervention decisions. recently, an easy to perform serological assay has been assessed 6  to differentiate covid‐19 positive patients from negative subjects.we herein report results of a real‐life study performed in an emergency room department of a tertiary hospital in northern italy to validate vivadiag covid‐19 igm/igg rapid test lateral flow immunoassay (lfia) for the rapid diagnosis of covid‐19.overall 110 subjects were tested for covid‐19‐specific serological assay at fondazione irccs policlinico san matteo. in detail, we enrolled 30 healthy volunteers with documented negative results for covid‐19 rt‐pcr in respiratory samples (m 11/f 19; median age, 38.5; range, 25‐69 years). ten of them (33.3%) had been infected in the past with one of the common oc43, 229e, hku1, and nl63 coronavirus. thirty covid‐19‐positive patients (25 m/5 f; median age, 73.5; range, 38‐86 years) admitted to the infectious diseases department or at the intensive care unit were tested as positive controls. finally, the performance of vivadiag covid‐19 igm/igg rapid test lfia was tested in 50 patients at their first access at emergency room department with fever and respiratory syndrome (34 m/16 f; median age, 61.50; range, 33‐97 years) in comparison with results of nasal swab molecular screening. 5  vivadiag covid‐19 igm/igg from vivachek was performed according to manufacturer's instruction by adding 10 µl of serum or whole blood sample into the sample port followed by adding 2 to 3 drops (70‐100 µl) of dilution buffer. 6  after about 15 minutes, results were read.respiratory samples (floqswabs; copan italia, brescia, italy) were collected from all the patients. total nucleic acids (dna/rna) were extracted from 200 µl of utm using the qiasymphony instrument with qiasymphony dsp virus/pathogen midi kit (complex 400 protocols) according to the manufacturer's instructions (qiagen; qiagen, hilden, germany). specific real‐time rt‐pcr targeting rna‐dependent rna polymerase and e genes were used to detect the presence of sars‐cov‐2 according to the who guidelines 7  and corman et al 5  protocols.in the cohort of patients admitted to the emergency room department, data from serological tests were compared to molecular results to define specificity, sensitivity, positive predictive value (ppv), and negative predictive value (npv) of the rapid serological test.as expected, all 30 covid‐19 negative volunteers were negative for both immunoglobulin g (igg) and immunoglobulin m (igm) using the vivadiag covid‐19 igm/igg rapid test. no cross‐reactivity was detected in the 10 subjects with previous coronaviruses infection, supporting the high specificity of the vivadiag covid‐19 igm/igg rapid test lfia.serum samples were obtained at a median 7 days (interquartile range, 4‐11) after the first covid‐19 positive result from 30 hospitalized patients. a total of 19 of 30 (63.3%) were positive for both igm and igg, 5 of 30 (16.7%) were negative for both igg and igm, 5 of 30 (16.7%) were weakly positive for both igm and igg, and only 1 of 30 (3.3%) was positive for igm and negative for igg. thus, the sensitivity of the rapid assay was suboptimal (data not are shown). a possible explanation is the low antibody titers or a delayed humoral response. 6  focusing on acute patients enrolled from the emergency room department, 12 of 50 (24%) were negative for covid‐19 by real‐time rt‐pcr. of these, 1 (8.3%) showed a positive results for the vivadiag covid‐19 igm/igg rapid test, while the other 11 of 12 (91.7%) tested negative. on the other side, 38 patients were positive for covid‐19 by real‐time rt‐pcr. of these, only 7 (18.4%) showed a positive or weak positive serology for igm and/or igg, while the other 31 of 38 (81.6%) tested negative for the rapid serology assay (table 1). thus, the sensitivity of the vivadiag covid‐19 igm/igg rapid test was 18.4%, specificity was 91.7%, while npv was 26.2%, and ppv was 87.5% in patients enrolled from emergency room department. in contrast with the high levels of sensitivity reported in the previous study, 6  vivadiag covid‐19 igm/igg rapid test revealed a very poor sensitivity (less than 20%). indeed, the majority of patients that tested positive for covid‐19 by real‐time rt‐pcr would have been identified as negative using only the rapid serological assay, leading to a misdiagnosis of covid‐19 disease in the vast majority of patients. on the basis of our results, vivadiag covid‐19 igm/igg rapid test lfia is not recommended for triage of patients with suspected covid‐19.r. bruno, m. mondelli, e. brunetti, a. di matteo, e. seminari, l. maiocchi, v. zuccaro, l. pagnucco, b. mariani, s. ludovisi, r. lissandrin, a. parisi, p. sacchi, s. f. a. patruno, g. michelone, r. gulminetti, d. zanaboni, s. novati, r. maserati, p. orsolini, and m. vecchia (id staff); m. sciarra, e. asperges, m. colaneri, a. di filippo, m. sambo, s. biscarini, m. lupi, s. roda, t. c. pieri, i. gallazzi, m. sachs, and p. valsecchi (id resident); s. perlini, c. alfano, m. bonzano, f. briganti, g. crescenzi, a. g. falchi, r. guarnone, b. guglielmana, e. maggi, i. martino, p. pettenazza, s. pioli di marco, f. quaglia, a. sabena, f. salinaro, f. speciale, and i. zunino (ecu staff emergency care unit); m. de lorenzo, g. secco, l. dimitry, g. cappa, i. maisak, b. chiodi, m. sciarrini, b. barcella, f. resta, l. moroni, g. vezzoni, l. scattaglia, e. boscolo, c. zattera, m. f. tassi, v. capozza, d. vignaroli, and m. bazzini (ecu resident emergency care unit); g. iotti, f. mojoli, m. belliato, l. perotti, s. mongodi, and g. tavazzi (intensive care unit); g. marseglia, a. licari, and i. brambilla (pediatric unit); d. barbarini, a. bruno, p. cambieri, g. campanini, g. comolli, m. corbella, r. daturi, m. furione, b. mariani, r. maserati, e. monzillo, s. paolucci, m. parea, e. percivalle, a. piralla, f. rovida, a. sarasini, and m. zavattoni (virology staff); g. adzasehoun, l. bellotti, e. cabano, g. casali, l. dossena, g. frisco, g. garbagnoli, a. girello, v. landini, c. lucchelli, v. maliardi, s. pezzaia, and m. premoli (virology technical staff); a. bonetti, g. caneva, i. cassaniti, a. corcione, r. di martino, a. di napoli, a. ferrari, g. ferrari, l. fiorina, f. giardina, a. mercato, f. novazzi, g. ratano, b. rossi, i. m. sciabica, m. tallarita, and e. vecchio nepita (virology resident); m. calvi and m. tizzoni (pharmacy unit); and c. nicora, a. triarico, v. petronella, c. marena, a. muzzi, and p. lago (hospital management).the authors declare that there are no conflict of interests.ic, fn, fg, fs, ms, sp, rb, fm, fb, and the other members of the san matteo pavia covid‐19 task force listed reviewed and approved the manuscript. ic and fn discussed results, data analysis, and wrote the paper. fg, fs, and ms collected the samples. sp, rb, and fm discussed results. fb conceived the study.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) due to a novel virus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), is now a global pandemic. there are more than 1.5 million confirmed cases across almost every country in the world, and at the time of writing (early april 2020) there were close to 100 000 recorded deaths. [1] the diagnosis of covid-19 can be challenging, and as with any disease entity, a number of factors, including disease stage, disease prevalence, patient profile and sample type and quality, can influence diagnostic test performance. in this review we outline the performance outcomes of key tests used to diagnose covid-19, and considerations that modulate performance. the safety of healthcare workers collecting samples, laboratory safety aspects and experimental approaches such as detection of volatile organic compounds in exhaled breath, mass spectrometry studies of different sample types, methods of signal amplification and utility of other novel approaches are not discussed here.country-specific indications and criteria for testing have evolved rapidly, and are being updated as information emerges and as the epidemic progresses. these recommendations have been guided by the phase of the epidemic and available resources. generally speaking, testing for covid-19 should currently be considered in anyone with symptoms of an acute respiratory tract infection (upper or lower) and with or without systemic symptoms such as fever, fatigue and myalgia. [2] [3] [4] [5] in mild disease, testing directs the need for self-isolation and identification of new cases through contact tracing and testing of contacts. as the epidemic progresses, and with forecasted limited testing capacity, testing may be directed to specific subgroups or those with enhanced risk of a poor outcome.in the clinical setting, covid-19 will form part of the differential diagnosis of any acute respiratory presentation, including infectious causes of pneumonia (e.g. bacterial, influenza, other viral pneumonia, pneumocystis pneumonia, tuberculosis (tb), etc.), acute exacerbations of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), acute pulmonary embolism, cardiac failure and other conditions. relevant investigations will depend on the clinical context, and will likely include pulmonary imaging, relevant laboratory investigations, blood cultures and interrogation of urine and/or lower respiratory tract specimens to rule in a viral, mycobacterial, fungal and/or bacterial cause. clinical and laboratory parameters that may suggest viral infection include pyrexia, acute malaise and myalgia, and lymphopenia. c-reactive protein is unhelpful in distinguishing covid-19 from other infections. procalcitonin is elevated in severe covid-19 and when there is secondary bacterial infection. [6, 7] in early disease low procalcitonin may distinguish covid-19 from bacterial infections, but not from other viral diseases (data are awaited to confirm this supposition). in those with underlying asthma or copd the presence of pulmonary infiltrates may favour a respiratory infection-related cause, though a cardiac cause must also be considered in the differential diagnosis.the most common sample types sent for testing, usually by means of reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), are nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal samples obtained using a swab, placed in viral transport medium. there is already considerable shortage of reagents (and swabs), meaning that dry swabs are being sent to laboratories in some centres. dry swabs are less costly and more conducive to community-based testing, but data are urgently required to determine the comparative sensitivity of dry swabs compared with using viral transport medium (taking into account the time from sample acquisition to sample processing). samples from the lower respiratory tract including sputum, tracheal aspirate, bronchial washings and bronchoalveolar lavage may also be sent. in patients with covid-19 disease, samples from the lower respiratory tract are more likely to test positive (discussed below). viral rna can also be detected in stool in ~30% of cases, and in blood in ~1% of cases, [8] but rarely in urine.recent data from infections in special contexts such as cruise liners [9] and in close contacts of covid-19 patients [10] have demonstrated that sars-cov-2-specific rt-pcr may be positive in the early phase of the disease, and that viral shedding in the asymptomatic phase and in the early prodromal phase can be considerable. [11, 12] at present, screening of asymptomatic individuals by rt-pcr has been constrained by limited testing capacity, and the need to focus public health efforts and resources on symptomatic persons.in symptomatic individuals, 80 -90% of patients have mild symptoms not requiring hospitalisation. depending on age and the presence of risk factors, ~10 -20% of symptomatic persons may require admission to hospital because of respiratory or other complications. individuals in this enhanced risk category may have one or more such factors, including age >50 years, comorbidities, history of significant tobacco smoking and underlying immunocompromising illnesses. [10, 13] in mild disease, especially in the early stages, the rt-pcr false negative rate is ~30 -40%. [8, 14, 15] a meta-analysis reported that a single test ~10 days post symptom development had an ~33% false negative rate using a nasopharyngeal swab (52.89% for a throat swab). [16] ai et al. [17] reported a false negative rate of 41% in a cohort of 1 014 hospitalised patients; the estimated median (standard deviation) interval between the initial negative test and subsequent positive rt-pcr result was 5.1 (1.5) days. a selection of other studies reported false negative rates of between 3 and 29%. [18] [19] [20] notably, some patients required up to five repeat tests before a positive result was ascertained. [19] this false negativity phenomenon may be the result of several factors, including a low viral load below the detection limit of the assay, low sample volume or cellular mass during acquisition, sampling location (upper v. lower respiratory tract), sample degradation during transport or storage, sample processing methodology and the timing of sampling in relation to the stage of the disease (rt-pcr positivity may progressively increase during the course of the disease). [14] test accuracy will depend on the quality of the specimen collec ted. [20] it has since been shown that specimens from the lower respiratory tract have a higher viral load, and are hence more likely to test positive than specimens from the upper respiratory tract. [8, 21] nasopharyngeal specimens have better yield than oropharyngeal samples. [8, 15] in hospitalised patients with severe disease, wang et al. [8] found a sensitivity of 93% in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (a high aerosol-generating procedure), 72% in sputum and 63% in nasal swabs; sensitivity ranged from 0 to 32% in pharyngeal swabs, faeces, blood and urine. given these considerations, a negative test from an upper respiratory tract specimen should be repeated after 1 -3 days (the optimal timing is unclear), or a lower respiratory tract specimen obtained to exclude a false negative result, if clinical suspicion is high. [22] viral shedding in asymptomatic, early prodromal and minimally symptomatic individuals, and after resolution of symptoms, helps to explain the rapid and extensive spread of covid-19. in patients with more severe disease, including those with lower respiratory tract infection, but also in individuals with mild disease, high viral loads can often be detected for several days after the resolution of symptoms. [23] the significance of this remains unclear, although recent data from a limited number of patients suggest that rt-pcr positivity does not necessarily mean shedding of infectious virus after symptom resolution. [11] zhifeng et al. [24] demonstrated that rt-pcr using nasopharyngeal samples can be negative even when there is computed tomography scan evidence of covid-19 pneumonia. [24] ali et al. [17] showed an improvement in disease extent in 42% of ct scans prior to rt-pcr tests becoming negative. it is unclear whether patients whose symptoms have resolved but who continue to have detectable viral rna in respiratory samples can transmit infection. furthermore, when symptoms have resolved, and especially given limited testing capacity, it remains unclear when patients may be discharged from the intensive care unit into the general ward setting, or from hospital into the community, especially if there are other individuals with high-risk profiles living in the same household. therefore there are no clearly defined guidelines as to when it is safe for social mixing to occur after symptoms have resolved. healthcare worker safety must be taken into account when collecting sputum, which should ideally be performed in an infection-controlled environment, or in the open air in ambulant patients.currently, rt-pcr is the (imperfect) 'gold standard' for the diagnosis of covid-19. the development of molecular detection assays has been facilitated by the sequencing of sars-cov-2. [25] the assay consists of two principal steps: (i) viral rna extraction from patient specimens performed manually or using automated platforms; and (ii) reverse transcription and pcr amplification using specific primers and specific probes for real-time detection (see fig. 1 for an overview).the use of robotic systems allows for increased throughput for rna extraction and pcr setup. because of current resource constraints (trained personnel and reagents) and the necessity to rapidly deliver test outcomes, most diagnostic laboratories are skipping the postextraction rna quality and quantification check, which is costly and labour intensive.several sars-cov-2 targets are being used, and these include the envelope, nucleocapsid and rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) genes, and two large open reading frames orf1a/orf1b, and ribonuclease p. [4] generally, at least two target genes need to be identified for sars-cov-2 confirmation. however, interpretation algorithms differ with respect to the number of genes that need to be detected for the test to be considered positive. for some protocols, results are interpreted as indeterminate or negative if one of the genes is not detected, whereas for others, identification of one gene is used as screening test, while that of the subsequent gene(s) serves as a confirmatory test. [4] from a laboratory perspective, multiplexing of targets allows for better efficiency, shorter turnaround times and more optimal management of laboratory consumables. [26] vogels et al. [27] evaluated nine primer-probe sets. they confirmed that each pair had a detection efficiency of >90%, but there were differences in the ability to differentiate true negatives from positives in patients with a low viral load. some sets led to inconclusive results due to nonspecific background amplification (including the initial sets issued by the us centers for disease control and prevention but with subsequent rectification). with viral evolution, nucleotide substitutions may emerge that could affect primer/probe binding regions that could alter the sensitivity of pcr. indeed, a potentially problematic mismatch in the rdrp-sarsr reverse primer has already been confirmed. the threshold cycle value of the target gene remains the quantitative endpoint to ascertain viral load and, depending on the kit used, this value generally lies in the 30 -40 range. [4, 27] to control for nonspecific pcr inhibition, an internal positive amplification control (e.g. sars-cov-2 e-gene rna, sars-cov frankfurt 1 rna) is included in the assay, while a negative control interrogates for contamination during sample preparation.digital pcr (dpcr) has been used to perform a quality assurance verification of rt-pcr. [28] dpcr involves partitioning a sample into many individual parallel pcr reactions, allowing even a single molecule to be amplified more than a million-fold. using this technique, sensitivity was significantly improved from 28.2% by rt-pcr to 87.4% by rt-dpcr. [28] moreover, 15/16 close contacts in south korea that were guidelines for laboratory diagnosis of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19)-inconclusive with conventional rt-pcr (likely because not all the targets of interest were detected) were dpcrpositive. the overall sensitivity, specificity and diagnostic accuracy of rt-dpcr was 90%, 100% and 93%, respectively. moreover, the higher sensitivity of rt-dpcr translated into detection of viral rna for longer periods than with conventional rt-pcr in convalescing patients. while rt-dpcr is more sensitive and suitable for detecting low viral loads, its accessibility is limited by the complexity of the system and cost implications, and the inability to multiplex target genes of interest. [29] several automated rapid nucleic acid amplification tests have recently received food and drug administration (fda) approval for emergency use. cepheid's xpert xpress sars-cov-2, run on the gene xpert platform, detects multiple gene targets and can provide a result within 45 minutes (https://www.cepheid.com/coronavirus). abbott's rapid covid-19 test, run on the abbott id now device, can provide results within 13 minutes (https://www.alere.com/en/home/productdetails/id-now-covid-19.html). the former may be convenient in countries such as south africa (sa) that have an extensive gene xpert infrastructure, and the technology lends itself to onsite point-of-care testing using portable xpert platforms such as xpert edge.while rt-pcr currently remains the imperfect gold standard for the rapid confirmation of sars-cov-2 infection, ongoing genetic evolution of the virus highlights the need to closely monitor and review the methodology based on emerging data. it is possible that a better stage-specific reference standard may emerge incorporating immunoassay results.limited testing capacity remains a challenge to widespread surveillance and testing in sa. expanding testing services to researchbased laboratories is fraught with challenges, including the need for accreditation of laboratories (by the south african national accreditation system in sa) and personnel (by the health professions council in sa). capacity shortfalls are further compounded by an international and countrywide shortage of kits and reagents and a severe reduction in international freight shipping capacity. however, the implementation of rapid automated molecular testing (xpert xpress sars-cov-2) will be helpful if enough cartridges can be procured.several antigen-based immunoassays have been developed that detect antibodies in serum or plasma. [30] one such assay was recently fda approved, and the foundation for innovative new diagnostics website lists over 200 companies that are either making or have made such assays. [31] some are rapid lateral flow assay (lfa)-based while others are enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa)-like tests. both formats have antigen impregnated on a test line or on a plasticplate surface, and detect human igg or igm, and sometimes also iga antibodies. in the meantime, rapid capture assays that detect viral antigens in nasopharyngeal aspirates have also been developed, and are being evaluated in tandem.despite the proliferation of different testing devices and kits that are emerging, there are very few independent validation data on which specific assays work optimally. therefore the sensitivity, specificity and predictive values of individual tests in different contexts remain unknown. a web-based resource has been developed that lists assays that have now been approved for use in specific countries. [32] some tests purchased by specific countries have already been found not to meet expectations. [33] in spain, one of worst-hit european nations, health authorities purchased thousands of rapid serological tests from a biotech company in china, but these were later found to have a sensitivity of ~30%. [34] sa companies have already produced iterations of lfa platforms, and they are currently being evaluated.one concern is test specificity, as there are four common human coronaviruses that cause up to a third of common cold episodes. poorly designed antibody tests may cross-react with pre-existing anti-coronavirus antibodies. high false-positivity rates may erroneously indicate disease in those without covid-19, resulting in wasted public health contact-tracing efforts, unnecessary anxiety and even worse, unintended exposure of individuals to covid-19 in testing centres and wards if they are hospitalised. sub-optimal sensitivity with lfa formats without a signal amplification step is a potential concern as lfa, depending on the context, may have suboptimal sensitivity compared with elisa-based assays. however, to what extent this applies to covid-19 remains to be seen.several recent articles describe longitudinal antibody responses in patients with covid-19. [35] [36] [37] [38] broadly speaking, igm responses tend to become detectable 3 -7 days after the onset of symptoms. [37, 39] robust responses generally develop during the second week of illness. [35, 36] given these considerations, antibody-based tests are not recommended for first-line diagnosis within the first few days of symptoms. there is some evidence that combining antibody and rt-pcr data during the early phase of disease may be useful and may have some incremental benefit, though further studies are required. however, the sa health products regulatory agency and other agencies have recently indicated, based on guidance from the sa national institute of communicable diseases and the world health organization, that serological testing is not suitable for diagnosis of acute sars cov2 infection, and should be limited to epidemiological surveys (at least until more data become available).indeed, there is an undisputed role for immunoassays in surveillance studies, which may guide public health planning and help to define the trajectory of the epidemic. their potential role for targeting vaccination in certain subgroups is being investigated. some have suggested that immunoassays could identify previously infected and recovered healthcare workers and other essential workers who could potentially return to work, on the assumption that they are immune to reinfection. whether this is the case, and for how long immunity lasts in the case of covid-19, remains unclear. therefore the validity of the concept of 'immunity passports' remains unclear. [40] there are currently no data on how diagnostic, management and prognostic considerations may be different in hiv-infected v. uninfected persons. in hiv-infected patients presenting with a respiratory tract infection, the general possibilities outlined above have to be considered, including considering pneumocystis carinii pneumonia and tb in the differential diagnosis. although well documented, it is not widely appreciated that between 10 and 20% of community-acquired pneumonia or acute lower respiratory tract infection in sub-saharan africa and parts of asia is due to mycobacterium tuberculosis [41] [42] [43] , and this proportion is even higher in hiv-infected persons. [41, 43] it is also possible that covid-19 infection may unmask subclinical tb in both hiv-infected and uninfected persons. on the other hand, and particularly in hiv-infected persons, covid-19 pneumonia, as in the case of influenza, [43] may be associated with a poorer prognosis in hospitalised patients with tb. whether the sars-cov-2 viral load will be higher in hiv-infected persons, and therefore rt-pcr sensitivity better, remains unclear. in hiv-uninfected persons, co-infection with more than one pathogen has already been documented, e.g. co-infection with covid-19 and influenza and/or bacterial organisms. [44] it is possible that co-infection with more than one pathogen may be more frequent in hiv-infected persons or those with advanced immunosuppression. these unanswered questions will only be resolved once more data become available.the rapidly spreading covid-19 pandemic has exposed capacity weaknesses in healthcare and laboratory testing systems. although the mainstay of testing remains rt-pcr, there are several drawbacks, including a significant false negative rate in the early course of the disease, assay cost and lack of assay simplicity and the requirement for complex laboratory infrastructure. there is an emerging shortage of reagents, including rna extraction kits, that is likely to worsen; already many centres are using dry nasopharyngeal swabs because of the shortage of viral transport medium. antibody-based immunoassays have been developed, although they have a limited role in the early diagnosis of symptomatic patients. their incremental benefit over rt-pcr assays, and their role in other applications, including surveillance and targeting of individuals for vaccination and redeployment into the workforce, are under investigation.declaration. none.children bear the heaviest burden of viral respiratory illness. studies that used viral culture estimate that, in developed countries, infants and preschool children experience a mean of 6-10 viral infections annually and school-age children and adolescents experience 3-5 illnesses annually [1] . because of the limited sensitivity of culture methods, this is certainly an underestimate. although many viral infections are limited to the upper respiratory tract, viral infections of the lower respiratory tract cause an enormous disease burden in children [2] . recently, the role of respiratory viruses in serious lower respiratory tract infections (lrtis) in older adults has begun to be appreciated. although this article focuses on infections in children, many of the same issues apply to older adults.the syndromes of lrti in children include bronchiolitis, exacerbations of asthma or wheezing, croup, and pneumonia. although working definitions exist, there is overlap among the syndromes. although some respiratory viruses are more strongly associated with specific syndromes, many viruses have been shown to cause each syndrome (table 1) . it is often difficult to differentiate between viral and bacterial pneumonia in children. seven viruses have been considered to be the usual suspects for lrti and have been sought in many studies: respiratory syncytial virus (rsv); influenza a and b; parainfluenza 1, 2, and 3; and adenovirus. in the past decade, at least 6 new viruses associated with respiratory infection have been identified, including human metapneumovirus (hmpv), severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus, human coronavirus nl63 and hku1, parainfluenza 4, and bocavirus [3, 4] .viruses are responsible for a large proportion of lrtis in children, but antibiotics are often prescribed for viral illnesses. in addition, viral infections cause the majority of febrile episodes in infants ,3 months of age [5] .however, because of the inability to accurately identify the minority of infants who have serious bacterial infections, the majority of febrile infants are hospitalized and receive antibiotics. existing viral diagnostics, such as enzyme immunoassay-based rapid tests, are limited in sensitivity and detect only influenza and rsv or, in the case of direct fluorescent antibody detection and shell vial culture, require a sophisticated virology laboratory. furthermore, several of the newer pathogens do not grow well in culture.better diagnostic tests that establish the cause of lrtis in children have the potential to both reduce overall antibiotic use and to improve the targeted use of antibiotics. in addition, rapid identification of viral infections can help control nosocomial transmission. studies using currently approved rapid tests or direct fluorescent antibody testing, despite the limitations of these methods, have already demonstrated improvements in clinical practice [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] .bronchiolitis is a disease in children ,2 years of age that is characterized by acute inflammation, edema and necrosis of epithelial cells lining small airways, and increased mucus production, leading to bronchospasm, wheezing, hyperexpansion of the lungs, and hypoxia. bronchiolitis causes .120,000 hospitalizations in infants ,1 year of age annually; up to 3% of infants are hospitalized for bronchiolitis annually [11] . rsv is the most common cause of bronchiolitis and is detected in 43%-74% of cases. however, other viruses can cause bronchiolitis and are clinically indistinguishable from rsv-induced disease, including parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, rhinovirus, hmpv, coronavirus, and bocavirus [12, 13] . with polymerase chain reaction (pcr)-based testing, coinfection with >2 viruses has been detected in 23% of children. thus, the potential for nosocomial transmission of a variety of viruses among children hospitalized for bronchiolitis is very high. diagnostic testing has the potential to influence cohorting, clinical management, and the prevention of health care-associated infections [13, 14] .community-acquired pneumonia (cap) is an important cause of morbidity and hospitalization in children in developed countries, and one of the leading causes of death in children in the less developed countries [15] . the large number of established and emerging pathogens that cause pneumonia and the difficulty of determining the microbial cause complicate the management of pneumonia in children. in addition, it is difficult to obtain adequate specimens from the lower respiratory tract, and nasopharyngeal carriage of potential pathogens is common in healthy children. moreover, coinfection with >2 pathogens is common.the etiologies of pneumonia in children differ according to the age of the child, the season, and the clinical presentation. there are relatively few contemporary studies of the etiology of pediatric pneumonia [16] [17] [18] [19] . the studies vary in the population studied, case definition, clinical specimens, test methodology, and the number of pathogens sought. in prospective studies, a potential pathogen was identified in 24%-85% of children with pneumonia. table 2 summarizes several recent studies of children hospitalized with cap. despite differences in the methods used and age groups studied, the overall results are generally similar. in these studies, at least 1 potential pathogen was identified in 77%-86% of children studied. at least 1 virus was identified in 45%-66% of children. mixed viral and bacterial infections were identified in 23%-33%. in most studies, viral infections were most common in children ,2 years of age, but viral causes of pneumonia were important in all age groups.the use of pcr increases the proportion of children with cap who are found to have viral infection. tsolia et al [18] studied 75 school-age children hospitalized with cap with use of conventional cultures and pcr assays for influenza, rsv, parainfluenza, adenovirus, mycoplasma pneumoniae, and chlamydophila pneumoniae. a pathogen was demonstrated in 58 (77%) of 75, >1 virus in 65%, bacterial infection in 40%, and coinfection in 35%. adenovirus was present in 9 (12%), procalcitonin and c-reactive protein levels were significantly higher in children with bacterial infection, but the sensitivity of these tests was modest (72% and 88%, respectively) and the specificity was low (58% and 44%, respectively). there was no association between the radiologic description and the etiology. it remains unclear from these studies whether children with coinfection with viruses and bacteria had more severe illness.although it is clear that influenza, parainfluenza, rsv, human metapneumovirus, and adenovirus are important causes of cap in the absence of bacterial coinfection, the role of rhinoviruses and some of the newly described viruses, including human coronaviruses and bocavirus is harder to determine. rhinoviruses are the most common cause of mild upper respiratory illness, and detection of rhinovirus in asymptomatic persons is relatively common [20, 21] . jartti et al [21] reviewed studies that reported detection of viruses from asymptomatic adults and children, although some of the participants were household contacts of ill patients. with use of conventional culture, rhinovirus detection was uncommon (mean, 1.5%; range, 0%-15%), but with use of pcr, rhinovirus was detected more frequently (mean, 14%; range, 0%-45%). the few studies that have performed sequential sampling have shown that pcr positivity is relatively brief [22, 23] . replication of many strains of rhinovirus is limited at higher temperatures, and this was thought to prevent replication in the lower respiratory tract. however, recent studies demonstrated that rhinovirus can replicate at higher temperatures and infect the lower respiratory tract [24] . although season-and age-matched control subjects would be helpful, detection of rhinovirus in young children hospitalized with cap has been substantially higher in some studies than would be expected from children with uncomplicated urti [16, 25] . pcr-based detection and sequencing of rhinoviruses has revealed a greater degree of genetic divergence than was appreciated with culture-based detection [20, 26] . it is possible that better understanding of these viruses will identify genotypes with greater capacity for lower respiratory tract disease and severe disease [27, 28] .three new coronaviruses capable of infecting humans were described recently. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus was rapidly identified after outbreaks of severe respiratory disease were detected in china, vietnam, and singapore in early 2003 [29] . fortunately, only sporadic laboratory-associated cases have been detected since containment of the worldwide outbreaks by the end of 2003. human coronavirus nl63 (hcov-nl63) was identified in the netherlands in 2004 [30] . it has clearly been associated with croup and bronchiolitis and occasionally with pneumonia [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] . human coronavirus hku1 (hcov-hku1) was detected in an adult in hong kong in 2005 [36] . in one of the initial studies in hong kong, hcov-hku1 was detected in 2.4% of patients with cap [36] . other studies have shown slightly lower frequency. hku1 was detected as the only respiratory pathogen in 14 (1.4%) of 1043 specimens from hospitalized children in seattle [34] . in a prospective active surveillance study involving children ,5 years of age in nashville, coronaviruses, including hku1, nl63, oc43, and 229e, were isolated from 2.2% of children hospitalized with respiratory disease. thus, coronaviruses appear to be a significant but relatively uncommon cause of hospitalization among children.bocavirus was first isolated in 2005 in nasopharyngeal aspirate specimens from children with respiratory tract infection [37] . unlike many other respiratory viruses, it is a single-stranded dna virus of the family parvoviridae. bocavirus has also been isolated from stool and serum samples. bocavirus has frequently been detected in conjunction with other pathogens and may be detected for prolonged periods. thus, it has been challenging to demonstrate the clinical importance of bocavirus detection [38] [39] [40] . however, at least 2 studies showed that isolation of bocavirus alone was more common in ill children than in control subjects [41, 42] . bocavirus loads were significantly higher in patients with only bocavirus than in those with coinfection [3, 43] . thus, accumulating data support the role of bocavirus as a true pathogen, but determining the relevance of isolation from an individual patient remains difficult.respiratory viral infections are an important cause of severe disease in children and adults who receive solid organ and hematopoietic stem cell transplants [44] [45] [46] . children appear to be at increased risk of infection with respiratory viruses, compared with adult transplant recipients. respiratory viruses can cause severe or fatal pneumonia and may trigger chronic progressive airway obstruction. the role of rsv, influenza virus, adenovirus, and parainfluenza viruses has been appreciated for several years and is reasonably well understood. the seasonal distribution parallels the epidemiology in the community. infections may be attributable to shedding by visitors or staff or from the patients' upper respiratory tracts. many outbreaks have been described in transplant units with horizontal transmission. in recipients of stem cell transplants, the mortality associated with lower respiratory tract infection due to the older respiratory viruses is 25%-45%. [44] improved molecular detection has led to increased recognition of hmpv, coronavirus, bocavirus, and rhinovirus infections in transplant recipients [47, 48] . there are reports of severe disease associated with these pathogens. however, many unanswered questions remain about the risk factors, natural history, and optimal management of these pathogens.accurate and timely diagnosis of the cause of lrti in children has potential benefits, including improved treatment of the individual child, decreasing the overall costs of care and reducing selection for antimicrobial organisms due to excessive antibiotic use. a specific viral diagnosis may provide reassurance to parents and providers.a few randomized trials and case series have examined the potential for viral testing to improve management [5] [6] [7] 49] [ [50] [51] [52] [53] [54] . bonner et al [6] conducted a randomized trial of providing emergency department physicians with the results of influenza rapid tests for febrile children. for children with influenza, access to the test results reduced the number of antibiotic prescriptions, the ordering of urinalysis, urine culture, complete blood counts, blood cultures, and chest radiographs. no differences were seen among those who did not have influenza. a quasi-randomized trial of influenza rapid testing showed similar results [51] . when the analysis included all children, the use of a rapid test did not influence clinician behavior. however, among those children who tested positive for influenza by either method, those with a rapid influenza test were less likely to have urinalysis, urine culture, or a complete blood count ordered. doan et al [50] studied 200 children ,3 years of age who were seen in the emergency department for fever and had at least 1 respiratory symptom and randomized them to have a direct fluorescent antibody test for 7 respiratory viruses or routine care. there was no statistically significant difference in duration of emergency department stay; performance of chest radiographs, blood tests, and urine analyses; or use of antibiotic prescriptions between the groups. however, children who were tested had a 64% reduction in the likelihood of receiving antibiotics from another provider within 1 week after the visit. among those who tested positive for a virus, testing was associated with a median 69-min reduction in the duration of the emergency department stay.for transplant recipients with respiratory infection, the ability to detect the full range of viral pathogens is critical. the known respiratory viral pathogens should be sought in addition to cytomegalovirus, epstein barr virus, human herpesvirus type 6, and herpes simplex virus. highly sensitive multiplex platforms offer obvious advantages over the combination of direct fluorescent antibody testing (dfa), culture, and individual pcr assays.nosocomial viral infections impose a substantial burden in children's hospitals and pose a particular risk to immunocompromised children [55] . early identification allows effective cohorting and isolation. the inability to distinguish among the multiple viral causes of bronchiolitis means that the practice of cohorting children by syndrome without a viral diagnosis exposes them to substantial risk of acquiring a new virus during hospitalization. virus-specific cohorting should reduce this risk.the largest potential societal benefit may come from reduction in the unnecessary use of antibiotics for lrti in children [56] . although many factors contribute to the rapid emergence of antimicrobial resistance, respiratory tract infections remain the most common reason for prescribing antibiotics, and each course of antibiotics adds selective pressure [57] .the clinical interpretation of the detection of a virus from nasopharyngeal secretions in a child with lrti can be challenging. it is possible that the virus is from a resolving upper respiratory infection and not the cause of the lower respiratory tract disease. detection of influenza, adenovirus, rsv, and probably, human metapneumovirus can generally be assumed to correlate with infection of the lower respiratory tract, but coinfection or superinfection with bacteria is not rare. a biphasic illness, focal consolidation on chest radiograph, and elevated inflammatory markers increase the likelihood of bacterial coinfection. more research is needed to help determine when isolation of rhinovirus, bocavirus, or coronavirus is the only cause of pneumonia. viral quantification may prove helpful to determine when an isolate is associated with severe disease. preliminary results are encouraging [43, [58] [59] [60] [61] [62] , but more data using consistent samples and methods are needed to validate the usefulness and to establish cutoff values.in evaluating new diagnostic platforms, it is not enough to demonstrate that the new test correctly identifies the presence of a large number of respiratory pathogens. the clinician must be able to interpret a positive test result in the context of the clinical illness and determine the appropriate management. it is unreasonable to expect that advanced molecular diagnostic tests will be able to do this in isolation. instead, as with all tests, the result will need to be interpreted with knowledge of the epidemiology of the pathogen, pretest probability of infection, the patient's symptoms, and other clinical information. additional epidemiologic studies are needed to establish the importance and presentation of several of the more recently diagnosed pathogens. we need to better understand the role of multiple infections in lrti.it is also not enough to demonstrate improved diagnostic accuracy. the tests must ultimately change the behavior of clinicians and improve patient outcomes. although the preliminary results of the aforementioned trials are promising, the tests studied are limited in breadth and accuracy, and none incorporate detection of bacterial causes of lrti. studies are needed that use newer multiplex platforms and that address hospitalized children with pneumonia. ideally, diagnostic tests should be able to rapidly identify viral and bacterial pathogens and to simultaneously detect antibiotic resistance.financial support.this work was supported by national institutes of health (nih; 1u01ai082184-01 to a. t. p.) and the centers for disease control and prevention (1u181p000303 to a. t. p.). a. t. p. received travel support from the food and drug administration to attend this meeting. he is also a co-investigator on nih-funded research in which scientists from idaho technologies are co-investigators.supplement sponsorship. this article was published as part of a supplement entitled ''workshop on molecular diagnostics for respiratory tract infections.'' the food and drug administration and the infectious diseases society of america sponsored the workshop. astrazeneca pharmaceuticals, bio merieux, inc., cepheid, gilead sciences, intelligent mdx, inc., inverness medical innovations, and roche molecular systems provided financial support solely for the purpose of publishing the supplement.potential conflicts of interest. author certifies no potential conflicts of interest.coronavirus was for the first time identified in 1960 as a cause of common cold. it is an enveloped rna virus, single-stranded with a pleomorphic or spherical shape having projections of glycoprotein. it has various subtypes such as alpha, beta, gamma, and delta coronavirus along with serotypes of each subtype. the human coronavirus (oc43-like and 229e-like) can also be found in bats, pigs, birds, cats, dogs, mice, and whales. coronavirus can be transmitted through airborne droplets and the replication of the virus occurs in the ciliated epithelium that causes cell damage and inflammatory reactions at the site of infection [1] . consequently, the covid-19 fatality rate (30--90%) is observed to be higher in the older generation making them the most vulnerable group. the milder cases of covid-19 can include nasal congestion, sore throat, difficulty in breathing, chest pains, chills, kidney failure, and pneumonia. this virus can infect several organs in the human body, such as respiratory, hepatic, central nervous, and gastrointestinal systems. the rate of the outbreak of this emerging coronavirus is increasing alarmingly and current methods of diagnosis such as polymerase chain reaction are not ideal as far as the costeffectiveness, accuracy, and speed are concerned. therefore, a faster and simpler method for the detection of viral infections in biofluids can become a front-line tool in order to tackle the spread of this deadly disease [2, 3] .real-time polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) is used for the detection of covid-19, which is time-consuming as sample preparation is required prior to analysis.rt-pcr is also known as quantitative pcr or qpcr, and therein, the amplification of dna is detected in real time as pcr is in progress by the use of a fluorescent reporter. it detects nucleic acids either for their presence or absence or for their amount. pcr testing is a highly sensitive technique, 10 copies per reaction is the sensitivity that the researcher is relying upon, and false-negative tests can result in the failure of detection of covid-19-infected patients [4] . therefore, the correct procedure for pcr is crucial. according to who guidelines regarding covid-19, laboratory testing is now available and research toward improved detection is desperately needed. the dynamics of the virus and subsequent immunological responses are significant in molecular testing. thus, certain factors such as severity of disease in several populations, the relationship between the severity and viral concentration, duration of shedding, development of serological assays and their validation, monitoring of mutations that can affect molecular testing, and encouragement of sharing of data is significant in order to better manage the covid-19 outbreak. the initiation and development of several other molecular techniques to detect the quick and easy prevention and diagnosis of the covid-19 outbreak are crucial to develop countermeasures.to date, the diagnostic kits developed by different countries for the detection of covid-19 are based on nucleic acid assay that has been widely distributed in china [4] .hence, timely detection along with clinical validation of sensitivity and specificity of technique is important to overcome the diagnostic challenges; such as implementation of test, personnel training, quick detection timing, and availability of primers and probes. the definite need for better techniques and portable technology can benefit researchers and clinicians. spectroscopy can offer a promising detection approach through the potential disease molecular/chemical biomarkers [4] .spectroscopy with its advances in technology is central to novel applications in bioengineering, natural sciences, and now in the medical field. both raman (rs) and infrared (ir) spectroscopies can help in the diagnosis of infections at the point of care [5, 6] . spectroscopic techniques have attracted growing interest as biomedical tools for the early diagnosis and monitoring of human disease. the need to study bacteria and viruses has seen a renewed interest with recent technologies capable of providing snapshot information about the overall composition of biological species [7, 8] . as a result, complex biological samples such as urine, cvf, blood, saliva, breast milk, etc., can now be assessed with unparalleled efficiency and resolution using techniques such as proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1 h-nmr), rs, and ir [9] [10] [11] .these analytical techniques are vibrational spectroscopic techniques that look at the molecular vibrations of the chemical structure of molecules. the viral proteins or antibody proteins from the immune system response can be detected in the vibrational spectrum [12] . wood et al. emphasized the need for better methods of diagnosis and reported on the detection of viruses through infrared spectroscopy claiming that it offers significant economic and social benefits to the community [13] . recently, we successfully separated different types of bacteria by both ftir and raman spectroscopy and the data (to be published) provides compelling evidence. this is encouraging, as we strongly believe that both the techniques can be used for detecting viruses, as glycoprotein and nucleic acids of these species can be analyzed ultimately paving the way for rapid and accurate diagnosis and continuous monitoring.spectroscopy coupled with a multivariate analysis approach could be a powerful tool to explore biomolecules. artificial intelligence, having the potential to customize deep neural networks that have the ability to learn the spectra, could, after training, make instant predictions regarding spectra. additional studies should investigate the diagnostic capability of spectroscopy and machine learning [14] . the effectiveness, sensitivity, and specificity of these methods, although significant, could still be further improved. this pandemic situation around the globe calls for the sharing of data among countries with anonymized samples, so that researchers are able to explore diagnostic opportunities and so that a rapid development of point of care testing methodology can be developed, strengthening the global fightback against the spread of covid-19. a spectroscopic device based on either ir or/and rs for the detection of viruses and bacteria can be developed by analyzing proteins and nucleic acid structure in a multiplexed fashion. spectroscopic techniques have immense potential in diagnosing human diseases including bacterial and viral infections, inflammatory conditions, and various cancers as demonstrated in a schematic diagram in figure 1 . currently, although pcr can aid in the diagnosis of viral diseases, the process is time-consuming and sample preparation intensive. proposed spectroscopic techniques can be of immense value for rapid, accurate, and relatively cost-effective methods of not only detecting infections but also monitoring. the monitoring aspect is even more crucial, as viruses are known to change their rna in relation to the surrounding environment making it more difficult to find a cure. the use of rs and ir combined with artificial intelligence and machine learning will allow the monitoring of the chemical pathway to the progression of the disease and identify any changes in the chemical structure of the viruses (and bacteria) that may occur. in addition, due to the ability to precisely determine the chemical structural changes by spectroscopy, it should be possible to detect the concentration of various infections in saliva, urine, blood, or serum.the aim should be to develop a spectroscopic test methodology by employing infrared and raman spectroscopies as diagnostic techniques to analyze covid-19 samples and compare spectral results with the current pcr method that is routinely used. vibrational spectroscopy will help in understanding the process of viral infection, not only it is rapid and accurate detection but also monitoring, which could lead to understanding its mutation and drug development for covid-19 as well.a complete spectroscopic detection system can be a next diagnostic tool going through different stages of spectral data acquisition, defining a test methodology, statistical process control, and spectral data mining and hence, developing a rapid diagnostic system. there are many factors as to why the response to sars-cov-2 in the united states (us) has been 57 different from previous pandemic responses, and our goal here is to document challenges to the sars-58cov-2 response and provide initial recommendations to better prepare for the next pandemic. in 2009, 59 the influenza a h1n1 pandemic was the first pandemic in the age of molecular diagnostics. the large 60 network of academic and community hospital laboratories throughout the united states was able to 61 develop and validate molecular tests in the first week of the outbreak to rule out h1n1 as the cause of a 62 patient's illness, and this played a critical role in containing the h1n1 pandemic. for example, in chicago 63 during the first month of the pandemic, 62% of the patients screened for h1n1 influenza were tested by 64 community molecular diagnostics laboratories with a typical turnaround time of 24 hours 1 . the clinical 65 laboratory community rapidly provided widely available h1n1 influenza molecular testing, facilitating a 66 swift pandemic response 2-6 . 67 68 ten years later, our laboratories are now responding to the sars-cov-2 pandemic 7-10 . as we go to press, 69 the us has surpassed all other countries in number of diagnosed infections and deaths 70 (https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html, last accessed 4/28/2020). the us federal government continues 71 to recommend social distancing measures, and many states have taken significant public health 72 measures to slow sars-cov-2 spread in their communities 11,12 (https://www.kff.org/health-costs/issue-73 brief/state-data-and-policy-actions-to-address-coronavirus/, last accessed 4/28/2020). the highest rates 74 of infection are currently observed in urban areas, consistent with patterns observed in seasonal flu 75 outbreaks; however, community spread has been identified in all 50 states and reported incidence has 76 increased in areas with smaller population density as testing expands 13 . experts believe that due to a 77 number of factors we are seeing only the tip of the iceberg with regard to numbers of patients infected 78 using current diagnostic test strategies, and the inability to identify asymptomatic yet sars-cov-2 challenges the cdc has released guidance on how to safely reopen the us on may 2020 81 (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/downloads/php/cdc-activities-initiatives-for-covid-19-82response.pdf, last accessed 5/27/2020). key to this guidance is building more testing capacity for both 83 symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals. 84this new coronavirus has unique biological characteristics that would challenge any health care system's 87 response, including high levels of infectivity 21 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/nbk554776/, last 88 accessed 5/27/2020). as a novel pathogen, existing clinical tests could not identify covid-19 patients 89 and confirmation of diagnosis required molecular testing for sars-cov-2 viral rna 22,23 . once the genetic 90 sequence of the virus became available in early january 2020 (http://virological.org/t/genome-91 sequences-by-date-and-location/380, last accessed 4/28/2020) and clinical tests could be developed and 92 performed, reliance on a single assay production and test modality (i.e., centers for disease control and 93prevention (cdc) test kit performed at cdc laboratories; https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-94 ncov/lab/rt-pcr-panel-primer-probes.html, last accessed 4/28/2020) provided inadequate testing and 95 sars-cov-2 detection capacity, ultimately hindering the public health system response (e.g., 96https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/28/us/testing-coronavirus-pandemic.html, subscription required, 97 last accessed 4/28/2020). 98with the lack of access at local levels, high complexity clinical diagnostic laboratories began 100 appropriately developing their own tests but faced additional regulatory hurdles due to the invocation 101 of emergency use authorization (eua) requirements by the us food and drug administration (fda) 102 (e.g., https://www.gq.com/story/inside-americas-coronavirus-testing-crisis, last accessed 5/27/2020). us public health laboratories; however, this kit was subsequently found to have a manufacturing 105 problem (https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/18/politics/cdc-coronavirus-testing-106 contamination/index.html, last accessed 5/27/2020). on february 24, the association of public health 107laboratories wrote a letter to the fda requesting enforcement discretion to allow state and local public 108 health laboratories the ability to create a laboratory-developed test for the detection of sars-cov-2, 109 which was denied (https://www.360dx.com/clinical-lab-management/aphl-asks-fda-make-own-tests-110 cdc-struggles-provide-sars-cov-2-test-kits#.xp4d2chkiul and https://www.360dx.com/regulatory-news-111 fda-approvals/fda-declines-aphl-request-make-own-sars-cov-2-test-kits#.xqliuwhkiuk, last accessed 112 4/28/2020, registration required). once the remanufactured cdc test was available to public health labs 113 on february 28, 2020, use of the test was initially restricted to specific reagent lots, extraction 114 platforms, and real-time pcr instruments which placed significant additional barriers on widespread 115 implementation (https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/health-coronavirus-hospital-116 test/, last accessed 5/27/2020). the need for sars-cov-2 testing in the community resulted in fda 117 changing their eua policy and procedure at the end of february, allowing some academic laboratories to 118 rapidly make their test available. it was not until march 12, 2020 that the fda granted the first eua for 119 commercial test kits, and multiple molecular platforms became available for use by clinical diagnostic 120 laboratories (https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-washington-failed-to-build-a-robust-coronavirus-121testing-system-11584552147?mod=article_inline, subscription required, last accessed 4/28/2020). 122 123 while clinical laboratories rapidly responded to make sars-cov-2 diagnostic testing available for 124 patients, supply chain issues have limited testing capacity and led to bottlenecks that hindered 125 widespread availability of these necessary tests (e.g., https://abcnews.go.com/health/wirestory/us-126 virus-testing-faces-headwind-lab-supply-shortages-69710161, last accessed 5/27/2020). this situation (https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-06-20-00300.pdf, last accessed 5/28/2020). because of these 129 critical shortages and cdc recommendations providing specific clinical presentation and epidemiological 130 criteria to identify those eligible for diagnostic testing (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-131 ncov/hcp/clinical-criteria.html, last accessed 4/28/2020), the initial data set on the performance of 132 sars-cov-2 diagnostics reflected only symptomatic patients biased towards the very ill. diagnostic data 133 critical to determinations of mortality rate, infection rates, and other critical metrics -upon which 134 existing modeling and predictions are based -therefore potentially contains a testing bias that we do 135 not yet fully comprehend 24-26 (https://www.statnews.com/2020/03/31/covid-19-overcoming-testing-136 challenges/, last accessed 4/28/2020). full diagnostic testing capacity, to include serological screening to 137 identify persons in the community who have been exposed and recovered from sars-cov-2, is only now 138 becoming available, many months after the first confirmed us case of sars-cov-2 23,27,28 . recent autopsy 139 data indicates the earliest identified death was weeks earlier 140 (https://www.npr.org/sections/coronavirus-live-updates/2020/04/22/840836618/1st-known-u-s-covid-141 19-death-was-on-feb-6-a-post-mortem-test-reveals, last accessed 4/28/2020). only with additional 142 testing and research on disease pathogenesis can we fully understand the scope and pathogenicity of 143 covid-19 disease. 144the association for molecular pathology (amp)'s infectious diseases subdivision leadership is aware of 147 and involved in multiple efforts to address sars-cov-2 testing development, test quality and 148 interpretation, operation, and limited resource management. during the pandemic, guidance from amp 149 subject matter experts will continue to be provided in multiple formats. the authors anticipate providing 150 additional communications as needed to document and to address emerging challenges. throughout related scientific, regulatory, and reimbursement resources (https://www.amp.org/clinical-153 practice/testing-resources-for-covid-19/, last accessed 4/28/2020). on february 20 and may 14, amp 154 provided freely accessible online education regarding the covid-19 pandemic 155 (https://educate.amp.org/local/catalog/view/product.php?productid=4, last accessed 5/5/2020 and 156 https://educate.amp.org/local/catalog/view/product.php?productid=183, last accessed 5/27/2020); 157 additional webinars will provide periodic updates. amp has conducted a robust covid-19 testing survey 158 designed to identify and understand the laboratory community's challenges, with initial data from over 159 100 us-based laboratories available (https://www.amp.org/advocacy/sars-cov-2-survey/, last accessed 160 5/28/2020). amp member peer-to-peer listserv communications have been robust as colleagues rapidly 161 shared concerns, challenges, knowledge, experience, and solutions to support the clinical laboratory 162 community's covid-19 testing response. multiple amp subject matter experts have been featured in 163 media interviews and are interacting on social media outlets, effectively communicating laboratory 164 community concerns and highlighting numerous success stories in spite of challenging conditions (e.g., 165https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/09/politics/coronavirus-testing-cdc-fda-red-tape-invs/index.html, last 166 accessed 4/28/2020). we applaud the efforts of amp members from all over the world, other 167 professional societies, and laboratory professionals around the world for their leadership and dedication 168 to patient care during this time of rapid change and instability. clinical laboratory physicians and professionals are in the vanguard of the response to the sars-cov-2 302 pandemic, providing accurate, high-quality laboratory results to aid in diagnosis, treatment, and 303 epidemiology. in this role, we have encountered numerous regulatory, reimbursement, supply-chain, 304 logistical, and systems problems that we have struggled to overcome in order to fulfill our calling to 305 provide patient care. despite the challenges and setbacks, the cadre of highly-trained and dedicated 306 molecular diagnostic professionals of the amp have risen to the challenge and are providing the vital 307 diagnostic intelligence needed for effective management of this pandemic. while the current successes 308 were achieved through determination and ingenuity, our experiences suggest that the hurdles and 309 obstacles that have been encountered were not inevitable and certainly impaired our national 310 recognition of and response to the pandemic. in order to prepare for the next unexpected challenges, 311 thoughtful retrospection and intervention into key areas will improve our ability to care for patients and 312 our society when the next crisis arises. 313 314 on behalf of amp, we recognize and thank our members and all members of the multidisciplinary 315 medical teams for their expertise, dedication, and service. organizationally, amp will continue to 316 proactively provide critical information and resources in support of all laboratory professionals involved 317 in covid-19 response activities. we will also continue to engage in, encourage, and support disclaimer: the association for molecular pathology (amp) perspectives are developed to be of 327 assistance to laboratory and other health care professionals by providing guidance and 328 recommendations for particular areas of practice. the perspectives should not be considered inclusive 329 of all proper approaches or methods, or exclusive of others. the perspectives cannot guarantee any 330 specific outcome, nor do they establish a standard of care. the perspectives are not intended to dictate 331 the treatment of a particular patient. treatment decisions must be made on the basis of the 332 independent judgment of health care providers and each patient's individual circumstances. the amp 333 makes no warranty, express or implied, regarding the perspectives and specifically excludes any 334 warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular use or purpose. the amp shall not be liable for 335 direct, indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages related to the use of the information 336 contained herein. 337respiratory tract infections (rti) cause considerable morbidity and mortality among the elderly population because of the general decline in the respiratory and immune systems with age . there is increasing recognition that many of these rtis are viral in origin, with viruses contributing up to 80% of acute rti (falsey et al., 1995; flamaing et al., 2003) . infectious outbreaks commonly occur among older adult communities (graat et al., 2003; hicks et al., 2006; loeb et al., 2000; strausbaugh and joseph, 2000) . clinical clues are often unreliable because indicators of infection and traditional laboratory methods are cumbersome, slow, and variably insensitive, making most diagnoses retrospective (falsey et al., 1996; walsh et al., 2007) . emerging molecular diagnostic techniques now offer the potential to test for both a greater breadth of viruses and detect them with increased sensitivity and rapidity (kuypers et al., 2006; oosterheert et al., 2005; templeton et al., 2005) . previous studies were often limited by design, knowledge of etiologic agents, or available diagnostic tests (angeles marcos et al., 2006; flamaing et al., 2003; jennings et al., 2008; templeton et al., 2005) .multiplex reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) for rapid diagnosis of viral rti is a powerful diagnostic tool, providing clinical and financial benefits upon the health care system (barenfanger et al., 2000; gruteke et al., 2004; marshall et al., 2007; woo et al., 1997) . with excellent sensitivity and specificity, multiplex rt-pcr can help make the diagnosis of viral respiratory infections in a timely and clinically relevant manner, allowing for more effective clinical care, more appropriate use of antimicrobial (mahony et al., 2007) . although testing characteristics of both traditional and newer diagnostic methods have been defined in diverse adult and children populations (arden et al., 2006; jennings et al., 2008) , little data exist on the optimal diagnostic test for older adults with viral rti aside from influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) testing. for this population, there has not been a comprehensive comparison of current modalities for detection of respiratory viruses (i.e., direct fluorescent antibody testing [dfa], culture, multiplex nucleic acid amplification, and rapid antigen assays), and test performance is likely to differ because adults are known to shed fewer virus particles than children during rti (hall et al., 1976) .we seek to define the performance characteristics of 4 viral diagnostic tests in an older adult population and hypothesize that highly sensitive assays such as rt-pcr will be favored when considering speed and accuracy of diagnosis.older adult patients (age, ≥49 years) with rti were prospectively enrolled from february 2007 to august 2008 at a 56-room, 120-bed long-term care facility (durham va medical center, durham, nc). rti was defined as the presence of at least 3 respiratory symptoms (new onset or increase in chronic cough, new onset or increase in sputum, dyspnea, chills, headache, myalgias, malaise, sore throat, or nasal congestion) or 2 respiratory symptoms and temperature ≥38.0°c. children with rti presenting at an employee health clinic (arup laboratories, salt lake city, ut) from december 2007 to march 2008 were also enrolled as a comparison group for multiplex rt-pcr by respiratory viral panel (rvp) testing. nasopharyngeal (np) specimens were obtained using flocked swabs (diagnostic hybrids [dhi], athens, oh) and kept refrigerated in 3.0-ml universal transport media until analysis within 24 h of collection.dfa testing and culture were performed on all specimens for the detection of influenza a and b, rsv, parainfluenza 1 to 3, adenovirus (d 3 ultra dfa respiratory kit, dhi), and human metapneumovirus (dhi). dfa and culture were performed using a standard laboratory protocol that includes inoculation of 0.2-ml patient specimen into 1 ml of r-mix refeed media (dunn et al., 2004) . r-mix cell lines (dhi) were cultured and stained at 20 to 24 h after inoculation. on a subset of specimens, rapid antigen testing for rsv and influenza a/b was performed by lateral flow (binax now; inverness medical, waltham, ma) according to the manufacturer's recommended protocol.id-tag™ rvp (luminex, austin, tx), a multiplex rt-pcr platform for detection of influenza a (h1/h3), influenza b, rsv a and b, parainfluenza 1 to 4, coronaviruses 229e, oc43, nl63, and hku1, human metapneumovirus, enterovirus/rhinovirus, and adenovirus, was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. total nucleic acid was extracted from 0.14-ml transport media or 24-h culture supernatant (qiaamp virus biorobot 9604 kit; qiagen, valencia, ca). each 25-μl multiplex, 1-step rt-pcr reaction consisted of 5.75-μl molecular grade water, 2-μl qiagen onestep rt-pcr enzyme mix, 6.25-μl 5× qiagen onestep rt-pcr buffer, 1-μl qiagen 10 mmol/l deoxyribonucleotide triphosphate (dntp) mix, 5-μl rvp rt-pcr primer mix (luminex), and 5-μl template nucleic acid. reverse transcription was performed at 50°c for 30 min and inactivation at 95°c for 15 min. pcr, target-specific primer extension, bead hybridization, and signal detection were performed as previously described (mahony et al., 2007) . data were analyzed on the luminex® xmap® system using the tag-it data analysis software rvp-i. the mean fluorescence intensities (mfi) for positive samples were recorded. statistical comparison between adult and pediatric patients was made using the 2-sample wilcoxon rank-sum (mann-whitney) test. proportions were compared using the 2-sample test for equality of proportions with continuity correction.seventy-four np swab specimens were obtained from 60 patients 49 to 95 years of age. there was a positive result from any of the test methods in 16 specimens (22%) from 15 patients. the distribution of positive results by patient is shown in table 1 . all specimens were tested by rvp (direct specimen), dfa, and culture. all but 2 specimens were tested by rvp on 24-h culture supernatant. thirty-one specimens also underwent rapid antigen testing for rsv and influenza a and b. the distribution of positive results by type of respiratory virus is summarized in table 2 . for the pediatric comparison group (patient ages 8 month to 17 years), 10 (50%) of 20 samples were positive by direct specimen rvp.of 74 np swabs, 26 (35%) had inadequate cellularity for dfa interpretation, and of the 16 specimens found positive by any method, 5 (31%) had inadequate cellularity. there was no significant difference between these 2 proportions (p = 0.99). four specimens were positive by direct specimen dfa: 2 rsvs, 1 influenza b, and 1 parainfluenza 3. culture was positive in 2 cases (1 influenza b and 1 parainfluenza 3), which were also detected by rvp (direct specimen and post-24-h culture) and dfa.rvp from direct specimen yielded 16 positive results. rvp after a 24-h culture detected 8 of these 16 positive results (50%). the 2 specimens that were not tested by rvp on 24-h culture supernatant were negative by direct specimen rvp, dfa, and culture. the 10 pediatric specimens positive by rvp included 3 rsvs, 2 influenza a, 1 influenza b, 1 human metapneumovirus, 1 enterovirus/rhinovirus, 1 coronavirus, and 1 dual enterovirus/rhinovirus and influenza a. the mfi of positive samples from adult patients with rti was significantly lower than from pediatric patients with rti (median, 1560 versus 3553 u, p = 0.0373).of 31 specimens, none were positive for rsv, influenza a, or influenza b by rapid antigen testing, including the 6 specimens that were rsv positive by at least 1 test method. the 2 specimens positive for influenza b by rvp were not tested by rapid antigen. no specimens during the study were positive for influenza a by rapid antigen or any other test method.although many studies have examined the utility of the various methods used for diagnosis of respiratory virus infections, to our knowledge, none have systematically and concurrently examined the performance characteristics of dfa, culture, rapid antigen testing, and pcr on an older adult population (barenfanger et al., 2000; falsey et al., 1996 falsey et al., , 1995 lam et al., 2007; templeton et al., 2004) . we found that approximately one-fifth of older adult patients with an acute rti had a detectable viral etiology. this is somewhat lower than the frequency seen in other studies, which have found a viral etiology in approximately one-third of elderly patients with rti using various combinations of culture, serology, and antigen detection (falsey et al., 1995; flamaing et al., 2003) . this study did not have a surveillance group of asymptomatic older adults to establish a causal relationship, but respiratory viruses are found generally in a low percentage (b5%) of adult surveillance specimens when pcr is used (jartti et al., 2008) .the data in this study indicate that multiplexed rt-pcr is highly sensitive in detecting respiratory viruses in older adults compared to dfa, culture, and rapid antigen testing. the mfi data from the rvp assay suggest that older adults shed less virus than children during rti. virus detection in the older adult population is therefore enhanced by highly sensitive methods such as rt-pcr. an additional advantage of the rvp assay is that viruses that are not routinely cultured or stained can be detected, such as rhinovirus and coronavirus. this is especially useful in elderly patients, for whom rhinovirus and coronavirus can cause severe to fatal respiratory disease (greenberg, 2007; hicks et al., 2006) . although it may seem intuitive that rvp testing after 24 h of culture would be equally if not more sensitive than rvp on the direct specimen, we found the opposite to be true. this may be due to the dilution of the specimen with culture media, particularly when there were low numbers of infective virus particles in the original sample. furthermore, r-mix cells are optimized for rapid viral antigen detection at 24 or 48 h but not for propagation of virus (wilkey et al., 2006) . our observation that rvp from the supernatant of a 24-h r-mix culture is associated with reduced sensitivity is an important finding, especially for developing diagnostic algorithms for the detection of respiratory viruses. dfa on respiratory specimens remains a useful test in young children because they shed large amounts of virus, and dfa is quicker and simpler to perform compared to rt-pcr. in the older adult population studied here, dfa failed to detect a viral pathogen in 8 of 12 possible cases, whereas rvp did not miss any cases that were found by dfa. culture was even less sensitive than dfa, contributing no additional information to the patients tested. other studies have also found viral culture to be insensitive, especially in older adults (falsey et al., 1996) . although convenient, rapid antigen testing for rsv is not recommended for testing in older adults because of its insensitivity in this patient population. this finding is corroborated by other investigators (casiano-colon et al., 2003; falsey et al., 1996) . no influenza a or b cases were available for testing by rapid antigen; thus, conclusions on rapid antigen testing for influenza in older adults cannot be made.dual infections were not found in older adults in this study, whereas in young children, they are found in 12% or more of patients tested in other investigations (gruteke et al., 2004; kuypers et al., 2006) . the incidence of mixed viral rti in older adults has not been studied using highly sensitive modalities such as rt-pcr but has been reported in very low frequency with use of other test methods such as serology and culture (falsey et al., 1995; flamaing et al., 2003) . our study did not include serologic testing, another sensitive testing modality, but serology is largely retrospective in contrast to the test methods used in this study.we acknowledge that the results of this study may have been affected by the high number of inadequate specimens. however, specimens were collected by experienced nursing and medical staff. moreover, this underscores the importance of having highly sensitive diagnostic assays for older adults and highlights the need for modified protocols for specimen collection, especially in the elderly population during dry winter conditions. the proportion of inadequate specimens overall and among specimens with positive results did not differ statistically. this finding suggests that pcr is sufficiently sensitive to detect virus even in specimens with poor cellularity. the low number of positive results from dfa or culture may has been due to specimen inadequacy. it should be noted that for pcr, culture, and rapid antigen testing, specimen cellularity is not routinely assessed and would be noted only if microscopy, e.g., dfa, was performed.this study demonstrates that for older adults, a highly sensitive platform is necessary to minimize false-negative test results. rapid antigen testing for rsv is not recommended for older adults. negative dfa and culture results should be interpreted with caution because these methods are insensitive particularly in the older adult population. nucleic acid amplification-based testing, with its superior sensitivity, serves as the most robust method to detect respiratory viruses in older adults, and further study is warranted to determine its clinical, epidemiologic, and financial benefits over traditional methods.as of may 8th, 2020, maharashtra, delhi, and gujarat states were reported to be hotspots for covid-19 with 17,974, 5,980, and 7,012 confirmed cases, respectively. to date, 16,540 patients have recovered, and 1,886 deaths have been reported in india (5) . to impose social distancing, the "janata curfew" (14- h lockdown) was ordered on march 22nd, 2020. a further lockdown was initiated for 21 days, starting on march 25th, 2020, and the same was extended until may 3rd, 2020, but, owing to an increasing number of positive cases, the lockdown has been extended for the third time until may 17th, 2020 (6) . currently, out of 32 states and eight union territories in india, 26 states and six union territories have reported covid-19 cases. additionally, the health ministry has identified 130 districts as hotspot zones or red zones, 284 as orange zones (with few sars-cov-2 infections), and 319 as green zones (no sars-cov-2 infection) as of may 4th, 2020. these hotspot districts have been identified to report more than 80% of the cases across the nation. nineteen districts in uttar pradesh are identified as hotspot districts, and this was followed by 14 and 12 districts in maharashtra and tamil nadu, respectively (7) . the complete lockdown was implemented in these containment zones to stop/limit community transmission (5) . as of may 8th, 2020, 310 government laboratories and 111 private laboratories across the country were involved in sars-cov-2 testing. as per icmr report, 14,37,788 samples were tested till date, which is 1.04 per thousand people (3).the recent outbreak of covid-19 in several countries is similar to the previous outbreaks of sars and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) that emerged in 2003 and 2012 in china and saudi arabia, respectively (8) (9) (10) . coronavirus is responsible for both sars and covid-19 diseases; they affect the respiratory tract and cause major disease outbreaks worldwide. sars is caused by sars-cov, whereas sars-cov-2 causes covid-19. so far, there is no particular treatment available to treat sars or covid-19. in the current search for a covid-19 cure, there is some evidence that point to sars-cov-2 being similar to human coronavirus hku1 and 229e strains (11, 12) even though they are new coronavirus family members. these reports suggest that humans do not have immunity to this virus, allowing its easy and rapid spread among human populations through contact with an infected person. sars-cov-2 is more transmissible than sars-cov. the two possible reasons could be (i) the viral load (quantity of virus) tends to be relatively higher in covid-19-positive patients, especially in the nose and throat immediately after they develop symptoms, and (ii) the binding affinity of sars-cov-2 to host cell receptors is higher than that of sars-cov (13, 14) . the other comparisons between sars and covid-19 are tabulated in table 2 , and references for the same are provided here (1, 15, 16) . as per the official government guidelines, india is making preparations against the covid-19 outbreak, and avoiding specific crisis actions or not understating its importance will have extremely severe implications. all the neighboring countries of india have reported positive covid-19 cases. to protect against the deadly virus, the indian government have taken (10, (18) (19) (20) . the outbreak of sars in china was catastrophic and has led to changes in health care and medical systems (18, 20) . compared with china, the ability of india to counter a pandemic seems to be much lower. a recent study reported that affected family members had not visit the wuhan market in china, suggesting that sars-cov-2 may spread without manifesting symptoms (21) . researchers believe that this phenomenon is normal for many viruses. india, with a population of more than 1.34 billionthe second largest population in the world-will have difficulty treating severe covid-19 cases because the country has only 49,000 ventilators, which is a minimal amount. if the number of covid-19 cases increases in the nation, it would be a catastrophe for india (22) . (24) .economists assume that the impact of covid-19 on the economy will be high and negative when compared with the sars impact during 2003. for instance, it has been estimated that the number of tourists arriving in china was much higher than that of tourists who traveled during the season when sars emerged in 2003. this shows that covid-19 has an effect on the tourism industry. it has been estimated that, for sars, there was a 57 and 45% decline in yearly rail passenger and road passenger traffic, respectively (25) . moreover, when compared with the world economy 15 years ago, world economies are currently much more inter-related. it has been estimated that covid-19 will hurt emerging market currencies and also impact oil prices (26) (27) (28) . from the retail industry's perspective, consumer savings seem to be high. this might have an adverse effect on consumption rates, as all supply chains are likely to be affected, which in turn would have its impact on supply when compared with the demand of various necessary product items (29) . this clearly proves that, based on the estimated losses due to the effect of sars on tourism (retail sales lost around usd 12-18 billion and usd 30-100 billion was lost at a global macroeconomic level), we cannot estimate the impact of covid-19 at this point. this will be possible only when the spread of covid-19 is fully controlled. until that time, any estimates will be rather ambiguous and imprecise (19) . the oecd interim economic assessment has provided briefing reports highlighting the role of china in the global supply chain and commodity markets. japan, south korea, and australia are the countries that are most susceptible to adverse effects, as they have close ties with china. it has been estimated that there has been a 20% decline in car sales, which was 10% of the monthly decline in china during january 2020. this shows that even industrial production has been affected by covid-19. so far, several factors have thus been identified as having a major economic impact: labor mobility, lack of working hours, interruptions in the global supply chain, less consumption, and tourism, and less demand in the commodity market at a global level (30) , which in turn need to be adequately analyzed by industry type. corporate leaders need to prioritize the supply chain and product line economy trends via demand from the consumer end. amidst several debates on sustainable economy before the covid-19 impact, it has now been estimated that india's gdp by the international monetary fund has been cut down to 1.9% from 5.8% for the fy21. the financial crisis that has emerged owing to the worldwide lockdown reflects its adverse effect on several industries and the global supply chain, which has resulted in the gdp dropping to 4.2% for fy20, which was previously estimated at 4.8%. nevertheless, it has been roughly estimated that india and china will be experiencing considerable positive growth among other major economies (31) .an easy way to decrease sars-cov-2 infection rates is to avoid virus exposure. people from india should avoid traveling to countries highly affected with the virus, practice proper hygiene, and avoid consuming food that is not home cooked. necessary preventive measures, such as wearing a mask, regular hand washing, and avoiding direct contact with infected persons, should also be practiced. the ministry of health and family welfare (mohfw), india, has raised awareness about the recent outbreak and taken necessary action to control covid-19. besides, the mohfw has created a 24 h/7 days-a-week disease alert helpline (+91-11-23978046 and 1800-180-1104) and policy guidelines on surveillance, clinical management, infection prevention and control, sample collection, transportation, and discharging suspected or confirmed cases (3, 5) . those who traveled from china, or other countries, and exhibited symptoms, including fever, difficulty in breathing, sore throat, cough, and breathlessness, were asked to visit the nearest hospital for a health check-up. officials from seven different airports, including chennai, cochin, new delhi, kolkata, hyderabad, and bengaluru, have been ordered to screen and monitor indian travelers from china and other affected countries. in addition, a travel advisory was released to request the cessation of travel to affected countries, and anyone with a travel history that has included china since january 15th, 2020, would be quarantined. a centralized control room has been set up by the delhi government at the directorate general of health services, and 11 other districts have done the same. india has implemented covid-19 travel advisory for intra-and inter-passenger aircraft restrictions. more information on additional travel advisory can be accessed with the provided link (https://www.mohfw.gov.in/ pdf/traveladvisory.pdf).india is known for its traditional medicines in the form of ayush (ayurvedic, yoga and naturopathy, unani, siddha, and homeopathy). the polyherbal powder nilavembukudineer showed promising effects against dengue and chikungunya fevers in the past (32) . with the outbreak of covid-19, the ministry of ayush has released a press note "advisory for coronavirus, " mentioning useful medications to improve the immunity of the individuals (33) . currently, according to the icmr guidelines, doctors prescribe a combination of lopinavir and ritonavir for severe covid-19 cases and hydroxychloroquine for prophylaxis of sars-cov-2 infection (34, 35) . in collaboration with the who, icmr will conduct a therapeutic trial for covid-19 in india (3). the icmr recommends using the us-fda-approved closed real-time rt-pcr systems, such as genexpert and roche cobas-6800/8800, which are used to diagnose chronic myeloid leukemia and melanoma, respectively (36) . in addition, the truenattm beta cov test on the truelabtm workstation validated by the icmr is recommended as a screening test. all positive results obtained on this platform need to be confirmed by confirmatory assays for sars-cov-2. all negative results do not require further testing. antibody-based rapid tests were validated at niv, pune, and found to be satisfactory; the rapid test kits are as follows: infections caused by these viruses are an enormous global health threat. they are a major cause of death and have adverse socio-economic effects that are continually exacerbated. therefore, potential treatment initiatives and approaches need to be developed. first, india is taking necessary preventive measures to reduce viral transmission. second, icmr and the ministry of ayush provided guidelines to use conventional preventive and treatment strategies to increase immunity against covid-19 (3, 38) . these guidelines could help reduce the severity of the viral infection in elderly patients and increase life expectancy (39) . the recent report from the director of icmr mentioned that india would undergo randomized controlled trials using convalescent plasma of completely recovered covid-19 patients. convalescent plasma therapy is highly recommended, as it has provided moderate success with sars and mers (40) ; this has been rolled out in 20 health centers and will be increased this month (may 2020) (3) . india has expertise in specialized medical/pharmaceutical industries with production facilities, and the government has established fast-tracking research to develop rapid diagnostic test kits and vaccines at low cost (41) . in addition, the serum institute of india started developing a vaccine against sars-cov-2 infection (42) . until we obtain an appropriate vaccine, it is highly recommended that we screen the red zoned areas to stop further transmission of the virus. medical college doctors in kerala, india, implemented the low-cost wisk (walk-in sample kiosk) to collect samples without direct exposure or contact (43, 44) . after kerala, the defense research and development organization (drdo) developed walk-in kiosks to collect covid-19 samples and named these as covid-19 sample collection kiosk (covsack) (45) . after the swab collection, the testing of sars-cov-2 can be achieved with the existing diagnostic facility in india. this facility can be used for massive screening or at least in the red zoned areas without the need for personal protective equipment kits (43, 45) . india has attempted to broaden its research facilities and shift toward testing the mass population, as recommended by medical experts in india and worldwide (46) .publicly available datasets were analyzed in this study. this data can be found here: https://www.mohfw.gov.in/ and https://www. icmr.gov.in/.sk, dk, and cd were involved in the design of the study and the acquisition, analysis, interpretation of the data, and drafting the manuscript. bc was involved in the interpretation of the data. cd supervised the entire study. the manuscript was reviewed and approved by all the authors.on 11 february 2003, the world health organization's (who) communicable disease surveillance & response (csr) unit published a report from the chinese ministry of health of an outbreak of acute respiratory syndrome in guangdong province with 300 cases and 5 deaths. at the same time, mass media reported that a pneumonia epidemic in guangdong was causing considerable fear and disruption among the local population, but provided no details about the etiology of the apparently infectious disease. one week later, csr reported the detection of an avian influenza a (h5n1) virus in a child from hong kong. following a visit to mainland china, several members of the family had presented with a similar illness, to which two of the child's relatives had succumbed.although many observers were tempted to see a possible causal link between the two reports relating to adjacent geographic areas, the chinese ministry of health stated on 20 february that the atypical pneumonia outbreak in guangdong was probably caused by chlamydia pneumoniae.days later, a doctor who had treated patients with the disease in guangdong booked into a hong kong hotel for a family reunion. in the days until he himself succumbed to the disease in a hong kong hospital, he unwittingly infected 2 family members, 10 other hotel guests, and 4 health care staff. he thus became the epicenter for the international spread of the illness: traveling hotel guests infected by him brought the disease within days to vietnam, singapore, canada, ireland, the usa and, indirectly, germany.on 12 march 2003, who issued a 'global alert' about cases of atypical pneumonia spreading to hospital staff. the alert had been raised by a who doctor working in vietnam, dr. carlo urbani, who recognized this was a novel infectious disease with an enormous potential for nosocomial transmission; tragically, he himself became infected and later succumbed to it. an 'emergency travel advisory' followed on 15 march 2003, reporting the worldwide spread of what was for the first time termed severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars).in an unprecedented move, who initiated a collaborative multicenter research project to identify the causative agent of sars. avian influenza was quickly ruled out. several laboratories diagnosed active infections with chlamydia or paramyxoviruses in some -but far from all -patients suffering from sars. however, there was good evidence that neither of these were plausible etiological agents for the novel infectious disease.the network comprised laboratories with access to sars patient samples and those with particular expertise on emerging or respiratory viruses. for several weeks, a spirit of cooperation rather than competition prevailed. samples were exchanged and results and findings shared continuously via daily telephone conferences and a password-protected website.within weeks, groups in hong kong, germany, canada, and the united states of america found a hitherto unknown member of the coronavirus family in sars patients. this was achieved through independent studies but certainly benefited greatly from the real-time sharing of interim results. although different approaches were employed, including cell culture, electron microscopy, and molecular techniques, sequencing data showed all laboratories had identified the same coronavirus, previously unknown to human and veterinary virology ( figure 1) .it was shown that sars patients seroconverted against this virus in the course of their illness; healthy, unexposed control individuals lacked antibody reactivity. however, it remained to be proven that this novel coronavirus was indeed the etiological agent for sars rather than an 'innocent bystander' newly discovered by thorough studies.after experimental infection of macaques with the newly isolated agent was shown to cause a sars-like illness, and subsequent reisolation of the agent, all of koch's postulates had been fulfilled. on 16 april 2003, who officially announced that the provisionally termed sars-associated coronavirus (sars-cov) was the causative agent of sars.based on this breakthrough, tests for the detection of viral sequences and specific antibodies were quickly developed and made available to affected countries. in addition, numerous scientists embarked on programmes to develop vaccines and drugs or antibodies for prophylactic or therapeutic use.within a few months, the sars outbreak was brought under control. on 5 july 2003, who declared that the last chain of person-to-person transmission had been interrupted. measures including source isolation of patients -who only became infectious after onset of clinical symptoms -strict infection control in health care facilities, timely identification and quarantining of exposed contacts, and perhaps also measures to increase social distance, such as travel warnings and screening of travelers, had led to this remarkable and remarkably rapid success.thorough and consistent implementation of these measures eventually brought an end to the sars outbreak even in the worst affected areas. in the meantime, however, several areas -different chinese provinces other than guangdong, most prominently the capital, beijing, but also toronto in canada, and taiwan -paid a high price for not implementing adequate countermeasures in a timely fashion. typically, a so-called 'superspreader,' that is, a highly contagious sars patient, would seek treatment at a poorly prepared facility, and by the time the danger was realized, scores of staff and patients had become infected and themselves become sources of spread.interestingly, despite the rapid identification of the agent and laboratory tests becoming available almost immediately, these formidable achievements did not contribute much to the containment of the outbreak. instead, it was the prudent and thorough use of 'oldfashioned' measures such as isolation and quarantine that proved to be the key to success. identification of suspected cases was based on clinical and epidemiological criteria: high fever (4381c) plus symptoms of respiratory tract infection plus an exposure history, the details of which depended on each location's sars status at the time. an additional positive sars-cov test result or radiological or pathological evidence of pneumonia or respiratory distress syndrome would make it a probable case.the final case count from 1 november 2002 until 31 july 2003 is 8096, with 774 deaths. since mid-2003, sars has reappeared on four occasions. three involved laboratory-acquired infections, which demonstrates the dangers of breaching biosafety procedures and the risks of subsequent further spread in the community by secondary transmission outside of the laboratory. the fourth sars outbreak was due to reintroduction from the reservoir. to minimize the risk of reemergence, who has issued guidelines for the surveillance of possible sars cases. risk categories to guide adequate national surveillance strategies to guard against the possible (re-)emergence of sars are emergence from wildlife or other animal reservoirs, emergence or introduction from laboratories or via international travel, or low risk of sars-cov emergence or introduction.who also urges all countries to conduct an inventory of all laboratories working with or storing sars-cov and to ensure strict enforcement of biosafety procedures.before sars, only two coronaviruses (hcov-229 e and hcov-oc43) were known to infect humans. because they both cause only relatively minor disease and are difficult to propagate in the laboratory, they received relatively little attention by diagnostic and research laboratories. in contrast, several coronaviruses were recognized as animal pathogens, infecting pigs, dogs, rabbits, cats, mice, rats, turkeys and chicken. some of these had for some time played important roles in veterinary medicine.it was obvious that the majority of human sars cases were acquired through transmission from other sars sufferers (which proved key to its eventual control). however, it seemed highly unlikely that this was a previously existing disease entity that was only then being recognized; its propensity to cause nosocomial outbreaks, often in hospital settings, would not have been overlooked for long.the very first sars cases were identified retrospectively in various localities in guangdong province. the first of these early cases occurred in foshan in november 2002, and several more over the following weeks in nearby places. interest soon focused on these early index cases: was there any characteristic these patients had in common that could point to a source of their sars-cov infection?there was indeed; many of these early index patients either worked in kitchens or at markets or lived nearby where they were constantly exposed to a multitude of species of domestic and wild animals that were being traded, kept in captivity, and finally slaughtered and prepared for consumption.this provided the impetus for studying animals being sold at guangdong markets. infection with coronaviruses closely related to sars-cov was identified in different species, most commonly in the masked palm civet (paguma larvata) but also in the chinese ferret badger (melogale moschata) and the raccoon dog (nyctereutes procyonoides). a further, small sars outbreak occurred again in guangdong in late 2003/early 2004; molecular analysis of virus isolates from human cases and animals sampled at the same place and time confirmed that this was zoonotically acquired from paguma larvata.however, further investigations revealed that this widely consumed species is most likely not the animal reservoir, as most populations studied were uninfected. later research identified a multitude of coronaviruses in different species of bats in asia and elsewhere, among them what is probably the progenitor of sars-cov.studies by different groups demonstrate that sars was the result of spillover from a wildlife reservoir -most likely bats -into an intermediate host (or hosts; most importantly paguma larvata) and from there to the human population. rapid viral evolution was demonstrated and most likely was the pivotal factor that allowed sars-cov to rapidly adapt to nonreservoir species. table 1 shows the distribution of several different coronaviruses in humans and animals and their classification into different groups.disease caused by sars-cov may present with rather nonspecific clinical signs and symptoms. the differential diagnosis is therefore wide and may include various common respiratory pathogens, including influenza, parainfluenza, and respiratory syncytial viruses (rsv)the laboratory diagnosis of sars remains a challenge; in fact, despite the rapid identification of sars-cov as the etiological agent, testing contributed little to the successful control of the 2003 outbreak. insufficient test specificity on occasions caused falsepositive results, leading to considerable confusion. in many viral diseases, virus shedding is greatest during the early symptomatic phase, that is, around, and immediately following the onset of symptoms. unfortunately, virus excretion is comparatively low during the initial phase of sars. it peaks in respiratory specimens and in stools at around day 10 after the onset of the clinical illness.in addition, there are currently no laboratory tests available to reliably diagnose sars in the first few days of illness. the highest test sensitivity is achieved with bronchoalveolar lavage fluid or lung biopsy tissue at the onset of illness. because of the invasiveness of such procedures and the associated risk of transmission, nasopharyngeal aspirates and throat washings, taken with respiratory precautions and preserved in viral transport medium, remain the most important diagnostic specimens.most commonly, viral genome detection, usually by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), is used diagnostically. nucleic acid amplification tests have been designed targeting the orf1b or nucleoprotein genes; it has not been clearly proven in clinical studies that they are superior.real-time rt-pcr of nasopharyngeal aspirates is the most sensitive and rapid method. furthermore, the determination of viral load in nasopharyngeal specimens or serum has been shown to be of clinical value, as it is an important prognostic factor.to avoid false-positive results, who stipulates that the following should be tested: at least two different clinical specimen types (e.g., nasopharyngeal aspirate and stool), or the same type of clinical specimen but collected on at least two occasions during the course of the illness (e.g., sequential nasopharyngeal aspirates), or the same original clinical sample but two different assays or by repeating the same assay but using a new rna extract for each test.sars-cov is cultivable on vero and caco2 cells not only from respiratory materials but also from fecal samples (figure 2) . once isolated, the virus must be identified as sars-cov using further tests. cell culture is a very demanding test, but currently (with the exception of animal trials) the only means to show the existence of a live virus.antigen detection in respiratory and fecal specimens using enzyme immunoassay (eia) is generally less sensitive than rt-pcr. however, antigen detection in serum specimens with monoclonal antibodies or monospecific polyclonal antibody against the viral n protein was found to be a sensitive and specific test for the diagnosis of sars. as serum antibody levels start to rise from day 7 after onset of illness, the sensitivity of the serum antigen assay progressively decreased to 0% at day 21. antibody testing allows the indirect diagnosis of sars-cov infection and is unsuitable during the acute illness. positive antibody test results indicate previous infection with sars-cov. seroconversion from negative to positive or a fourfold rise in the antibody titer from acute to convalescent serum indicates a recent infection. a negative antibody test result later than 21 days after the onset of illness is likely to indicate that no infection with sars-cov has taken place.virus-specific serum igg, igm, and iga antibodies against sars-cov appear at around the same time, between days 5 and 17 after the onset of symptoms. antibody testing is therefore generally not useful during the first week of illness. for antibody testing, the indirect immunofluorescent antibody test is more commonly performed than the neutralizing antibody test in cell cultures that again requires a biosafety level 3 laboratory (figure 3) . a recombinant nucleocapsid eia may be used as a rapid screening test and possesses a higher sensitivity, with detection as early as day 5 after onset of illness. single low-titer positive antibody results can be due to cross-reactivity with other human coronaviruses and require confirmation by more specific western blotting or neutralization assays. who regards seroconversion or an at least fourfold rise in antibody titer between an acute and a convalescent serum as proof of infection.the updated who guidelines for the global surveillance of sars of october 2004 replace all previous who guidance on sars surveillance and response. one key recommendation is that independent of the test used, who strongly recommends that during the interepidemic period all countries seek verification of laboratory-confirmed cases of sars ('preliminary positive' cases), preferably by an external laboratory that is part of the who sars international reference and verification laboratory network (figure 4) .human sars-cov are no longer circulating in the human population, nevertheless the virus is still present in the animal reservoir and virological laboratories and can reemerge anytime. there is no single test that can be used to diagnose sars with a reasonable degree of accuracy. diagnosis, therefore, continues to rely on the clinical examination, supported by case definitions that include the risk assessment according to the 2004 updated who guidelines (tables 2 and 3) . the initial symptoms of sars are nonspecific, complicating the differential diagnosis. the mean incubation period is 5 days with the range of 2-10 days although there are isolated reports of longer incubation periods. unlike influenza virus, where the patients are most infectious in the first 2 days of illness, transmission from symptomatic sars patients usually occurred on or after the fifth day of onset of disease, which is in line with the rising viral load in nasopharyngeal secretions that peaked at around day 10. there have been no reports of transmission occurring before the onset of symptoms. the typical clinical presentation of sars is that of viral pneumonia with rapid respiratory deterioration. patients initially develop influenza-like prodromal symptoms. fever, malaise, myalgia, headache, rigors, and nonproductive cough are the major presenting symptoms, whereas rhinorrhea and sore throat are less frequently seen. clinical deterioration, often accompanied by watery diarrhea, commonly occurs 1 week after the onset of illness. although history of fever is the most frequently reported symptom, it may be absent on initial measurement. severe cases develop rapidly progressing respiratory distress and oxygen desaturation with approximately 20% requiring intensive care. chest radiographs typically show ground-glass opacities and focal consolidations, especially in the periphery and subpleural regions of the lower zones. progressive involvement of both lungs is not uncommon. features during the later stages have sometimes included spontaneous pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, subpleural fibrosis and cystic changes. nosocomial transmission of sars-cov has been a striking feature of the sars outbreak. the majority of the cases have occurred in adults. children are less commonly affected than adults and usually have a milder illness. the overall mortality rate was approximately 10%. age and the presence of comorbidities are poor prognostic indicators.although the sars outbreak was still ongoing during the first half of 2003, significant funding was made available for sars-related research.immunomodulators (i.e., corticosteroids, intravenous immunoglobulins, thymosin, and anti-tnf) were empirically used for the treatment of sars during the initial epidemic. the correlation between viral load and clinical outcome suggests that suppression of viral replication by effective antiviral drugs should be the key to preventing morbidity and mortality. numerous potential antiviral agents have been identified using different approaches. in vitro susceptibility test results demonstrate that ifn-alpha and ifn-beta have some potential activity. ribavirin has good activity when tested in human caco-2 cells despite its lack of activity in vero cells. the viral proteases are important targets for the development of antiviral drugs. protease inhibitors like nelfinavir, glycyrrhizin, chloroquine, and many others as well as many herbal formulations have been found to possess some antiviral activity against sars-cov in vitro. in addition, the use of nitric oxide (s-nitro-n-acetylpenicillamine) inhalation as an experimental form of rescue therapy for sars appeared to have inhibitory activity against sars-cov. screening of chemical libraries has identified several inhibitors of the viral protease and helicase. identification of angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ace2) as an obligatory cellular receptor for sars-cov contributed to understanding of the sars-cov entry process, and helped to characterize two targets of antiviral therapeutics: the sars-cov spike protein and ace2. however, most of the chemicals or approaches have not been evaluated in human or animal models.various approaches toward producing a vaccine against sars have been pursued, including the use of inactivated sars-cov, plasmid dna, and adenovirus vectors. one obvious problem any vaccine would face is whom it should be given to, in the absence of sars-cov transmission. however, waiting until a renewed outbreak occurs before commencing vaccination means that precious weeks would be lost until individuals at risk become immune.the administration of preformed antibodies (obtained from human or animal donors or, more recently, produced in vitro) is effective in preventing a number of different infections, such as hepatitis b, varicella, and rsv. similarly, it could be shown that neutralizing antibodies against sars-cov can protect experimental animals from infection.using screening of a large naive antibody library by antibody phage display technology, neutralizing antibodies were identified and produced that were protective in vitro. there was no evidence of enhancement of sars-cov infection by subneutralizing concentrations of these antibodies, and immune escape mutants were not generated.in theory, this could be an ideal tool: if sufficient stocks of such human monoclonal antibodies could be procured, they would be ready for use when and wherever sars reemerges. one could then passively immunize anyone in contact with the source or patients, affording immediate protection.in summary, sars was a novel severe infectious disease that presumably originated in guangdong in southern china. large-scale wildlife trade and consumption favored the emergence of this zoonosis from a hitherto unrecognized animal reservoir. after its zoonotic origins, the new agent quickly spread within the human population, being transmitted mostly via the respiratory route through close human-to-human contact.sars was rapidly disseminated via the metropolis hong kong through international air travel. its important potential for nosocomial transmission in the community and in hospitals was soon recognized and allowed for appropriate measures to be instituted in most places.there was an unprecedented rapid gain of knowledge through global networking and international collaboration, led by who. unfortunately it took some major outbreaks, some of them affecting industrialized countries with modern health care systems, until the first sars epidemic was controlled. thus in the end rapid success was achieved through 'traditional' sanitary measures, mainly rapid identification of suspect cases and isolation of the diseased. fortunately, sars-cov has -at least so far -not established itself permanently in the human population. its relatively low transmissibility (with the exception of 'superspreaders') led to a low basic reproduction number r 0 ; together with the fact that infected individuals only become infectious themselves once they have developed clinical disease, this made 'traditional' public health measures very effective.is the fact that the first pandemic of the twenty-first century was quickly contained reason to take comfort in the knowledge that the history of humankind has reached a phase in which biomedical sciences and information technology are able to deal with such threats? probably not. first, the rapid success was remarkable. unfortunately, though, this does not reflect preparedness. in 1998, donald burke proposed the following criteria for identifying virus families with a high pandemic risk: (1) those that had caused pandemics in human populations in the recent past;(2) those with the proven ability to cause larger epizootics; and (3) those with an intrinsic propensity to rapidly undergo evolution on the basis of high mutation rate or genome organization favoring recombination ('intrinsic evolvability').interestingly, even before the sars outbreak (which obviously fulfills the first criterion), the coronavirus family should clearly have been regarded as high risk: starting in the late 1970s, the porcine epidemic diarrhea coronavirus (pedv) caused a severe swine epizootic in europe and asia (second criterion). the high evolvability of the coronavirus family had also been demonstrated: the porcine respiratory coronavirus (prcv) evolved through a deletion mutation in the s gene from the transmissible gastroenteritis virus (tgev); the mutant has a different tissue tropism and is less virulent.second, infectious disease emergence from zoonotic sources was a well-recognized threat long before sars. nevertheless, it took another -fortunately minor -sars outbreak before decisive steps were taken to control at least the trade in the directly implicated paguma larvata in southern china.starting shortly after sars had been controlled, another agent with pandemic potential has caused an ongoing epizootic of unprecedented proportions: highly pathogenic influenza a (h5n1) virus. transmission to humans occurs almost exclusively through close contact with infected -and sick -poultry. despite the possibility that this avian influenza virus will become fully 'humanized' and trigger the next influenza pandemic, even activities recognized as high risk, such as 'wet markets,' have mostly not been curtailed.finally, the lessons from sars -particularly the experiences of beijing, toronto, and taiwan that suffered devastating sars outbreaks during the later phase of the outbreak -emphasize over and over again the enormous importance of open and timely communication. at times, this may mean admitting to problems that (at least initially) reflect negatively on the country or territory concerned. in the medium to long term, however, such openness is the only way to prevent consequences that would be much worse. although this was widely accepted in the wake of the sars experience and has had a strong influence on the new international health regulations that entered into force in june 2007, the information policies of some countries during the h5n1 epizootic unfortunately do not attest to this at all.notwithstanding its grave consequences in humanitarian, political, and economic terms, sars should serve as an example what can be achieved through international cooperation, modern science, and rigorous use of 'traditional' approaches. even if prudent precautions were suddenly adopted, sars will certainly not have been the last highly pathogenic novel infectious agent that crosses the species barrier into the human population.although bats must be very high on the list of 'culprits' for emerging viral diseases, having been identified as reservoir hosts for a number of emerging viruses, there is no reason why other groups of animals should not figure as prominently in future. the mechanisms behind emergence have been studied. these may be linked to the agent, the new host species (i.e., human beings and in certain cases also the intermediate hosts) or to the connection between those. many of the factors and determinants of disease emergence are related to human activities.although this has accompanied humankind throughout history, and in fact may have helped shape human history, the speed and the extent of human-induced changes has accelerated markedly in recent times. although in the case of sars people were lucky in the end, this may be quite different next time round. it will be important to improve understanding of emergence to minimize the risks of what is a natural phenomenon but much aggravated by human behavior. in an unprecedented move, who initiated a collaborative multicenter research project to identify the causative agent of sars. avian influenza was quickly ruled out. several laboratories diagnosed active infections with chlamydia or paramyxoviruses in somebut far from allpatients suffering from sars. however, there was good evidence that neither of these were plausible etiological agents for the novel infectious disease.the network comprised laboratories with access to sars patient samples and those with particular expertise on emerging or respiratory viruses. for several weeks, a spirit of cooperation rather than competition prevailed. samples were exchanged and results and findings shared continuously via daily telephone conferences and a password-protected website.within weeks, groups in hong kong, germany, canada, and the united states of america found a hitherto unknown member of the coronavirus family in sars patients. this was achieved through independent studies but certainly benefited greatly from the real-time sharing of interim results. although different approaches were employed, including cell culture, electron microscopy, and molecular techniques, sequencing data showed all laboratories had identified the same coronavirus, previously unknown to human and veterinary virology ( figure 1) .it was shown that sars patients seroconverted against this virus in the course of their illness; healthy, unexposed control individuals lacked antibody reactivity. however, it remained to be proven that this novel coronavirus was indeed the etiological agent for sars rather than an 'innocent bystander' newly discovered by thorough studies.after experimental infection of macaques with the newly isolated agent was shown to cause a sars-like illness, and subsequent reisolation of the agent, all of koch's postulates had been fulfilled. on 16 april 2003, who officially announced that the provisionally termed sars-associated coronavirus (sars-cov) was the causative agent of sars.based on this breakthrough, tests for the detection of viral sequences and specific antibodies were quickly developed and made available to affected countries. in addition, numerous scientists embarked on programmes to develop vaccines and drugs or antibodies for prophylactic or therapeutic use.within a few months, the sars outbreak was brought under control. on 5 july 2003, who declared that the last chain of person-toperson transmission had been interrupted. measures including source isolation of patientswho only became infectious after onset of clinical symptomsstrict infection control in health care facilities, timely identification and quarantining of exposed contacts, and perhaps also measures to increase social distance, such as travel warnings and screening of travelers, had led to this remarkable and remarkably rapid success.thorough and consistent implementation of these measures eventually brought an end to the sars outbreak even in the worst affected areas. in the meantime, however, several areasdifferent chinese provinces other than guangdong, most prominently the capital, beijing, but also toronto in canada, and taiwanpaid a high price for not implementing adequate countermeasures in a timely fashion. typically, a so-called 'superspreader,' that is, a highly contagious sars patient, would seek treatment at a poorly prepared facility, and by the time the danger was realized, scores of staff and patients had become infected and themselves become sources of spread.interestingly, despite the rapid identification of the agent and laboratory tests becoming available almost immediately, these formidable achievements did not contribute much to the containment of the outbreak. instead, it was the prudent and thorough use of 'old-fashioned' measures such as isolation and quarantine that proved to be the key to success. identification of suspected cases was based on clinical and epidemiological criteria: high fever (>38 c) plus symptoms of respiratory tract infection plus an exposure history, the details of which depended on each location's sars status at the time. an additional positive sars-cov test result or radiological or pathological evidence of pneumonia or respiratory distress syndrome would make it a probable case.the final case count from 1 november 2002 until 31 july 2003 is 8096, with 774 deaths. since mid-2003, sars has reappeared on four occasions. three involved laboratory-acquired infections, which demonstrates the dangers of breaching biosafety procedures and the risks of subsequent further spread in the community by secondary transmission outside of the laboratory. the fourth sars outbreak was due to reintroduction from the reservoir. to minimize the risk of reemergence, who has issued guidelines for the surveillance of possible sars cases. risk categories to guide adequate national surveillance strategies to guard against the possible (re-)emergence of sars are emergence from wildlife or other animal reservoirs, emergence or introduction from laboratories or via international travel, or low risk of sars-cov emergence or introduction.who also urges all countries to conduct an inventory of all laboratories working with or storing sars-cov and to ensure strict enforcement of biosafety procedures.before sars, only two coronaviruses (hcov-229 e and hcov-oc43) were known to infect humans. because they both cause only relatively minor disease and are difficult to propagate in the laboratory, they received relatively little attention by diagnostic and research laboratories. in contrast, several coronaviruses were recognized as animal pathogens, infecting pigs, dogs, rabbits, cats, mice, rats, turkeys and chicken. some of these had for some time played important roles in veterinary medicine.it was obvious that the majority of human sars cases were acquired through transmission from other sars sufferers (which proved key to its eventual control). however, it seemed highly unlikely that this was a previously existing disease entity that was only then being recognized; its propensity to cause nosocomial outbreaks, often in hospital settings, would not have been overlooked for long.the very first sars cases were identified retrospectively in various localities in guangdong province. the first of these early cases occurred in foshan in november 2002, and several more over the following weeks in nearby places. interest soon focused on these early index cases: was there any characteristic these patients had in common that could point to a source of their sars-cov infection?there was indeed; many of these early index patients either worked in kitchens or at markets or lived nearby where they were constantly exposed to a multitude of species of domestic and wild animals that were being traded, kept in captivity, and finally slaughtered and prepared for consumption.this provided the impetus for studying animals being sold at guangdong markets. infection with coronaviruses closely related to sars-cov was identified in different species, most commonly in the masked palm civet (paguma larvata) but also in the chinese ferret badger (melogale moschata) and the raccoon dog (nyctereutes procyonoides). a further, small sars outbreak occurred again in guangdong in late 2003/early 2004; molecular analysis of virus isolates from human cases and animals sampled at the same place and time confirmed that this was zoonotically acquired from paguma larvata.however, further investigations revealed that this widely consumed species is most likely not the animal reservoir, as most populations studied were uninfected. later research identified a multitude of coronaviruses in different species of bats in asia and elsewhere, among them what is probably the progenitor of sars-cov.studies by different groups demonstrate that sars was the result of spillover from a wildlife reservoirmost likely batsinto an intermediate host (or hosts; most importantly paguma larvata) and from there to the human population. rapid viral evolution was demonstrated and most likely was the pivotal factor that allowed sars-cov to rapidly adapt to nonreservoir species. table 1 shows the distribution of several different coronaviruses in humans and animals and their classification into different groups.disease caused by sars-cov may present with rather nonspecific clinical signs and symptoms. the differential diagnosis is therefore wide and may include various common respiratory pathogens, including influenza, parainfluenza, and respiratory syncytial viruses (rsv)the laboratory diagnosis of sars remains a challenge; in fact, despite the rapid identification of sars-cov as the etiological agent, testing contributed little to the successful control of the 2003 outbreak. insufficient test specificity on occasions caused false-positive results, leading to considerable confusion. in many viral diseases, virus shedding is greatest during the early symptomatic phase, that is, around, and immediately following the onset of symptoms. unfortunately, virus excretion is comparatively low during the initial phase of sars. it peaks in respiratory specimens and in stools at around day 10 after the onset of the clinical illness.in addition, there are currently no laboratory tests available to reliably diagnose sars in the first few days of illness. the highest test sensitivity is achieved with bronchoalveolar lavage fluid or lung biopsy tissue at the onset of illness. because of the invasiveness of such procedures and the associated risk of transmission, nasopharyngeal aspirates and throat washings, taken with respiratory precautions and preserved in viral transport medium, remain the most important diagnostic specimens.most commonly, viral genome detection, usually by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), is used diagnostically. nucleic acid amplification tests have been designed targeting the orf1b or nucleoprotein genes; it has not been clearly proven in clinical studies that they are superior.real-time rt-pcr of nasopharyngeal aspirates is the most sensitive and rapid method. furthermore, the determination of viral load in nasopharyngeal specimens or serum has been shown to be of clinical value, as it is an important prognostic factor.to avoid false-positive results, who stipulates that the following should be tested: at least two different clinical specimen types (e.g., nasopharyngeal aspirate and stool), or the same type of clinical specimen but collected on at least two occasions during the course of the illness (e.g., sequential nasopharyngeal aspirates), or the same original clinical sample but two different assays or by repeating the same assay but using a new rna extract for each test.sars-cov is cultivable on vero and caco2 cells not only from respiratory materials but also from fecal samples ( figure 2 ). once isolated, the virus must be identified as sars-cov using further tests. cell culture is a very demanding test, but currently (with the exception of animal trials) the only means to show the existence of a live virus.antigen detection in respiratory and fecal specimens using enzyme immunoassay (eia) is generally less sensitive than rt-pcr. however, antigen detection in serum specimens with monoclonal antibodies or monospecific polyclonal antibody against the viral n protein was found to be a sensitive and specific test for the diagnosis of sars. as serum antibody levels start to rise from day 7 after onset of illness, the sensitivity of the serum antigen assay progressively decreased to 0% at day 21.antibody testing allows the indirect diagnosis of sars-cov infection and is unsuitable during the acute illness. positive antibody test results indicate previous infection with sars-cov. seroconversion from negative to positive or a fourfold rise in the antibody titer from acute to convalescent serum indicates a recent infection. a negative antibody test result later than 21 days after the onset of illness is likely to indicate that no infection with sars-cov has taken place.virus-specific serum igg, igm, and iga antibodies against sars-cov appear at around the same time, between days 5 and 17 after the onset of symptoms. antibody testing is therefore generally not useful during the first week of illness. for antibody testing, the indirect immunofluorescent antibody test is more commonly performed than the neutralizing antibody test in cell cultures that again requires a biosafety level 3 laboratory (figure 3) . a recombinant nucleocapsid eia may be used as a rapid screening test and possesses a higher sensitivity, with detection as early as day 5 after onset of illness. single low-titer positive antibody results can be due to cross-reactivity with other human coronaviruses and require confirmation by more specific western blotting or neutralization assays. who regards seroconversion or an at least fourfold rise in antibody titer between an acute and a convalescent serum as proof of infection. the updated who guidelines for the global surveillance of sars of october 2004 replace all previous who guidance on sars surveillance and response. one key recommendation is that independent of the test used, who strongly recommends that during the interepidemic period all countries seek verification of laboratory-confirmed cases of sars ('preliminary positive' cases), preferably by an external laboratory that is part of the who sars international reference and verification laboratory network (figure 4) .human sars-cov are no longer circulating in the human population, nevertheless the virus is still present in the animal reservoir and virological laboratories and can reemerge anytime. there is no single test that can be used to diagnose sars with a reasonable degree of accuracy. diagnosis, therefore, continues to rely on the clinical examination, supported by case definitions that include the risk assessment according to the 2004 updated who guidelines (tables 2 and 3 ). the initial symptoms of sars are nonspecific, complicating the differential diagnosis. the mean incubation period is 5 days with the range of 2-10 days although there are isolated reports of longer incubation periods. unlike influenza virus, where the patients are most infectious in the first 2 days of illness, transmission from symptomatic sars patients usually occurred on or after the fifth day of onset of disease, which is in line with the rising viral load in nasopharyngeal secretions that peaked at around day 10. there have been no reports of transmission occurring before the onset of symptoms. the typical clinical presentation of sars is that of viral pneumonia with rapid respiratory deterioration. patients initially develop influenza-like prodromal symptoms. fever, malaise, myalgia, headache, rigors, and nonproductive cough are the major presenting symptoms, whereas rhinorrhea and sore throat are less frequently seen. clinical deterioration, often accompanied by watery diarrhea, commonly occurs 1 week after the onset of illness. although history of fever is the most frequently reported symptom, it may be absent on initial measurement. severe cases develop rapidly progressing respiratory distress and oxygen desaturation with approximately 20% requiring intensive care. chest radiographs typically show ground-glass opacities and focal consolidations, especially in the periphery and subpleural regions of the lower zones. progressive involvement of both lungs is not uncommon. features during the later stages have sometimes included spontaneous pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, subpleural fibrosis and cystic changes. nosocomial transmission of sars-cov has been a striking feature of the sars outbreak. the majority of the cases have occurred in adults. children are less commonly affected than adults and usually have a milder illness. the overall mortality rate was approximately 10%. age and the presence of comorbidities are poor prognostic indicators.although the sars outbreak was still ongoing during the first half of 2003, significant funding was made available for sars-related research.immunomodulators (i.e., corticosteroids, intravenous immunoglobulins, thymosin, and anti-tnf) were empirically used for the treatment of sars during the initial epidemic. the correlation between viral load and clinical outcome suggests that suppression of viral replication by effective antiviral drugs should be the key to preventing morbidity and mortality. numerous potential antiviral agents have been identified using different approaches. in vitro susceptibility test results demonstrate that ifn-alpha and ifnbeta have some potential activity. ribavirin has good activity when tested in human caco-2 cells despite its lack of activity in vero cells. the viral proteases are important targets for the development of antiviral drugs. protease inhibitors like nelfinavir, glycyrrhizin, chloroquine, and many others as well as many herbal formulations have been found to possess some antiviral activity against sars-cov in vitro. in addition, the use of nitric oxide (s-nitro-n-acetylpenicillamine) inhalation as an experimental form of rescue therapy for sars appeared to have inhibitory activity against sars-cov. screening of chemical libraries has identified several inhibitors of the viral protease and helicase. identification of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as an obligatory cellular receptor for table 2 risk categories for the emergence of sars emergence of sars-cov-like viruses from wildlife or other animal reservoirs -countries/areas identified as source(s) of the epidemic in 2002-03 in southern china or areas with an increased likelihood of animal-to-human transmission of sars-cov-like viruses from wildlife or other animal reservoirs. emergence or introduction of sars-cov from laboratories or international travel -countries/areas at potentially higher risk of sars-cov emergence or introduction due to the presence of laboratories in which sars-cov or sars-covlike viruses are being studied or in which clinical specimens infected with sars-cov are being processed or stored. or -countries/areas with entry of large numbers of persons from areas in which wildlife or other animal reservoirs of sars-cov-like viruses are found. low risk of sars-cov emergence or introduction -countries/areas that never reported cases or reported only imported cases during the 2002-03 epidemic, and that do not conduct research using live sars-cov-like viruses or store clinical samples from sars cases. sars-cov contributed to understanding of the sars-cov entry process, and helped to characterize two targets of antiviral therapeutics: the sars-cov spike protein and ace2. however, most of the chemicals or approaches have not been evaluated in human or animal models. various approaches toward producing a vaccine against sars have been pursued, including the use of inactivated sars-cov, plasmid dna, and adenovirus vectors. one obvious problem any vaccine would face is whom it should be given to, in the absence of sars-cov transmission. however, waiting until a renewed outbreak occurs before commencing vaccination means that precious weeks would be lost until individuals at risk become immune.the administration of preformed antibodies (obtained from human or animal donors or, more recently, produced in vitro) is effective in preventing a number of different infections, such as hepatitis b, varicella, and rsv. similarly, it could be shown that neutralizing antibodies against sars-cov can protect experimental animals from infection.using screening of a large naive antibody library by antibody phage display technology, neutralizing antibodies were identified and produced that were protective in vitro. there was no evidence of enhancement of sars-cov infection by subneutralizing concentrations of these antibodies, and immune escape mutants were not generated.in theory, this could be an ideal tool: if sufficient stocks of such human monoclonal antibodies could be procured, they would be ready for use when and wherever sars reemerges. one could then passively immunize anyone in contact with the source or patients, affording immediate protection.in summary, sars was a novel severe infectious disease that presumably originated in guangdong in southern china. large-scale wildlife trade and consumption favored the emergence of this zoonosis from a hitherto unrecognized animal reservoir. after its zoonotic origins, the new agent quickly spread within the human population, being transmitted mostly via the respiratory route through close human-to-human contact.sars was rapidly disseminated via the metropolis hong kong through international air travel. its important potential for nosocomial transmission in the community and in hospitals was soon recognized and allowed for appropriate measures to be instituted in most places.there was an unprecedented rapid gain of knowledge through global networking and international collaboration, led by who. unfortunately it took some major outbreaks, some of them affecting industrialized countries with modern health care systems, until the first sars epidemic was controlled. thus in the end rapid success was achieved through 'traditional' sanitary measures, mainly rapid identification of suspect cases and isolation of the diseased.fortunately, sars-cov hasat least so farnot established itself permanently in the human population. its relatively low transmissibility (with the exception of 'superspreaders') led to a low basic reproduction number r 0 ; together with the fact that infected individuals only become infectious themselves once they have developed clinical disease, this made 'traditional' public health measures very effective.is the fact that the first pandemic of the twenty-first century was quickly contained reason to take comfort in the knowledge that the history of humankind has reached a phase in which biomedical sciences and information technology are able to deal with such threats? probably not. first, the rapid success was remarkable. unfortunately, though, this does not reflect preparedness. in 1998, donald burke proposed the following criteria for identifying virus families with a high pandemic risk: (1) those that had caused pandemics in human populations in the recent past; (2) those with the proven ability to cause larger epizootics; and (3) those with an intrinsic propensity to rapidly undergo evolution on the basis of high mutation rate or genome organization favoring recombination ('intrinsic evolvability'). interestingly, even before the sars outbreak (which obviously fulfills the first criterion), the coronavirus family should clearly have been regarded as high risk: starting in the late 1970s, the porcine epidemic diarrhea coronavirus (pedv) caused a severe swine epizootic in europe and asia (second criterion). the high evolvability of the coronavirus family had also been demonstrated: the porcine respiratory coronavirus (prcv) evolved through a deletion mutation in the s gene from the transmissible gastroenteritis virus (tgev); the mutant has a different tissue tropism and is less virulent.second, infectious disease emergence from zoonotic sources was a well-recognized threat long before sars. nevertheless, it took anotherfortunately minor -sars outbreak before decisive steps were taken to control at least the trade in the directly implicated paguma larvata in southern china.starting shortly after sars had been controlled, another agent with pandemic potential has caused an ongoing epizootic of unprecedented proportions: highly pathogenic influenza a (h5n1) virus. transmission to humans occurs almost exclusively through close contact with infectedand sickpoultry. despite the possibility that this avian influenza virus will become fully 'humanized' and trigger the next influenza pandemic, even activities recognized as high risk, such as 'wet markets,' have mostly not been curtailed.finally, the lessons from sarsparticularly the experiences of beijing, toronto, and taiwan that suffered devastating sars outbreaks during the later phase of the outbreakemphasize over and over again the enormous importance of open and timely communication. at times, this may mean admitting to problems that (at least initially) reflect negatively on the country or territory concerned. in the medium to long term, however, such openness is the only way to prevent consequences that would be much worse. although this was widely accepted in the wake of the sars experience and has had a strong influence on the new international health regulations that entered into force in june 2007, the information policies of some countries during the h5n1 epizootic unfortunately do not attest to this at all.notwithstanding its grave consequences in humanitarian, political, and economic terms, sars should serve as an example what can be achieved through international cooperation, modern science, and rigorous use of 'traditional' approaches. even if prudent precautions were suddenly adopted, sars will certainly not have been the last highly pathogenic novel infectious agent that crosses the species barrier into the human population.although bats must be very high on the list of 'culprits' for emerging viral diseases, having been identified as reservoir hosts for a number of emerging viruses, there is no reason why other groups of animals should not figure as prominently in future. the mechanisms behind emergence have been studied. these may be linked to the agent, the new host species (i.e., human beings and in certain cases also the intermediate hosts) or to the connection between those. many of the factors and determinants of disease emergence are related to human activities.although this has accompanied humankind throughout history, and in fact may have helped shape human history, the speed and the extent of human-induced changes has accelerated markedly in recent times. although in the case of sars people were lucky in the end, this may be quite different next time round. it will be important to improve understanding of emergence to minimize the risks of what is a natural phenomenon but much aggravated by human behavior.the management of febrile infants younger than 3 months in the emergency room (er) is challenging as they have a higher risk of serious bacterial infection (sbi) than older children and because clinical evaluation has a low sensitivity and specificity in identifying those infants with sbi. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] therefore, additional examinations are usually performed to diagnose sbi, or to identify those infants at higher and lower risk of sbi. accordingly, a large proportion of these infants considered at higher risk of sbi are admitted to the hospital and treated empirically with intravenous antibiotics while awaiting microbiological confirmation, whereas those at lower risk of sbi can be managed as outpatients, provided adequate surveillance can be ascertained. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] traditional viral and bacterial diagnostic techniques allow to find the etiology of febrile episodes in about half of the cases only. 7, 8 with the development of molecular techniques, the ability to diagnose viral infections has improved substantially in recent years. multiple real-time polymerase chain reactions (pcrs) have been developed, increasing the detection rate for cultivable viruses or allowing the detection of non-or difficult-tocultivate viruses. 9 more recently, techniques such as multiplex pcrs or microarrays allow the codetection of large panels of viruses in a single assay. 10 furthermore, these new tools can now generate accurate results within a few hours. 11 in several clinical situations, rapid report of microbial pathogens identification from clinical specimens has been shown to significantly improve the management and the outcome of infected patients, enabling rapid adjustment of antibiotic treatments, shortened hospital stay, and lower hospitalization costs. 12, 13 regarding the management of febrile infants younger than 3 months, several authors have shown that infants presenting a proven viral infection have a significantly lower risk of sbi. [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] an early diagnosis of a viral infection could help consider a larger proportion of febrile infants at lower risk for sbi and lead to a more conservative approach regarding additional invasive procedures, antibiotic treatments, or hospital admission. while the molecular techniques allowing this early diagnosis are more expensive than conventional methods, their real clinical benefits remain poorly studied.the aims of this prospective study were to evaluate the analytical performances of a multiplex diagnostic tool detecting the most frequent respiratory viruses as compared with our set of homemade real-time pcrs and the potential contribution of these molecular methods to the etiologic diagnosis of febrile episodes in infants younger than 3 months of life.the study was conducted at saint-pierre hospital, a university-affiliated hospital located in downtown brussels. about 24 000 patients per year attend its pediatric er. all infants ≤90 days of age admitted to the pediatric er from november 15, 2010, to may 5, 2011, reporting or presenting a rectal temperature ≥38.0°c, were eligible for this study.according to published guidelines, 1-6 our standard procedure for these patients includes a thorough clinical interview, a complete physical examination, and the following laboratory tests: complete blood count, blood bacterial culture, viral rapid antigen testing and viral culture of nasopharyngeal aspirates (npa), urinalysis, and bacterial culture. cerebrospinal fluid is obtained for cytology, bacterial culture, and enterovirus (ev) detection by pcr in all infants <28 days or in those 28 to 90 days with toxic aspect or the following laboratory findings: white blood cell ≥15 000/mm 3 or ≤5000/mm 3 or c-reactive protein ≥20 mg/l or white cell count >35/ µl in urine sediment collected by catheterization. additional tests such as chest x-ray, stool culture, and stool viral antigen tests are performed whenever clinically indicated. for all patients, an admission is proposed; intravenous empirical antibiotic is started in nearly all infants <28 days and in those older than 28 days with clinical or laboratory alterations.samples received in the laboratory during business hours were processed on receipt. sample arriving outside business hours were stored at 4°c and processed on the next working day. standard viral diagnostic procedures consisted in viral culture on confluent vero, mrc5, and llc-mk 2 cell lines (vircell, santa-fé, spain), and a combination of 3 of the following rapid detection tests according to the season: lateral flow chromatography for influenza a and b (binaxnow influenza a/b, alere inc, waltham, ma), respiratory syncytial virus (rsv; binaxnow rsv, alere inc) and adenovirus (adv; adeno respi-strip, coris bioconcept, gembloux, belgium), and direct fluorescent immunoassays for human metapneumovirus (hmpv) and parainfluenza virus (piv; argene, biomérieux, marcy l'etoile, france).if rapid tests were negative, 2 sets of molecular assays were performed: (1) the clart pneumovir dna array (genomica, coslada, spain) detecting influenza a, b, and c; piv 1, 2, 3, and 4; rsv a and b; hmpv a and b; adv; ev (solely echoviruses); rhinoviruses; coronavirus 229e; and bocaviruses and (2) a homemade real-time pcrs detecting influenza a and b; piv 1, 2, 3, and 4; rsv a and b; hmpv a and b; adv; ev; rhinoviruses; coronavirus 229e, nl63, and oc43; and bocaviruses. extraction of nucleic acids was arried out with the magna pure lc extraction system (roche diagnostics) using the total nucleic acid large volume isolation kit (input volume 800 µl, output volume 200 µl). the pneumovir assay was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions; detection and interpretation of the results were conducted by a carreader (genomica). all these molecular techniques were performed once a week, except for the pcr targeting ev, which was performed twice a week.for npa with negative rapid tests, as the molecular tests used were presumably more sensitive than the reference standard (viral culture), we constructed, as recommended, 19 a "composite" reference standard in order to avoid bias in establishing the specificity of the evaluated tests. this "composite" reference standard was constructed as follows: (1) samples were considered as positive for a viral pathogen if they tested positive by at least 2 of the 3 assays used (viral culture, pneumovir, homemade pcrs) and (2) they were considered negative if they tested negative by at least 2 of the 3 assays. the samples not fitting one of these categories were classified as undetermined. as a consequence, the analytical performances of our pcr detecting coronavirus nl63 and oc43 could not be evaluated, as it was the only method used here that was able to detect these viruses.for each patient, the following demographic, clinical, biological, and microbiological data were recorded: age, gender, duration of gestation, immunization status, duration and maximal documented temperature at home and in the er, symptoms, laboratory results, treatment administered and duration, destination after discharge from er, complications, and length of stay if hospitalized.all patients' files were reviewed by an infectious diseases senior pediatrician, and infants were classified into 4 groups according to clinical symptoms at presentation: (1) respiratory infection, (2) suspected infection. viral or bacterial suspected infection was defined as clinical signs and nonspecific laboratory tests matching either with viral or bacterial infections but with no microbiological documentation.no etiology. no etiology was defined as the febrile episodes not matching with any of the definitions described above. if a febrile episode matched with 2 diagnostic definitions, the most severe one was considered as the responsible of the fever.data were recorded on excel files (microsoft office, windows) and analyzed using descriptive statistics.verbal informed consent was obtained from all parents or legal guardians at inclusion. the study was approved by the local ethics committee.during the study period, 198 infants were enrolled on admittance to the er for a total of 208 febrile episodes: 10 infants presented 2 episodes (with a median of 27.5 days between episodes [6-41 days]). median age was 52 days (6-85 days), 56.3% were males, and 6.7% were prematurely born babies. median measured for fever in the er was 37.8°c and 38.5°c at home, for a median duration of 12 hours (0-240 hours) before arrival. for the 42.9% of infants older than 60 days, the immunization program was not yet started (belgian immunization program is free and starts at 8 weeks of age).blood culture, urine culture, and npa were performed in 96.2%, 94.2%, and 97.6% of patients, respectively. lumbar puncture was performed in 32.2% of the infants (92.6% of infants <28 days and 56% of older infants with toxic aspect or laboratory alterations), stool viral antigenic tests in 25%, stool culture in 22.6%, and skin pus culture in 0.5% (1 patient). in 200 of the 208 episodes, an npa was available for complete viral evaluation (3 patients were not sampled, 2 samples were not analyzed with rapid test and viral culture, and 3 others were not analyzed with molecular techniques due to technical issues).seventy-five out of 200 npa (37.5%) had a positive rapid antigen detection test ( figure 1 ); 62 positive results (82.7%) were confirmed by culture. among the 13 culture-negative rapid test-positive samples, 10 were hmpv, whose culture growth is known to be difficult. the remaining 125 cases were explored by molecular methods but, as previously said, 2 were not analyzed with pneumovir assay. from the 123 samples evaluable for analytical performances, the composite reference standard was negative for 65 samples, positive for 56 samples, and undetermined for 2 samples (culture was negative and molecular tests were discordant). of note, among the 65 "negative" samples, 10 coronaviruses oc43 and 2 coronaviruses nl63 were detected by pcr.as shown in table 1 , culture was, as expected, the technique with the lowest sensitivity (71%), missing mainly hmpvs, rhinoviruses, and mixed infections; its specificity was 100%. the in-house real-time pcrs showed good specificity (91%) and positive predictive value (88%), but its sensitivity did not reach 80%. the pneumovir assay, on the other hand, achieved the best sensitivity (96%) and negative predictive value (95%) but lacked specificity (58%), mainly due to 23 results considered as false positives for rhinoviruses according to the composite standard.eighty-four percent of episodes (n = 175) led to hospitalization and 87 episodes (42%) to intravenous empirical antibiotic treatment. using our standard protocol, the rate of documented microbiological etiology was 13% at er discharge, 47% at the end of hospitalization, and 64% when viral cultures results became available. molecular methods increased the documented etiology rate by 12%, to a total of 76% of all episodes (figure 2 ). the highest rate of documented episodes was achieved for infants with respiratory symptoms at presentation (92.6%), followed by those with gastrointestinal symptoms (76.5%). the contribution of molecular methods to establish the etiology of the febrile episode was the highest for infants with fever without clinical focus, increasing the rate of microbiological documentation by 18%, to a total of 68% ( figure 2 ).among the 76% of episodes with documented etiology, sbi was diagnosed in 15 patients (7%): 11 urinary tract infections (utis), 3 bacterial enteritis, and 1 finger cellulitis ( table 2 ). viruses were detected in the npa of 5 of these 15 infants (33%): 1 rsv, 1 rhinovirus, 1 piv, 1 coronavirus nl63, and 1 cytomegalovirus. the remaining 69% were "documented viral infections." twentyone of the 143 episodes (15%) with a proven viral etiology were suspected to have a bacterial coinfection on clinical basis or because they had laboratory signs of inflammation. these 21 episodes occurred all in infants with respiratory symptoms at presentation. in 105 episodes (50.5%), infants were considered as low risk for bacterial infection after workup in the er ( figure 3) ; 82 (78%) of these infants were hospitalized, 59 of them (77%) only for clinical observation, while 23 required supportive treatment. one single episode classified as "low risk" at er discharge ended to be a "bacterial proven infection," namely, a campylobacter jejuni enteritis. among the 59 infants with febrile episodes considered at low risk of sbi and hospitalized for observation, 42 (71%) ended to have a documented viral infection. this is the first prospective study reporting the contribution of a large panel of techniques, including molecular methods for multiple respiratory viruses, to establish the etiology of febrile episodes in infants younger than 3 months. we evaluated the possible contribution on clinical decisions in parallel with the chronology of the availability of the laboratory results that led to episode documentation. our study presents the limitation of having been conducted mainly during the autumn-winter season in a single center. this can explain the important rate of infants presenting respiratory symptoms. nevertheless, the rate of sbi is similar to those reported in the literature, 2,3,5 as is the predominance of uti among our sbi, demonstrating that our cohort can be considered as representative of the etiologic case mix usually observed among febrile episodes in infants younger than 3 months.identifying infants at risk of sbi among those presenting a febrile episode remains an important challenge, and several scales based on clinical, biological, and microbiological data have been recommended. 1-6 in the past years, important advances have been made in terms of laboratory techniques that either help better identify high-risk infants or confirm sbi more rapidly, such as procalcitonin level [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] or rapid bacterial identification from blood culture by maldi-tof (matrixassisted laser desorption/ionization-time-of-flight mass spectrometry). 25 other authors have focused on detecting infants at low risk of sbi using clinical scores. 26 documenting a viral infection has also been shown to contribute to identify febrile infants at low risk of sbi. [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] however, as having a proven viral infection does not fully rule out the risk of sbi (especially uti), 15-17 viral tests cannot replace blood or urine analysis but must be seen as additional tools in the management of these patients.current routine viral tests are rapid and relatively sensitive in pediatric population but are available for a limited number of viruses only. as a consequence, viral infection is not always documented on time to affect the clinical care.in our study, the infants considered at "low risk of sbi" when discharged from the er that finally turned out to have a proven viral infection represented about 20% of the total cohort (n = 42). these numbers are similar to those published by huppler et al, who identified in a large meta-analysis of 21 studies a similar rate of infants (30%) that were observed without receiving empiric antibiotic therapy or sent back home, after being identified at "low-risk." 27 this population, namely, "low risk" infants with a presumed viral infection, is probably the population that could benefit the most from adding molecular tools to their management, sparing them the bundle of downsides associated with hospitalization and empiric antibiotic therapy, including costs, adverse effects, development of resistant organisms, nosocomial infections, and psychosocial stress on family dynamics.the present evaluation demonstrates that molecular techniques greatly improve the detection rate of viral infections, especially in the challenging group of febrile infants without clinical source, among which the increase in microbiological documentation was nearly 20%. the clart pneumovir was the most powerful tool tested, multiplexing 11 viral targets with a sensitivity rate of 96% and a negative predictive value of 95%. however, it also presented 2 potential drawbacks: its lack of specificity (false-positive results for rhinoviruses) and the fact it does not target all circulating coronaviruses.unfortunately, as the molecular methods used here are expensive and need trained staff, they are not yet routinely used in the management of febrile infants younger than 3 months. 28 furthermore, to be useful in clinical practice, the results of these techniques should be available during the timespan in which patient's management, treatment, and follow-up are decided. new "sample-in, answer-out" point-of-care platforms that enable fully automated detection of comprehensive panels of respiratory pathogens in about 1 hour are now available and should soon enable this expected improvement of patient's management. 29 in conclusion, our study demonstrates that the use of molecular techniques increases to 76% the proportion of documented etiology in febrile episodes in infants younger than 3 months. we have also identified the population in which these techniques have the highest contribution. making these tests available 24 hours/24 and 7 days/7 could help lightening the management of these patients.our study provides adequate information to design a prospective study that could fully assess the contribution of new, rapid, point-of-care, multiplex molecular tools to the management of febrile infants younger than 3 months.the authors gratefully thank the fondation vésale for supporting the molecular analyses used in this study. the authors also thank jerôme de marchin for his contribution to the design of data collection instruments and beatriz epalza for her help in analyzing the data.ce: conceptualized and designed the study, coordinated patient's recruitment, designed the data collection instruments, coordinated and supervised data collection, drafted the initial manuscript, and approved the final manuscript as submitted. mh: supervised the molecular techniques, carried out the laboratory data analysis, critically reviewed and revised the manuscript, and approved the final manuscript as submitted. lb: supervised the laboratory techniques, reviewed the manuscript, and approved the final manuscript as submitted. sd: helped in patient's recruitment, reviewed the manuscript, and approved the final manuscript as submitted. pdb: helped in patient's recruitment, reviewed the manuscript, and approved the final manuscript as submitted. ov: reviewed the manuscript and approved the final manuscript as submitted. jl: conceptualized and designed the study, critically reviewed and revised the manuscript, and approved the final manuscript as submitted. all authors approved the final manuscript as submitted and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work.the author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.the author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: the fondation vésale supported the molecular analyses used in this study.cristina epalza https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6929-4903supplemental material for this article is available online.coronavirus disease 2019 , caused by the novel coronavirus severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2, formerly known as 2019-ncov), appeared in china for the first time, and subsequently spread worldwide [1, 2] . on 30 january 2020, the world health organization (who) officially announced the covid-19 epidemics as a threat to public health internationally, and subsequently, in march 2020, the global situation escalated into the covid-19 pandemic. johns hopkins university reported over 7,600,000 cases of infection and more than 427,000 deaths as of 13 june 2020 [3] . as a result of this rapidly progressing covid-19 pandemic and the limited laboratory-based molecular testing capacities, new point-of-care (poc), scalable rapid diagnostic tests have been invented recently as easy-to-use tools to allow covid-19 diagnostics outside of laboratory settings. what is more, the urgent need to multiply testing for covid-19 has been clearly identified as an essential element of the anti-coronavirus strategy all over the world.the diagnostic sensitivity, specificity and accuracy concerning suspected covid-19 infection, based on controlled testing and performance data from clinical settings, is of substantial importance in the context of limiting the scope of coronavirus epidemics. unreliable and unproved tests may not detect patients with active infection or may incorrectly indicate covid-19-negative patients as positive, hampering healthcare efforts. the diagnostic laboratory and point-of-care tests (pocts) at present, work is going on worldwide to develop new methods which will simplify and speed up the detection of novel coronavirus. currently, there are nearly 200 commercially available genetic tests, with further companies awaiting the completion of the procedure and food and drug administration (fda) or in vitro diagnostics (ivd) certificate to be issued. it is worth noting that a large portion of available tests are provided merely with the research use only (ruo) certificate, which in fact does not imply anything concerning test quality or its validation. more rigorous tests apply to products certified as ivd, complying with the iso13485 norm. in addition, ivd reagents are subject to local regulations, such as ce marking in europe, and hence they should comply with directive 98/79/ec of the european parliament and of the council of 27 october 1998 on in vitro diagnostic medical devices, with an extensive evaluation, including the validation of clinical samples.real time rt-qpcr genetic tests are meant for the identification and differentiation of sars-cov-2 in the material/specimens collected from patients with covid-19 symptoms, by detecting rna sequences unique for sars-cov-2. the genetic material of the virus is extracted from specimens (sputum, tracheal aspirate or bronchoalveolar lavage, swabs from nasopharynx and pharynx, blood, urine, or stool) and amplified by means of the pcr technique in real time, with the use of reverse transcription (rt), and detected by means of fluorescent reporter probes specific to sars-cov-2 [8, 9] .at present, rt-qpcr tests are available in the world market, which are meant to detect orf1ab, e, n, or s gene sequences, in various combinations. those tests differ in sensitivity, stability, and examination time. the test protocol is complex and costly, being mainly suitable for large, centralized diagnostic laboratories. tests usually take 4-6 h, yet the logistic requirements concerning sending clinical specimens imply that execution time is 24 h at the most [10] .in accordance with who recommendations, rt-qpcr tests must enable the detection of three genes in a single reaction: e gene, n gene, and rdrp gene. this allows us to detect viruses from the beta-coronavirus group (e gene), as well as to identify sars-cov-2 virus (n gene and rdrp, orf1ab). such a design guarantees double confirmation in cases of infection, it also limits the risk of obtaining false negative results in case of detecting only one target for sars-cov-2. this reduces the possibility of obtaining doubtful results, in which case the necessity of verification occurs [11] . a comparison review of rt-qpcr dedicated to sars-cov-2 genes target points is presented in table 1 . at present, work is going on worldwide to develop new methods which will simplify and speed up the detection of novel coronavirus. currently, there are nearly 200 commercially available genetic tests, with further companies awaiting the completion of the procedure and food and drug administration (fda) or in vitro diagnostics (ivd) certificate to be issued. it is worth noting that a large portion of available tests are provided merely with the research use only (ruo) certificate, which in fact does not imply anything concerning test quality or its validation. more rigorous tests apply to products certified as ivd, complying with the iso13485 norm. in addition, ivd reagents are subject to local regulations, such as ce marking in europe, and hence they should comply with directive 98/79/ec of the european parliament and of the council of 27 october 1998 on in vitro diagnostic medical devices, with an extensive evaluation, including the validation of clinical samples.real time rt-qpcr genetic tests are meant for the identification and differentiation of sars-cov-2 in the material/specimens collected from patients with covid-19 symptoms, by detecting rna sequences unique for sars-cov-2. the genetic material of the virus is extracted from specimens (sputum, tracheal aspirate or bronchoalveolar lavage, swabs from nasopharynx and pharynx, blood, urine, or stool) and amplified by means of the pcr technique in real time, with the use of reverse transcription (rt), and detected by means of fluorescent reporter probes specific to sars-cov-2 [8, 9] .at present, rt-qpcr tests are available in the world market, which are meant to detect orf1ab, e, n, or s gene sequences, in various combinations. those tests differ in sensitivity, stability, and examination time. the test protocol is complex and costly, being mainly suitable for large, centralized diagnostic laboratories. tests usually take 4-6 h, yet the logistic requirements concerning sending clinical specimens imply that execution time is 24 h at the most [10] .in accordance with who recommendations, rt-qpcr tests must enable the detection of three genes in a single reaction: e gene, n gene, and rdrp gene. this allows us to detect viruses from the beta-coronavirus group (e gene), as well as to identify sars-cov-2 virus (n gene and rdrp, orf1ab). such a design guarantees double confirmation in cases of infection, it also limits the risk of obtaining false negative results in case of detecting only one target for sars-cov-2. this reduces the possibility of obtaining doubtful results, in which case the necessity of verification occurs [11] . a comparison review of rt-qpcr dedicated to sars-cov-2 genes target points is presented in table 1 . the standard protocol with the application of the rt-qpcr method is demanding and time-consuming. for that reason, scientists constantly strive to invent more up to date modifications of the rt-qpcr tests, which would cut down the time required for analyses [13] .bosch healthcare solutions announced that they had developed a quick test, which may provide the results in 2.5 h; it is a fast testing kit for the vivalytic platform. it is a fully automated pcr test, which is performed by simply inserting the swab into a cartridge, which is subsequently analyzed by the machine. this universal platform for molecular laboratory diagnostics, with the option for various samples testing and different analytical methods, can be carried out as an entirely automated mode within a short time. unfortunately, the equipment has not been available for many healthcare institutions yet, and the diagnostic cartridges are dedicated solely to the specific analyzing device [14] .biomaxima has invented a test whose main advantages include a short waiting time; the results can be obtained in a mere 2 h. moreover, the analytical sensitivity of the test, being at the level of ≥10 rna copies per reaction, is higher than in other comparable systems. it seems important that the molecular test kit contains reagents with substantially enhanced stability, which allows us to transport it safely and store it at room temperature, whereas many other tests available on the market need to be stored in a freezer and to be transported in dry ice. storing such reagents, even for a short time, in conditions that deviate from those indicated is risky and may result in generating false negative test results [15] .the latest technology of molecular tests, developed by scientists from oxford university, is more sensitive than the previous ones and it implies the possibility of examining patients at earlier stages, reacting more quickly, and effectively preventing the spread of coronavirus. this new test for diagnosing sars-cov-2 provides rapid results within 30 min, whereas the fastest current methods that concentrate on viral rna give results in 1.5 to 2 h, i.e., three times faster than the presently quickest testing methods, and which requires the application of relatively simple technical devices. apart from those advantages, the scientists responsible for the test's development claim that it may even help detect patients infected with coronavirus at earlier stages, in comparison with current methods, while its results can be read with the "naked eye", which makes it more available for a wider spectrum of healthcare units and specialists. this fast-molecular test has been recently registered by the fda and utilizes a diagnostic system, which, in recent years, proved to function perfectly in diagnosing multiple infections (including hepatitis c virus-hcv and influenza) [16] . rna detection may be performed by means of rt-qpcr or reverse transcription-loop amplification (rt-lamp). a standard rt-qpcr test takes 90 to 120 min on average to test a set of samples, whereas lamp may be completed in 30 min. indirect isothermal amplification (lamp) is a fast technology of dna amplification, which is applied in the detection of pathogens such as viruses or bacteria. lamp reaction usually takes place at constant temperature, and the target dna may be amplified in 30 min. lamp method utilizes four or six starters for binding six regions of target dna, its specificity is exceptionally high. because sars-cov-2 is a rna-type virus with a length of some 30 kb, a single reverse transcriptase (rt) reaction and lamp may, jointly, significantly shorten the reaction time, omitting the stage of purifying cdna from reverse transcriptase, and thanks to this, sars-cov-2 may be quickly detected. it has to be noted that similarly, a one-step rt-qpcr method does not require cdna purification (a single stage reaction). the team from oxford university developed four sets of lamp starters (comprising six starters in each set/kit) focused on viral rna of sars-cov-2 in the regions of orf1ab, s gene, and n gene. for the interpretation of results, a colorimetric method has been applied, which enables the reading of the results of viral rna amplification by the naked eye, without the necessity of using expensive equipment. moreover, the sensitivity of the method may be 80 copies of viral rna per 1 ml in the sample and single stage process (without separate rna extraction), which enables the amplification of rna directly from the sample [17, 18] .performing examinations with the use of fast molecular tests may be particularly useful in emergency departments and admission rooms. pocts are needed to speed up the process of taking clinical decisions and decrease the workload for centralized testing laboratories [16] . poct means that test results are instantly delivered in the patient care settings, such as hospitals, urgent care centers and emergency rooms, instead of the use of expensive and time-consuming laboratory processes.additionally, the american company cepheid developed a quick test which, as they declare, takes 45 min, while the dutch pharmacists owning qiagen developed a 1-h test. the us food and drug administration has issued an emergency authorization of use for cepheid's point-of-care covid-19 diagnostics, xpert xpress sars-cov-2, according to a statement from the agency. the test was designed to provide detection of novel coronavirus within a short period of 45 min, using specimens from a nasopharyngeal swab, nasal wash/aspirate. another poct, the xpert xpress sars-cov-2 test cartridge is dedicated to detecting sars-cov-2 nucleic acid utilizing rt-qpcr and does not require the use of reagents. in the contrary, the genexpert system needs the test to be run in a clia-approved laboratory (clinical laboratory improvement amendments) or in a selection of patient care settings [19] .it is equally important to understand that rt-qpcr tests have also certain limitations. they are the most useful in case of positive results, although they appear to have less diagnostic value in situations when covid-19 must be ruled out. negative rt-qpcr test results do not necessarily indicate that person has not contracted an infectious disease, as other individual factors also need to be considered, such as exposure risk and potential laboratory errors. the false negative results may occur if the sample has not been properly collected, transported, or handled/treated, or as a result of the improper extraction of nucleic acid from clinical materials [9] . moreover, the false positive results can be related to the situation where the sample contains inhibitors of amplification, or an insufficient amount of virus molecules. on the contrary, a false positive result may be due to the cross-contamination of the sample during its handling or preparation, or between patient samples. what is more, the influence of vaccines, antiviral drugs, antibiotics, chemotherapeutic agents, or immunosuppressive drugs has not been taken into consideration. moreover, the set/kit does not exclude diseases caused by other bacterial or viral pathogens. the negative results do not exclude infection and should not be the sole basis for patients' treatment. test results when using the kit serve clinical purposes only. clinical diagnosis and treatment of patients should be considered in conjunction with the manifestations and symptoms, medical history, response to treatment or other laboratory tests [9] . in general, the sensitivity of this molecular method may vary depending on specimen collection (broncho-alveolar lavage, sputum, nasal swabs or throat swabs) and, what is more, the accuracy depends upon stage of infection, the rate of sars-cov-2 multiplication, and also the degree of clearance. interestingly, the provided values of rt-qpcr accuracies seem to be higher for in vitro validation by utilizing sars-cov-2-dedicated primers and cultures in highly controlled laboratory settings [20] .it is assumed that the optimal outcome and 'clear-cut diagnostic gold standard' might depend upon the development of hybrid assays in order to minimize the fraction of false negative results. the enhanced rt-qpcr test combined with serological immunoassays (either antibody-detecting or antigen-detecting), would bring an additional diagnostic value for accurate and quick covid-19 diagnosis in vitro diagnostics, when the human body reacts to an infectious bio-stimulant [21] .the progress made in recent years in the diagnostics of infections enables the application, often simultaneously, of numerous methods in order to detect respiratory viruses effectively. the choice of suitable tests depends upon the type of virus to be detected, the presumed number of antigens, patient population to be tested, as well as the technical abilities and experience of the testing unit. the validation of rt-qpcr tests seems to be an important step in combating the new coronavirus. one of the most significant parameters regarding the efficiency of the diagnostic procedure is most probably the one related to the minimum amount of analyte, which may be detected and quantitatively determine by means of a particular test. the parameters describing those properties are known as limit of detection ("lod") and limit of quantification ("loq"). in many laboratories, lod is used interchangeably with "sensitivity", "analytical sensitivity", or/and "detection limit.". this may be misleading, though, as "sensitivity" is also understood and used in other ways. sensitivity and clinical (diagnostic) specificity are two different parameters. diagnostic sensitivity is the proportion of true positive results to the sum of true positive and true negative results. a sensitivity ratio of 100% implies that all the sick people have been identified. the specificity of a test is the proportion of true negative results to the sum of true negative and false positive ones. the specificity of 100% implies that all healthy people in a given test have been correctly identified as healthy/not having the condition. as indicated in table 2 , sensitivity and specificity of tests is already about 100%, with a few exceptions, still one can notice differences in analytical sensitivity of the test (lod). the vast majority of molecular tests kits contain a so-called 'internal positive control' (ipc), that can be utilized either as an extraction control or internal control. the ipc is essential for an evaluation of whether the genetical material extraction procedure and amplification stage were carried out correctly. the failure in ipc detection using a patient's specimen may indicate the improper extraction of nucleic acid from clinical material as a consequence of nucleic acid loss or the transposition of pcr inhibitors and the lack of sufficient biological material in the collected sample. it needs to be noted that many molecular tests may not provide sets for extraction stages, and they need to be acquired separately. however, all tests reviewed here that detect the rna of sars-cov-2 contain ipc.another important factor which describes a diagnostic test is the analytical specificity. it is the ability of a test to detect a specific target, e.g., a virus. it is of great importance to check whether the starters used in pcr test are specific to a given virus. there are two components of analytical sensitivity: cross-reactivity and interference. cross-reactivity may occur if, in a sample collected from a patient, there are organisms which are genetically related that imitate the virus analysed, which causes test starters to cross react. as shown in table 3 , the producers have analysed their tests from the perspective of cross-reactivity; unfortunately, that analysis is selective and does not concern the same micro-organisms. tuberculosis  -nd  nd  --nd  nd  nd  -----streptococcus pneumoniae  --nd  --nd  -nd  -----streptococcus pyogenes  --nd  nd  -nd  nd  ------bordetella parapertussis  nd  nd  nd  -nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  bordetella bronchiseptica  nd  nd  nd  -nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  nd  bordetella pertussis  -----nd  nd  nd  -- no data available (nd); does not cross-react with analyzed pathogen (-).immunological methods are, most often, the chemiluminescent assaying of immunoglobulin igg and igm for sars-cov-2 from blood on an analyzer, or immunochromatographic assessment in the form of rapid pocts, not requiring additional equipment. the methods of detecting anti-sars-cov-2 antibodies, despite the ongoing research to develop them further, may or even should be applied during the coronavirus epidemics [22, 23] . after about a week from the first clinical manifestations, the sensitivity of molecular diagnostics (pcr) diminishes gradually for sars-cov-2 infections, due to the decreasing amount of virus particles in the respiratory tract epithelium. in such cases, patients may have false negative results, despite the ongoing infection.among the many contemporary technologies available, special attention should be paid to rapid lateral flow immunoassay (lfia), also referred to as immunochromatographic tests. perhaps they are not so much appreciated in the scientific community as pcr methods or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa tests), despite the fact that they do find application in diagnostics more and more often. they differ, depending on the type of test, but the basic principle of their action is invariably the same-they make use of the unique property that antibodies possess, that of selective binding to a specific particle or group of similar particles (antigen). lfias provide an uncomplicated and relatively inexpensive tool meant for detecting the presence (or absence) of a given component in the examined specimen, such as the presence of a virus in an analyzed blood sample. examination with the use of those tests is possible for various types of test material-whole human blood, blood plasma, serum, stool, urine, sweat, cerebrospinal fluid, or even tears [9] . the test principle is based on an immunological method, using specific antibodies, most often in complex with colloidal gold, where a drop of the examined substance first moves along the nitrocellulose membrane using capillary phenomena. after the sample is absorbed by the membrane, the antigen (should the test prove to be positive) binds to the colloidal gold complex and respective antibodies. consequently, the effect of that reaction is the formation of a complex, which will be detected by the test. the interpretation of results consists of confirmation or ruling out of the presence of antigens in the examined sample, based on color test strips that appear in the test [21, 22] . the brief comparison of advantages and disadvantages of immunochromatographic tests is presented in table 4 . table 4 . the brief comparison of advantages and disadvantages of immunochromatographic tests [24] [25] [26] [27] .short reaction time for most tests, amounting to 5-20 min suboptimal sensitivity, results often false negative, particularly during enhanced activity of the virus simple and comfortable to use and perform. some tests may be performed in outpatient clinics or at patient's bed.despite substantial specificity sometimes the results are false negative, particularly when the virus is not much active.reading most often possible with 'naked eye'. it is necessary to verify positive or doubtful results.small amount of material to be collected, variety of material. increased risk of operator becoming infected "best before" date distant (usually 18 months from manufacturing date) at present, most immunoenzymatic tests available are based on the immunochromatic technique. the difference between those tests depends upon the molecule assayed (p/c or antigens), structure, performance time, and diagnostic material. it may be supposed that, in future, rapid tests will enable easier and quicker diagnostics of many diseases, without the necessity of performing tedious and complicated procedures. this would reduce the waiting time for obtaining results, and accelerate decision making regarding suitable treatment [27] [28] [29] .the detection of specific sars-cov-2 serum antibodies allows for a rapid, cost-effective, and reasonably sensitive clinical diagnosis of covid-19, as immunoglobulins such as igm provide the initial humoral response during the first stage of viral infection, prior to the onset of the adaptive, high-affinity igg response essential for long-term immunological memory. research indicates that after sars infection, antibodies of the igm class may be detected in patient's blood about 6 days after the infection, while igg may be already detected after 8 days. as sars-cov-2 belongs to the same large family of viruses, which includes those causing middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) and severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), it should be assumed that the process of producing antibodies will be similar to that in case of other viruses belonging to that family, while the detection of igg antibodies and igm antibodies acting against sars-cov-2 may be an indication of infection. moreover, the detection of igm antibodies usually indicates a recent exposure to sars-cov-2, whereas the detection of igg antibodies in case of covid-19 indicates exposure to the virus some time ago [30] .serological tests, detecting solely the igm class of antibodies, should find applications for diagnostic purposes. when using tests which detect both igm and igg antibodies, one should remember that a positive result may be the evidence of past infection, not active infection (table 5 ). negative results from serological tests do not exclude sars-cov-2 infection, as the 'window period' (delay in the production of antibodies) may exceed 7 days. serological tests may also give false positive results. this may be the case of past or ongoing infection with virus strains other than sars-cov-2, such as coronavirus hku1, nl63, oc43, or 229e. moreover, the first tests assessing the titer of iga class antibodies have been launched, which, from the perspective of immunology, is of extreme importance, as it provides the possibility of testing for antibodies in a material other than blood samples collected from patients, e.g., respiratory tract secretions. type of testthe window period for a test designed to detect a specific disease p serological tests are thus applied as an adjunctive method, for monitoring the epidemiological situation, yet they may be performed faster and are less costly than genetic tests. this diagnostic method has a limited sensitivity, yet efforts to improve it are ongoing, as it is useful for monitoring the infection. due to insufficient data concerning, among others, the dynamics of immunological response to infection and the diagnostic value of available tests for detecting igm and igg class antibodies (comprising sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive value), in many countries, it is currently not recommended to use serological tests for diagnostic purposes. table 6 displays the evaluation of serological tests validated by the fda, and table 7 provides a comparison of the selected immunochromatographic tests for sars-cov-2 based on sensitivity, specificity, sample type and test performance time. of the selected immunochromatographic tests for sars-cov-2 based on sensitivity, specificity, sample type and test performance time. in serological ivd, the so-called 'window period' is of much importance-that is, the time when specific antibodies are not yet detectable in a patient's blood. in the initial phase of an infection, the production of antibodies is initiated, but their level is still low, and thus test results may prove negative. anti-sars-cov-2 antibodies appear quite late, i.e., a few days after clinical manifestations, which is why serological tests cannot be used as a basic tool in diagnosing sars-cov-2 infections [32] . in serological ivd, the so-called 'window period' is of much importance-that is, the time when specific antibodies are not yet detectable in a patient's blood. in the initial phase of an infection, the production of antibodies is initiated, but their level is still low, and thus test results may prove negative. anti-sars-cov-2 antibodies appear quite late, i.e., a few days after clinical manifestations, which is why serological tests cannot be used as a basic tool in diagnosing sars-cov-2 infections [32] .the detection of specific anti-sars-cov-2 antibodies is possible about 10 days after the first clinical manifestations of infection. thus, this serves the purpose of confirming contact with coronavirus, and is of enormous importance from an epidemiological perspective, as it allows us to detect subjects who had the infection but were asymptomatic or oligosymptomatic, and could have been the source of infection for other people ("silent" carriers/vectors). it also allows us to determine the spread of covid-19 infection in the population. a comparative review of currently available serological immunodiagnostic covid-19 tests is presented in table 8 . the protein microarray method (pmm) is a proteomic screening technique serving the purpose of simultaneous/parallel quantitative and qualitative analysis of mixtures containing many proteins. the chip used is composed of a supporting surface (e.g., modified glass plate, nitrocellulose membrane, or microtitration plate), on which the matrix of 'capturing' proteins is immobilized in accordance with the determined formula, performing the function of a probe. the material captured may be antibodies, enzymes, or ligands. protein analyte, added to the matrix, may be modified by means of various types of markers (among others: radioisotopes, fluorescence, luminescence markers). the interaction between micromatrix proteins and analyte induces an analytical signal, registered by means of suitable equipment. the advantages of protein micromatrices include the short time required for analysis, modest consumption of samples and reagents, high sensitivity, automation of testing. they allow us to investigate the functions and effects of proteins on large scale [33, 34] .the newly developed pepperchip ® sars-cov-2 proteome microarray (pepperprint) based on the sars-cov-2 genome derived from the virus isolate wuhan-hu-1 (genbank id: mn908947.3) enables us to serologically screen about 5000 individual peptides spanning the whole viral proteome. sequences of orf1ab protein, surface glycoprotein, orf3a protein, coat protein, membrane glycoprotein, orf6 protein, orf7a protein, orf8 protein, nucleocapsid phosphoprotein, and orf10 protein have been elongated and connected by means of neutral gsgsgsg connectors. the elongated protein sequences have been transcribed into 4883 different peptides composed of 15 amino acids printed in two repetitions (9766 peptide sites) in order to obtain high-resolution epitope data. in the case of sars-cov, which emerged in 2002, it was demonstrated that the application of pmm is characterized by enhanced sensitivity, as more chinese subjects were diagnosed as sars-positive when applying pmm in comparison with elisa tests. the pmm seems to be more reliable, as it allows us to determine more protein antigens of the virus [35] . an additional advantage of such tests is the possibility of automating the entire analytical process. unfortunately, the method has several imperfections, including the repeatability of the test itself, while the cost of the testing and equipment used for micromatrix diagnostics is significant, which makes the pmm method less accessible in standard laboratory settings [36] .undoubtedly, the scalable and reliable pocts used in the community and outside laboratories would have the opportunity to reduce the time to obtain covid-19 diagnostic results and might support early implementation of isolation resources and infection control measures. from a medical workforce point of view, antibody-and antigen-detecting tests appear to have a significant role in identifying healthcare workers who recovered from sars-cov-2 infection, to assess their suitability to provide frontline health services. on the other hand, the false negative serology tests could cause spread of covid-19, unjustified reassurance and a change in public behavior. undoubtedly, the negative results of serology tests (swabs) should not be treated as definitive for 'ruling out', but a positive test results are beneficial to 'rule in' coronavirus infection. the sufficient accuracy of serology tests used more widely will allow us to make an appropriate decision regarding lifting restrictions on a national level. nevertheless, the wider implementation of pocd will ultimately support public health strategies about the potential lifting of social distancing restrictions in future [30] . moreover, with the limited data available at present, for antibody-detecting and antigen-detecting rapid pocd, further intense research into their potential diagnostic utility is highly encouraged. if these tests demonstrate adequate accuracy, it is likely that they could potentially be used as triage tests for quick identification of patients who are suspected of contracting covid-19, reducing the need for expensive reference molecular pcr testing [4, 6] . finally, it is worth noting the psychological and behavioral consequences of correctly established and known immunity status within the community.recently, a test has been developed based on clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (crispr/cas12a), with visual readouts. the test can detect 10 copies of the virus gene in merely 45 min, providing simple and reliable diagnostic method, which additionally demonstrates high sensitivity and specificity. in order to enable fast diagnosis at the hospital or on admission, the test has been provided with an ssdna reporter labeled with a blank green fluorescent particle, which will be split off by the cas12a protein, when the nucleic acid of sars-cov-2 is found in the detection system. in this way, a green signal of fluorescence will be obtained, visible with the naked eye, in'the light, with a wavelength of 485 nm. the high specificity of the test was obtained by designing 15 crrnas, which may distinguish the polymorphisms of a single nucleotide with other viruses related to sars in four domains: orf1a or orf1b, n, and e genes [37] .the search for new diagnostic methods is continued. because sars-cov-2 is spread by droplets, while the diagnostic sensitivity and specificity index for rt-qpcr tests is the highest for broncho-alveolar lavage (bal) (higher than for sputum or nose/throat swabs), scientists recently proposed the use of exhaled breath condensate (ebc) for diagnostic purposes. ebc is most similar in its biochemical composition and origin to bal. examinations with the use of ebc are a relatively novel diagnostic method, used mainly to assess inflammation within the respiratory tract, and its components reflect the composition of the fluid lining the bronchi and alveoli. ebc is a condensed form of small droplets of the fluid lining the lungs, which is usually exhaled, it contains various components, from small ions to proteins and organelles; it may even contain viruses, fungi, and bacteria. taking samples of the condensate is safe, totally non-invasive, easy to perform, it may be repeated many times, it may also be performed on patients with severe complications of covid-19; its enormous advantage is that in may be performed in small children, with the use of special facial masks. the course of the examination is such that the patient is requested to exhale, when breathing uneventfully for some 10-15 min, to an apparatus provided with a cooling system, which allows us to accumulate the condensate in which sars-cov-2 may be detected. the application of this method seems justified from a public health perspective. the false positive results that are presently obtained contribute the continued spread of the virus worldwide [38, 39] .the optimization of laboratory diagnostics is the most dynamically developing field in the time of the covid-19 pandemic, supporting contemporary medicine, government decisions and healthcare strategies. the efforts of scientist-clinician teams focus, first of all, upon implementing the most reliable diagnostic tools; however, because covid-19 is a new nosological entity, there are not enough data as of yet that would enable the determination of standards for the interpretation of serological pocts. as with any other infectious diseases, the diagnostic value of a test is not only about the method of collecting the material, the quality of the sample and the equipment applied. equally essential pre-analytical considerations are also the time point when a sample is collected, as well as a suitable procedure (storage and handling) prior to analysis, from the moment of collecting the biological material to the assaying stage. funding: this study received no external funding.the authors declare no conflict of interest.acute respiratory tract infections are a significant cause of morbidity and mortality especially during the winter months. the elderly, the immunocompromised and patients with respiratory problems such as emphysema and asthma are particularly vulnerable to developing severe disease. viruses that commonly cause respiratory illness include influenza virus, parainfluenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), adenovirus, and human metapneumovirus. these viruses produce a range of symptoms including fever, rhinitis, pharyngitis and myalgia to more serious complications such as bronchitis, bronchiolitis, pneumonia and death (boivin et al., 2004) . influenza virus and rsv are among the most common viral agents and rapid identification of the aetiology of infection allows better patient management in terms of treatment and infection control (woo et al., 1997) . rapid detection of viral respiratory pathogens is also important for monitoring emerging influenza strains which may cause epidemics or pandemics. conventional detection methods for influenza virus include cell culture, antigen detection, serological tests, and immunofluorescent antibody-based (ifa) methods. however, these tests are either too slow to allow timely diagnosis or they lack sensitivity and speci- * corresponding author. ficity. more recently immuno-chromatographic point of care tests (poct) have been developed which have fast turn around times (aslanzadeh et al., 2008; selvarangan et al., 2008) however these assays often have limitations in sensitivity and specificity when compared to molecular tests (boivin et al., 2004) . the development of molecular diagnostic assays with superior sensitivity and significantly reduced turn around times when compared to conventional methodologies has led to them being considered to be the "gold standard" for respiratory virus detection (leven, 2007) . numerous real-time rt-pcr assays for the detection of influenza virus and rsv have been described in either monoplex (gueudin et al., 2003; kuypers et al., 2004; smith et al., 2003; stone et al., 2004; van elden et al., 2001) or multiplex format (brittain-long et al., 2008; gunson et al., 2005; hymas and hillyard, 2009 ). the regional health protection agency newcastle laboratory tests all respiratory samples with a panel of "in-house" multiplex real-time pcr assays which target influenza a and b, parainfluenza 1-4, rsv a and b, rhinovirus, adenovirus, human metapnuemovirus; and coronaviruses nl63, oc43, 229e. however it is not feasible to provide urgent out of hours testing based on this multiplex format therefore alternative virus specific testing is preferable for urgent individual samples. a rapid, real-time pcr-based diagnostic test for rsv and influenza a and b which can be performed in a relatively short turn around time would be extremely useful for patient management (goodrich and miller, 2007) . in addition, the resulting improved treatment of patients presenting with respiratory illness would help infection control, reduce nosocomial spread, and reduce the length of patient hospital stay (woo et al., 1997) .the smartcyler is a rapid random access, modular real-time pcr instrument which can perform 40 pcr cycles in less than 1 h (habib-bein et al., 2003) . the aim of this study was to evaluate two multiplex real-time rt-pcr assays on the rapid smartcycler real-time pcr system for the detection of influenza a and b and rsv. the assays used the respiratory syncytial virus analyte specific reagent (asr) bead and the influenza a/b asr bead (cepheid, sunnyvale, usa) which contain pcr primers and probes in a lyophilized bead format. the rsv asr bead contains primers and fam-labelled probes targeting the n (nucleocapsid protein) gene of rsv types a and b. the influenza a/b asr bead contains primers and a fam-labelled probe and an alexa fluor 532-labelled probe for the detection and differentiation of influenza a and b, respectively. when reconstituted the asr bead provides sufficient primers and probes for two 25 l pcr reactions. the influenza a and b asr reagents have not been evaluated previously to determine their utility for the detection of influenza in clinical samples from patients with respiratory disease. in this study, the asr reagents were evaluated in real-time rt-pcr assays using the smartcycler real-time pcr instrument. the new assays were applied to the detection of influenza virus and rsv in a collection of samples previously tested using an "in-house" multiplex real-time rt-pcr assay.a collection of 196 respiratory samples from patients with acute respiratory tract infections were tested in this study. samples were collected previously during the 2004-2008 winter respiratory seasons. sample types included nasopharangeal aspirates, nasal swabs, throat swabs, sputum, tracheal secretions, and bronchoalveolar lavages. of the 196 samples, 57 had been shown previously to be positive for rsv (38 type a, 18 type b, one dual infection a and b) and 48 samples positive for influenza virus (31 influenza a and 17 influenza b) by two multiplex real-time rt-pcr assays targeting the nucleocapsid protein gene (n gene) of rsv as described previously (gunson et al., 2005) , and the influenza a matrix gene and influenza b n gene as described previously (anon, 2006; curran et al., 2007) . these "in-house" assays were performed using a taqman fast 7500 real-time pcr instrument. the majority of the samples had also been tested by ifa and all ifa negative samples were tested by cell culture. prior to nucleic acid extraction all samples were stored at −80 • c. total nucleic acid was extracted using the roche magna pure instrument and roche magna pure total na large volume kit (roche diagnostics, lewes, uk) according to the manufacturer's protocol. two hundred microlitres of each sample were extracted and the nucleic acid extract eluted in 60 l of elution buffer (roche diagnostics, lewes, uk). prior to pcr testing nucleic acid extracts were stored at −80 • c. the smartcycler rsv assay was applied to 100 samples tested previously by the multiplex "in-house" assay. forty-three samples were negative for rsv by both methods with 56 samples being positive by both assays. one sputum sample was negative by the smartcycler rsv assay although it was positive for rsv a by the "in-house" real-time pcr test. this sample was re-tested by the smartcycler assay however it remained negative for rsv using the new test. of the 56 samples positive for rsv, 13 also contained other co-infecting viruses including rhinovirus (n = 8), bocavirus (n = 2), human metapneumovirus (n = 2), adenovirus (n = 1) and coronavirus 229e (n = 1). of the 43 samples negative for rsv in the smartcycler assay, 27 were shown to be positive for other viruses including rhinovirus (n = 14), human metapnuemovirus (n = 5), bocavirus (n = 3), parainfluenza virus 1 (n = 1), parainfluenza virus 2 (n = 1), parainfluenza virus 4 (n = 3). amplification of nucleic acids from any of these 27 samples produced no cross-reactions with the smartcycler rsv assay. overall, when compared to the "inhouse" multiplex assay the smartcycler rsv assay demonstrated a specificity of 100% and a sensitivity of 98.2%.of the 96 samples investigated, 39 were negative and 55 were positive for influenza virus by both the smartcycler and "in-house" multiplex pcr methods. the 55 positive samples included 37 positive for influenza a and 18 positive for influenza b. one sample was positive for both influenza a and b using the "in-house" multiplex assay however only influenza a was detected using the smartcycler assay. two nasal/throat swab samples were positive for influenza a by the "in-house" pcr but were negative by the smartcycler influenza assay and on re-testing these samples remained negative. of the 39 samples negative by the smartcycler influenza assay 19 were shown to be positive for other viruses including rhinovirus (n = 6), human metapnuemovirus (n = 2), bocavirus (n = 2), parainfluenza virus 1 (n = 2), rsv (n = 2), adenovirus (n = 2), coronavirus oc43 (n = 2), and coronavirus 229e (n = 1). amplification of nucleic acids from any of these 19 samples produced no cross-reactions with the smartcycler rsv assay. overall, when compared to the "in-house" multiplex assay the smartcycler influenza assay demonstrated a specificity of 100% and a sensitivity of 96.5%.the development of multiplex real-time pcr-based methods for the detection of respiratory viruses has significantly improved the diagnosis of respiratory disease (leven, 2007) . multiplex assays targeting a wide range of individual viruses are now considered to be the gold standard for diagnosis of viral respiratory disease and test results can be achieved within a few hours of samples being received in the laboratory (stone et al., 2004) . however the majority of laboratories batch samples together and perform one or more test runs per day therefore turn around times can be slower than other rapid tests such as those used as poct. in addition it is not feasible for many laboratories to provide multiplex pcr testing outside of the normal laboratory opening hours therefore alternative pcr-based methods which can be performed using a random access real-time pcr instrument would shorten turn around times with obvious benefits for patient care.in this study two rapid real-time pcr assays were evaluated for the detection of influenza and rsv in respiratory samples using the smartcycler real-time pcr instrument. the rsv and influenza assays were applied to a total of 196 samples tested previously in our "in-house" multiplex real-time pcr test and comparison of the results demonstrated a concordance between the two tests of 98.5%. the smartcycler rsv test failed to detect rsv in a single sample which was detected by the "in-house" multiplex assay. this false negative result may have been due to degradation of the sample because the extracted nucleic acids were stored at −80 • c for greater than 1 month following testing by the "in-house" multiplex assay prior to re-testing by the smartcycler assay. the sample also produced a high ct value (38.2) in the original "in-house" assay indicating it contained relatively low numbers of target virus. the smartcycler influenza assay failed to detect influenza a in two samples which were positive for influenza a in the "in-house" multiplex assay. again the extracted nucleic acid from these samples had been stored at −80 • c for greater than 1 month therefore sample degradation may have occurred. one of these samples also had a relatively high ct value (40.5) in the "in-house" assay indicating that it contained low levels of target virus. these three samples were re-tested in the "in-house" assays and the original results confirmed. the smartcycler assay also failed to detect influenza b in a sample demonstrated to contain both influenza a and b. again this may have been due to sample degradation during storage or alternatively this may reflect differences in the sensitivity of the smartcycler assay for the different influenza types. finally these false negative results in both the smartcycler rsv and influenza assays may be due to sequence variation in the target gene of the assays which may adversely affect the binding of the primers or probes.interestingly the ct values generated by the smartcycler assays for the positive samples were lower than those of the "in-house" test (e.g. influenza b mean reduction in ct value was 7.4, sd = 1.6) indicating that the smartcycler assay may be more sensitive than the "in-house" test. alternatively these differences may be due to the way the two real-time pcr instruments calculated their ct values relative to the automatically calculated threshold and cut offs. the positive predictive value of the smartcycler tests were 100% for both rsv and influenza and the negative predictive value was 97.7% and 95.1% respectively for rsv and influenza.the smartcycler asr bead-based primers and probes simplified the assay preparation steps, reducing the time taken for assay set up considerably when compared with our "in-house" assay. if this assay plus the random access real-time pcr system was used in conjunction with a rapid nucleic acid extraction instrument such as the qiagen ez1 instrument (barkham, 2006; dundas et al., 2008) sample turn around times could be signifi-cantly reduced and pcr assay set up simplified. this may facilitate the more urgent testing of respiratory samples by real-time pcr methods outside of the normal working day or outside of the batched runs during normal working day. overall the asr beadbased assay and the smartcycler instrument provide sensitive, specific and rapid detection of rsv and influenza virus in clinical samples from patients with respiratory disease. introduction of rapid real-time pcr methods for the diagnosis of illness caused by rsv and influenza, particularly outside of the normal laboratory working day would improve patient management and treatment.new and emerging infectious diseases continue to plague the world, and there is significant concern that recombinant infectious agents can be used as bioterrorism threats. microbiologists are increasingly being asked to apply their scientific knowledge to respond to these threats. the recent pandemic caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus illustrated not only how a newly evolved pathogen can rapidly spread throughout the world but also how the global community can unite to identify the causative agent and control its spread. rapid response research mechanisms, such as those used by the sars accelerated vaccine initiative (savi), have shown that the application of emergency management techniques, together with rapid response research, can be highly effective when applied appropriately to new infectious diseases.throughout human history, infectious diseases have had an important role in shaping and evolving our world. pandemics and epidemics have been commonplace as the density of the world's population and international travel and trade have increased to support the global spread of pathogens. microbial pathogens are constantly evolving, and new pathogens are continually emerging from nature. the recent emergence of many new pathogens, including hiv, enterohaemorrhagic escherichia coli, west nile virus, legionella pneumophila, cryptococcus neoformans subspecies gattii and various influenza a strains, is actually biology taking its normal course, as microorganisms evolve to exploit new or altered ecological niches 1, 2 . therefore, it is no surprise that the first pandemic of the twenty-first century appeared quickly, late in 2002, with the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) causing significant morbidity (approximately 8,500 cases) and mortality (774 deaths), and had an estimated economic impact of us $90 billion worldwide 3 .the sars outbreak provided an excellent opportunity to attempt to harness the power of modern science to provide rapid solutions to a public health emergency and placed pressure on many microbiologists worldwide to identify and sequence the virus, characterize the disease, apply modern epidemiological techniques to track and trace the virus and its origins, and develop strategies to treat and control the pathogen. worldwide, scientists responded to these challenges with extreme vigour, and many achievements were made (fig. 1) , including identifying the causative agent, sequencing its genome, developing animal models of infection and determining where the pathogen originated in nature and how it was globally spread in human communities. however, despite the acquisition of this large body of scientific information, as sars was spreading around the world a method of controlling the virus was required in case it escaped containment measures. this meant that alternative therapeutic and preventative methods were urgently needed.the development of vaccines and other therapeutic agents usually takes at least a decade and costs hundreds of millions of dollars, yet a practical solution for sars was needed before the beginning of the next respiratory virus season. in addition, other new microbial threats are likely to emerge, and scientists will again be asked to provide rapid solutions. so, a fast and successful response to sars could provide an example of how science can be effectively applied in response to other new and emerging diseases.unfortunately, the usual scientific process is not designed to be focused on quickly solving a practical problem. grant applications, peer review and funding mechanisms are traditionally not rapid processes. responding to emerging infectious diseases of pressing public health importance requires a scientific process that is significantly different from traditional procedures. such a response must focus the science directly on a practical solution to the problem, and solve several scientific problems in parallel instead of in sequence. the sars pandemic provided the perfect opportunity to attempt to develop such a system. clinical trials, regulatory affairs and international collaborations were all developed in parallel instead of sequentially. as soon as the genome became available, a bioinformatics web site was created, which was used by savi scientists as well as many other sars researchers around the world (see sars bioinformatics suite in the online links box). in addition, there was a large demand worldwide for full-length sequenced clones of the various sars coronavirus genes. several programmes were put in place to clone and express viral proteins that could be used both as reagents and in vaccine studies. methods were developed for growing the virus in tissue culture (using vero cells), and a neutralization assay was developed, both of which were necessary for vaccine development.an important factor in producing a vaccine quickly is the early availability of information about the basis for immunological protection against disease. although the immune correlates for protection against sars-cov are not yet completely defined, individuals convalescing from sars are known to develop high titres of neutralizing antibodies 8 . the appearance of these neutralizing antibodies coincided with the onset of resolution of sars pneumonia 9,10 and, as with other coronaviruses 11 , there is an inverse relationship between disease severity and the levels of pre-existing serum antibodies. so, neutralizing antibodies are likely to be important in protection against sars. t-cell immunity is also likely to be necessary for protection from sars, as it is for many other viruses. for instance, low concentrations of cd4 + and cd8 + t cells during a sars infection are correlated with increased disease severity and mortality 12 , and specific human leukocyte antigen (hla) class i alleles have been correlated with sars susceptibility 13 . taken together, the data indicated that a vaccine for sars would need to induce neutralizing antibodies and, possibly, cd4 + and cd8 + t-cell responses. this knowledge proved helpful in selecting vaccine candidates and immunization approaches.there are many potential vaccine strategies that can be considered for the sars-cov, including a whole killed viral vaccine, an attenuated virus, such as adenovirus or vaccinia virus, expressing sars proteins, recombinant sars proteins or dna vaccines. successful vaccines have been developed for animal coronaviruses, indicating that one or more of these strategies might work. information about which sars proteins could be used as candidate vaccine antigens was also obtained from the development of other animal coronavirus vaccines 14 . thesewith the emergence of sars, many scientific groups worldwide began to study the disease. canada was particularly affected by sarsthere were 438 cases, 44 deaths and a world health organization (who) travel health advisory was issued -and therefore had a strong interest in the pandemic 3, 4 . the michael smith genome sciences centre in vancouver had an emergency management plan in place that allowed the entire facility to be dedicated to the rapid sequencing of an infectious agent. in collaboration with the british columbia centre for disease control and health, which supplied the sars clinical virus strain (known as toronto 2 or tor-2), this centre generated the first genome sequence of the sars-cov within six days of receiving the viral nucleic acid 5 . several other groups followed with other genome sequences shortly thereafter 6, 7 .the key to sequencing the genome so quickly was having a rapid response emergency management plan already in place. this entailed a top-down management approach to be taken, with team members in parallel projects able to dedicate their time and expertise to their assigned tasks. this success, coupled with the concern that, in canada, quarantine would not contain the sars-cov, led to the provincial british columbia government providing cdn $2.6 million in april 2003 to establish the sars accelerated vaccine initiative (savi) that was dedicated to developing a human sars vaccine as rapidly as possible. a vaccine approach was chosen for several reasons, including previous success with animal coronavirus vaccines, the ease of product development and the use of vaccines to prevent infection in cases of defined risk exposure (such as healthcare workers in hospitals).savi was established to apply rapid response research to a public health issue. it was designed with only one goal -to develop a safe and effective human sars vaccine as rapidly as possible. all savi-funded vaccine-development initiatives were evaluated with this goal in mind. a senior management committee was established that had significant expertise in animal coronavirus vaccines and epidemiology, clinical trials and grant-funding mechanisms. an emergency management strategy was adopted, with weekly teleconferences between all members, as well as regular management committee discussions. parallel research strategies were designed, with vaccine development as the ultimate goal. so, in addition to identifying vaccine candidates, immunological assays, intellectual property. to successfully commercialize a vaccine, a strong intellectual property position is needed 25 . savi was fortunate in that it is partnered with the group that sequenced the sars-cov, and they protected the genome sequence 5 . however, additional intellectual property issues will arise as the project progresses, and there will also be preexisting intellectual property in place that must be incorporated, such as the use of live attenuated vectors or protein expression systems. savi decided to not make itself a legal entity, but to leave the ownership of intellectual property with the inventors and their home universities. this saved significant time, as intellectual property mechanisms are already established at the various partner universities, and issues such as royalty rates are already settled. an appropriate way to deal with intellectual property remains a significant challenge worldwide for the development and commercialization of sars vaccines.regulatory issues. regulatory issues are another consideration when rapidly developing a vaccine. vaccines often take many years to develop, yet the need for a sars vaccine was urgent. so, at the beginning of the initiative, discussions were held with the appropriate regulatory bodies (health canada and the us fda) to gain their support and obtain documents describing regulatory guidelines for biological agents. in addition, savi worked with regulatory authorities and consultants to define the steps that were needed for vaccine development, including the use of clinically approved cell lines for vaccine generation, avoidance of animal products for vaccine production, identification of plasmids another important consideration in vaccine testing is the availability of a relevant animal infection and challenge model. when the vaccine studies were initiated, there were no animal models available, but it was assumed that they would be developed quickly. as rapid vaccine development was the ultimate goal, it was decided, assuming they became available, to initially test the vaccine candidates in the most relevant animal infection model possible -non-human primates. small-animal vaccine models can be misleading and time consuming. soon after, a macaque infection model was published 17, 18 , and significant efforts were made to secure primates for these studies. however, recently there have been significant concerns that primate models are not the best infection models, and tests in many laboratories indicate that they only exhibit mild respiratory infections 19 .at present, ferrets seem to be the most relevant disease model 20 , and relevant murine models have been developed that allow viral replication 21 . owing to the high costs of doing primate experiments in biosafety level iii containment facilities and the concerns about the relevance of a primate challenge model, at present savi vaccines are first tested in ferrets and mice, and then in non-human primates or other small animals for safety and immunogenicity. similarly, other groups are testing adenoviruses 22 , modified vaccinia viruses 23 and a dna vaccine 24 in both murine and macaque models. although this additional step adds time to the project, it is necessary and imperative to show protection in an animal infection model that closely mimics human disease. it was anticipated that testing in multiple animal models would also help eliminate concerns regarding vaccine-induced immune enhancement or immunopathology 14 .in addition to the fundamental scientific questions associated with vaccine development, there are several related issues that impacted directly on the success of the project (fig. 3) .include the spike (s) surface glycoprotein that is found on the viral surface (giving the viral particle a 'crown' and therefore its name) and the nucleocapsid (n) protein that is found inside the viral particle and which packages the rna viral genome (fig. 2) . deciding on which antigens and which vaccine approach to use posed significant challenges, as each has both advantages and disadvantages.most research groups chose a particular vaccine method that they were familiar with. by contrast, savi chose to develop three vaccine approaches in parallel, only making the final decision on which candidate should progress to human clinical trials after a direct comparison of the three vaccines in relevant animal infection models. this strategy also provided the opportunity to use more than one vaccine in a prime-boost strategy if necessary. although this approach initially required more work, it was thought that it would significantly increase the likelihood of a successful vaccine being developed. so, work began on the three strategies: developing whole killed inactivated virus; developing a recombinant s protein; and modifying adenovirus and vaccinia virus to express the sars-cov s and n proteins. both whole killed virus and recombinant s protein were targeted at inducing neutralizing antibodies, whereas the adenovirus and vaccinia virus vectors were targeted at inducing both cellular immunity and neutralizing antibodies. as the and proved important in bringing together disparate research communities into a common effort. researchers who obtained funding are still held accountable to standard grant regulations and research guidelines, including adequate accounting and reporting on completion of the project. a project director periodically reviews progress with each of the funded collaborators to ensure adequate progress and relevance, as well as coordinating diverse research groups.international collaboration and vaccine development. as sars was a pandemic, international coordination and collaboration was essential. the who had an important role in coordinating responses during and following the epidemic. in addition, in october 2003, the who hosted a meeting in geneva that was attended by nearly all of the main research groups working on the sars-cov and sars vaccines. this meeting was useful in many respects, including allowing the various groups to discuss strategies and progress, resolving intellectual property and regulatory issues, and selecting and developing animal models. several additional collaborations were formed at this meeting, as well as a better understanding of where the world stood with regard to vaccines. more recently, in february 2004, the who held a meeting in rotterdam to reach a consensus regarding which animal models represent the best infection models to test sars vaccine candidates. although a macaque model has been described for sars 17 , there were still questions regarding its suitability for vaccine testing. at least three north american laboratories have had little success in observing lung pathology and severe clinical signs in macaques after live sars-cov challenge 19 . factors such as the dose or strain of sars-cov, the route of administration and the day of autopsy might account for the variability between the laboratories.the consensus at the who meeting in rotterdam was that standardization of conditions for sars-cov challenge was needed in the different laboratories before nonhuman primates could be used for vaccine testing. some strains of mice, such as balb/c and c57, have been shown to support sars-cov replication, but do not demonstrate significant pathology or clinical disease 21 . other small-animal models for sars such as ferrets 20 and hamsters (unpublished observations at the who meeting in rotterdam, 2004; ref. 19) also support viral replication and demonstrate some level of pathology that is similar to humans. these animals offer in canada and the united states were extremely supportive and willing to work according to a 'risk-benefit' platform and if sars had developed into the next major pandemic, they would have done everything possible to expedite the approval process to counter the risk of disease. now that sars is currently not a major threat, most agree that normal regulatory approval mechanisms should apply, and expediting vaccine approval might be unnecessary.handling the media. any major disease outbreak receives significant media attention, and there is a continual demand for updates about research progress into potential therapeutics and preventatives such as vaccines. therefore, mechanisms need to be in place to deal responsibly with media requests as these projects progress. consequently, a system was established that enabled effective communication with the media as needed and provided a consistent message that handled (but did not expand) expectations and provided important messages about the progress of the project. media briefings were also provided every six months. scientific symposia were held every six months to keep the entire savi group of collaborators abreast of progress being made in different areas of the project.funding mechanisms. an important hurdle in rapid response research is distributing funds to researchers in a timely manner. the timeframe from starting to write a peerreviewed grant application to when funds are received in the laboratory is usually more than one year, which is unsuitable for rapid response research. so rapid funding mechanisms must be established to ensure that appropriate research is carried out in a timely manner. when savi was established, the michael smith foundation for health research, the provincial health research funding agency in british columbia, was used to control and dispense the research funds. using a five-member senior management committee consisting of senior scientists, a rapid review mechanism was established. short (2-page), focused research proposals, together with a proposed research budget, which dealt directly with aspects of vaccine development, were solicited and accepted from the research community. the committee reviewed and evaluated the projects on the basis of scientific merit and the direct need for the project, and funds were dispersed to successful applicants immediately -usually 24 hours after the application was submitted. while ensuring that applications were peer-reviewed, this rapid review process significantly enhanced the speed of the project, nature reviews | microbiology volume 2 | july 2004 | 6 0 5 infectious diseases that was exemplified by sars is patient consent. when clinical samples are taken, especially early during the outbreak, the potential research uses of such samples are not known, and it is difficult to specify exactly what they will be used for. however, having a large collection of clinical samples is crucial to understanding an infectious disease, and mechanisms for collecting and sharing such samples must be in place before an outbreak occurs.for any vaccine or therapeutic product to be used in human clinical trials, it has to be made under stringent gmp 26 . ideally, all rapid response research would be done under such conditions from the start, but this is nearly impossible, especially with infectious agents. instead, once a candidate vaccine or therapeutic is identified, the work has to be reproduced under such conditions, which significantly lengthens the production time. at the outset, if standardized cell lines (such as vero cells), attenuated viral vectors (such as adenovirus) and adjuvant (alum) are chosen that are already approved for human use, significant time can be saved in product development 15, 26 . sars is particularly challenging as it requires biosafety level iii containment. all animal studies must be done in stringent containment facilities, of which there are only a few in the world. similarly, if a whole killed viral vaccine is to be manufactured, highly specialized biosafety level iii gmp facilities are needed, again few of which exist worldwide 27 . owing to the perceived threat of biological agents, several biosafety level iii containment facilities have recently been approved for construction. however, performing rapid response research on highly infectious agents that are new to the world places a major burden on such specialized facilities, especially biosafety level iii large animal (primate) and gmp facilities. efficient use of such space requires global cooperation and judicial prioritization.commercialization. commercialization of a sars vaccine raises several complex issues. as it seems that sars is not a worldwide threat at present, there is not a significant commercial market. so vaccine companies are unwilling to spend the hundreds of millions of dollars that are needed to commercialize a vaccine, as they are unlikely to recover their expenses 28 . there are several reasons why industry is unwilling to commit to developing specific vaccines. first, the huge cost of vaccine development (up to us $500 million) and the small and uncertain revenue from traditional vaccines have made vaccine manufacturersthe ability to do rapid research in response to an emerging infectious disease has significant appeal. as sars was seen as a major public health threat in canada and several countries in asia, these countries in particular felt compelled to act.canada indicated that the concept of working together in rapid response research towards a sars vaccine was rapidly accepted by all researchers who were approached. in fact, other scholars from the non-life-science areas of academia also freely offered their time and skills to deal with related problems. all scientists were willing to contribute their relevant expertise and a portion of their laboratory's resources to work towards a common goal, with no particular individual gain immediately obvious. although this willingness is probably accentuated when one perceives a significant threat to one's country, it is also a powerful motivating factor when seeking to obtain particular expertise during rapid response research. similarly, international cooperation and coordination are needed to avoid significant duplication and redundancy of efforts, as well as to share progress. in an ideal situation, expertise around the world would be coordinated, but this poses major logistical and political challenges. the who had a pivotal role throughout the sars pandemic, not only in tracking the disease, but also by convening meetings of researchers working on potential vaccine therapeutics and diagnostics. in the face of future pandemics, a coordinated international rapid response research approach will be essential to develop new ways of controlling these scourges. a main difficulty with sars research was the limited availability of clinical samples to researchers and the standardization of such samples. some countries had national centres for disease control that collected and coordinated clinical samples, whereas in others it was left to the individual hospitals. an important problem with studying emerging an alternative inexpensive disease model compared with non-human primates, although reports on the use of these small animals for sars-cov vaccine testing is scarce. however, despite these different animal models, no single animal species has been shown to reproduce all of the clinical signs and lethality that is observed in humans that are infected with sars-cov.anticipating that a re-emergence of sars would be most likely to occur close to its original site of origin, savi initiated a collaboration with chinese scientists in guangdong province in southern china. this resulted in a bilateral agreement to work together on sars vaccine trials. this collaboration was greatly facilitated by strong political support from both china and canada, two countries that were significantly affected by sars. the most obvious question is how sars vaccines will be evaluated for human efficacy given the lack of human sars cases globally this year. ordinarily, phase i to phase iii human clinical trials are designed to provide an understanding of the safety and immunogenicity of the vaccine in humans as well as identification of correlates of immunity. without an outbreak of sars that could be used to test the efficacy of the vaccines in humans, licensure of the vaccine under emergency conditions might have to take place under the fda's 'animal efficacy rule' , which states that vaccines or other biological agents can be licensed if they meet two criteria: human safety and the demonstration of adequate protection against a deliberate infection challenge in two species of animals (see vaccine policy in the online links). for the sars vaccines to go directly from animals to humans under these conditions, vaccine efficacy and safety must be evaluated in animals followed by phase i safety evaluation and immunogenicity testing in healthy human volunteers. such a phase i study is currently ongoing in china with an inactivated sars virus 19 . at present, there are not enough sars cases to test the vaccine further in phase ii and iii trials. despite the lack of an ongoing sars threat, rapid response initiatives such as savi will continue to be necessary as it is important to have a vaccine available should sars return. furthermore, such initiatives are strongly supported by internationally recognized scientists, each with a strong expertise in a particular area of research and development. this is in contrast to pharmaceutical companies where product focus is more diffuse and the expertise is suitable for gmp vaccine manufacturing and organizing clinical trials in humans."the concept of working together in rapid response research towards a sars vaccine was rapidly accepted by all researchers who were approached. all scientists were willing to … work towards a common goal"the recent novel corona virus/severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2 or 2019-ncov) pandemic, and the subsequent disease caused by the virus (coronavirus disease 2019 or covid-19), has generated global concern given its rapid spread in multiple countries and possible fatal progression of the infection. initially, many patients reported exposure at a large seafood and animal market in wuhan, china, suggesting animal-to-person transmission of the virus. however, since then many patients have reported no exposure to animal markets, indicating that person-to-person transmission is occurring. there is currently no vaccine or targeted therapeutic for sars-cov-2. sars-cov-2 infection is difficult to diagnose early in infection as patients can remain asymptomatic or present with non-specific clinical symptoms including fever, cough, or shortness of breath. symptoms may appear in as few as 2 days or up to 2 weeks after exposure [1] . quantitative reverse transcription pcr (qrt-pcr) for covid-19 in respiratory samples is currently the standard for diagnostic molecular testing. however, this requires expensive equipment and trained personnel.reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (rt-lamp) is a one-step nucleic acid amplification method based on pcr technology that has been used to diagnose infectious diseases [2] . rt-lamp has several advantages making it attractive for clinical utility. this includes high specificity and sensitivity, and ability to be completed in less than an hour. furthermore, it can work at various ph and temperature ranges which is advantageous for clinical samples [3] . lastly, the reagents are relatively inexpensive and can be stable at room temperature. we have previously used rt-lamp to detect zika virus in clinical serum and urine samples, as well as in crude lysates of single mosquitos [4, 5] .this study describes an rt-lamp methodology that can detect sars-cov-2 in simulated patient samples as well as clinical samples in 30-45 minutes. the test could be used at the point-of-care by field and local personnel for the rapid diagnosis of individuals for optimal treatment, isolation, and rapid contact tracing. this methodology could be rapidly developed for the investigation of outbreaks of unknown respiratory diseases where the genetic sequence of the pathogen is known.the consensus sequences of 23 different sars-cov-2 strains (epi_isl_403929,  epi_isl_403930, epi_isl_403931, epi_isl_402129, epi_isl_402130, epi_isl_402132,  epi_isl_402128, epi_isl_402124, epi_isl_402127, epi_isl_402121, epi_isl_402119,  epi_isl_402123, epi_isl_403962, epi_isl_403963, epi_isl_404227, epi_isl_404228,  epi_isl_403932, epi_isl_403933, epi_isl_403934, epi_isl_403935, epi_isl_403937,  epi_isl_403936, epi_isl_406596, epi_isl_406844, epi_isl_407079, epi-isl_407214) were established when aligned with lasergene megalign (dnastar) to identify areas of sequence conservation. to improve specificity, areas of divergence of sars-cov-2 (genbank mn908947) with the sequence-related coronavirus, bat severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-like coronavirus (genbank ky417152.1), were identified using blast 2 (basic local alignment search tool; ncbi). an area of genbank mn908947 sequence that had high homology with other sars-cov-2 strains and was divergent for bat sars-like coronavirus was then targeted for rt-lamp primer design. the genome equivalent of the sars-cov s coding region and orf8 were purposely avoided. the s coding region was demonstrated to have the most mutations among sars-cov isolated strains, suggesting this region may be prone to positive selective pressure, and there were major deletions observed in the orf8 region of the sars-cov genome variants [6] . rt-lamp primers were designed using lamp designer 1.15 (premier biosoft), and blasted using primer-blast (ncbi) against genomes of interest. primer selection was prioritized as described in "a guide to lamp primer designing" (https://primerexplorer.jp/e/v4_manual/). in addition, primers were selected to not have four guanines in a row to prevent the formation of tetraplex structures which could disrupt the rt-lamp reaction. rt-lamp primers are listed in table 1 and correspond to the nonstructural protein 3 (nsp3) coding region of open reading frame (orf) 1ab. primer sets include an outer forward primer (f3), outer backward primer (b3), forward inner primer (fip), backward inner primer (bip), loop forward primer (lf), and loop backward primer (lb). primers were ordered from integrated dna technologies and the fips and bips are hplc purified.sars-cov-2 pcr-standard was designed from nucleotide 2941-3420 of the sars-cov-2 wuhan-hu-1 complete genome (mn908947). the sars-cov-2 ssdna control fragment was synthesized through invitrogen geneart. an oligo of genbank mn908947.3 was used as there were no commercial sources for a sars-cov-2 control plasmid at the time this paper was prepared. the fragment was reconstituted to 10ng/μl and used for lamp and qpcr experiments. approximate copy numbers were calculated using a copy number calculator [7] . rt-lamp and pcr controls for middle east respiratory syndrome (mers), betacoronavirus england-1 (btcov), and murine hepatitis virus (mhv) were similarity made. we were unable to make an rt-lamp and a pcr control for any sars sequences as this is controlled under european union export regulations.all studies are in compliance with ethical practices and were approved by beaumont health's institutional review board (irb approval #2020-040 and 2016-044). for studies using samples from healthy participants, the study participants were provided with an information sheet and gave their informed verbal consent to participate, as approved by the irb. since samples were deidentified and the study presented no more than minimal risk or harm to the subjects, written consent was not obtained as the principal risk would be potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality. the irb determined that a waiver of consent documentation was appropriate given the study involves no more than minimal risk to human participants per the code of federal regulations. submission of the sample was interpreted as the participants' informed consent to participate. for studies using samples from with covid-19 symptoms, full written consent was obtained and documented in the patients' medical record. all experiments were performed in accordance with the ethical standards noted in the 1964 declaration of helsinki and its later amendments.samples from multiple, consenting, adult volunteers were tested from either fresh or frozen state for each assay. fresh samples were kept on ice until analysis. for whole mouth saliva and oropharyngeal swabs, participants refrained from eating or drinking anything other than water for 5 minutes prior to collection and rinsed their mouths with water prior to collection. oropharyngeal swab and nasopharyngeal swabs samples were collected using a flocked sterile plastic swab applicator which was placed in 3ml of a universal media for viruses, chlamydiae, percent mismatch for rt-lamp primers was determined by aligning the sars-cov-2 genome (wuhan city, hubei, 2019-12-26, genbank id mn908947) to 22 other sequenced sars-cov-2 strains from various locations around the world using the global initiative on sharing all influenza data (gisaid), epiflu database and the blast global alignment tool [8, 9] . rt-lamp primers were also compared to other coronaviruses using the blast global alignment tool to determine specificity and percent mismatch using the same method. percent mismatch was calculated using the following equation:all set-up and execution of rt-lamp reactions were done in an enclosed room using designated pipettes and filter tips. analysis and imaging took place in separate rooms to prevent contamination. rt-lamp reactions were executed in a total volume of 25μl of 1x isothermic amplification buffer, 1. for testing, a serial dilution of sars-cov-2 ssdna control fragment was made, from 2 ng to 0.06 fg. nuclease-free ddh 2 o was used as a no template control. no template control or sars-cov-2 was added to sybrselect master mix (thermofisher), and 10 μm forward and reverse primers with a total reaction volume of 20 μl. primers used were f 5'-atttggtgc cacttctgctgc -3' and r 5'-tcactgccgtcttgttgacca -3'. cycling conditions were 50˚c for 2 minutes and 95˚c for 10 minutes, followed by 40 cycles of 95˚c for 15 seconds and 60˚c for 1 minute, performed on a quantstudio 3 pcr system (applied biosystems).1:10 sybr green i (life technologies) dilution was made in tae buffer, then 2 μl of the sybr dilution was added to the rt-lamp reactions. the visual change of color (orange to yellow) can be used to identify positive amplifications. in addition, the sybr green i pcr tubes were imaged under uv light in the bio-rad chemidoc xrs+ imaging system as the reaction creates a fluorescent output. one half of the rt-lamp reaction was electrophoresed along with invitrogen low dna mass ladder on a 2% agarose gel in 1x tae buffer (40 mm tris, 20 mm acetic acid, 1 mm edta) at 90 v for 90 minutes. gels were imaged under uv light using the bio-rad chemidoc xrs+ imaging system. lanes containing a laddered banding pattern were qualified as a positive amplification. clinical samples were considered positive for rt-lamp products if they had both a fluorescent signal by excitation of uv light and if they had a laddering pattern when run on a gel.to establish the optimal conditions for rt-lamp using a sars-cov-2 pcr-standard designed from nucleotide 2941-3420 of the sars-cov-2 wuhan-hu-1 complete genome (mn908947), several primer sets, ranges of incubation temperatures (57-65˚c), and incubation times (15-45 mins) were tested. the best amplification results were obtained at 63˚c for 30 minutes as indicated by a banding pattern after electrophoresis on a gel (fig 1) . positive reactions containing sybr green i could be observed by naked eye by a color change from orange to yellow (fig 1top panel) , with a fluorescent light in response to uv excitation (fig 1-middle panel) , or by a laddering pattern of bands after electrophoresis on a gel (fig 1-bottom panel) . the rt-lamp reaction required all 6 primers to work under the optimized conditions; removing the forward and backward inner primers or the loop primers did not result in a positive result (fig 1) . in order to determine the lower detection limit of the rt-lamp reaction for sars-cov-2, a dilution series ranging from 10.0 ng to 0.06 fg sars-cov-2 dna olgio was amplified (fig 2) . this corresponds to approximately 3.802×10 10 to 228 copies of virus. the viral load in patients has been reported to range from 641 copies/ml to 1.34×10 11 copies/ml, with a median of 7.99×10 4 in throat samples and 7.52×10 5 in sputum samples [10] . the limit of detection was estimated to be 0.08 fg, which is approximately equal to 304 viral copies. this dilution series was run in parallel with qrt-pcr using primers that targeted this same region of the sars-cov-2 genome; the qrt-pcr ct values for the dilution series are reported in s1 table.to demonstrate the clinical utility of this system for sars-cov-2 detection, we spiked various human specimens with sars-cov-2, middle east respiratory syndrome (mers), betacoronavirus england-1 (btcov), or murine hepatitis virus (mhv) control oligos. mers, btcov and mhv spiked samples were used to test the specificity of the rt-lamp assay. spiked specimens included serum, urine, saliva, oropharyngeal swabs, and nasopharyngeal swabs as we wanted to verify that substances present in these samples would not interfere with rt-lamp. samples were directly used for rt-lamp without performing nucleic acid isolation. only samples containing sars-cov-2, but not mers, btcov, or mhv, had positive rt-lamp reactions indicating specificity of the reaction for sars-cov-2 (fig 3) . furthermore, rt-lamp could be successfully completed using human serum, urine, saliva, oropharyngeal swabs, and nasopharyngeal swabs.the sequences of the rt-lamp primers were also compared to aligned sequences of various strains of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronaviruses (sars) or coronaviruses commonly associated with the common cold (human coronavirus strains 229e, nl63, hku1, or oc43). these other coronaviruses had 27-54% nucleotide mismatch with our rt-lamp sars-cov-2 rt-lamp detection primers, making it highly unlikely they would give a positive rt-lamp result, supporting the specificity of this assay for sars-cov-2 ( table 2 ). given that viruses are prone to genetic mutation, we likewise examined if rt-lamp primers had any mismatch with 27 different isolated strains of sars-cov-2 from various locations. the 27 strains were from different regions of china (hubei, zhejiang, and guangdong providences), france, thailand, finland, united states, and australia. the strains were collected and sequenced from 12/24/2019 to 01/29/ 2020. thus these 27 strains reflect more than one region and time point. there was 0% mismatch with all the strains examined, suggesting that these rt-lamp primers would identify all 27 strains of sars-cov-2 examined (s2 table) .we next sought to determine if rt-lamp could detect sars-cov-2 in samples collected from patients with covid-19. patients with covid-19 symptoms were confirmed positive or negative for sars-cov-2 using standard clinical qrt-pcr testing. using the same rna from the patients that was used for the qrt-pcr testing, rt-lamp was in agreement with the qrt-pcr results in 95% (n = 19/20) of the sars-cov-2 positive by qrt-pcr patients ( fig  4a) , and 90% (n = 18/20) of the sars-cov-2 negative by qrt-pcr patients (fig 4b) . given that spiking nasopharyngeal swabs samples in viral transport media with sars-cov-2 control oligos was able to work with rt-lamp (fig 3) , we next tested to determine if rt-lamp could detect sars-cov-2 directly without rna isolation in these nasopharyngeal swab samples. rt-lamp detected 40% (n = 4/10) of sars-cov-2 positive by qrt-pcr patients, and 100% (n = 10/10) of the sars-cov-2 negative by qrt-pcr patients (fig 5) . the samples that were positive by rt-lamp all had a high level of viremia, as indicated by the ct values less than 24 ct by qrt-pcr. in contrast, all the samples negative by rt-lamp had a ct value greater than 24 ct by qrt-pcr.given the rapid emergence of sars-cov-2 and the severe complications that can result including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), pneumonia, and even death, improved sars-cov-2 rt-lamp detection diagnostic options that are fast, reliable, easy, and affordable are required. this is critical since sars-cov-2 infection can rapidly progress from hospital admission to ards in as few as 2 days, and sars-cov-2 infection can be fatal [1] . qrt-pcr is specific and sensitive. however, qrt-pcr requires trained clinical laboratory personnel to use specialized equipment in a qualified laboratory setting. since this virus is spreading rapidly and is highly contagious, centralized labs have had trouble keeping up with testing demands in part due to a significant shortage in available qrt-pcr tests despite significant investments by local governments and private industry. this feasibility study demonstrated that rt-lamp allows rapid detection of sars-cov-2 in a variety of common human specimens collected for clinical testing, including serum, urine, saliva, oropharyngeal swabs, and nasopharyngeal swabs. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0234682.g005currently, clinical testing for sars-cov-2 is done by central testing laboratories, which may take one or more days. this study sought to improve upon this by developing a potential point-of-care test. point-of-care testing has several advantages for sars-cov-2. point-ofcare testing should be fast, easy to use by a range of users, low cost, and require little if any laboratory infrastructure. furthermore, the test needs to be reliable, sensitive, and specific. rt-lamp meets these requirements and therefore has large value for screening and testing for sars-cov-2 in potentially exposed populations. other groups are working to adopt rt-lamp for sar-cov-2 into alternative readouts. for example, the primers designed by our group along with two other primer sets were adopted for fluorogenic oligonucleotide strand exchange (osd) probes [11] . this method could allow multiplexing and thus more than one genomic target of sars-cov-2 to be included in an assay. furthermore, this group also demonstrated that the rt-lamp primers described here and modified for osd are compatible for rt-lamp with the bst dna polymerase large fragment (bst-lf), which possesses reverse transcriptase ability as well as dna polymerase activity. this detected down to 100 sars-cov-2 genomes [11] and bst-lf can be made by bacteria without a purification step, useful for situations with an interrupted supply chain or in settings that are resource poor. rt-lamp, including the primers described here, are also currently being adopted for lamp-seq [12] . this could allow large scale processing using barcoding and next-generation sequencing to pool samples and subsequently identify positive individuals.rt-lamp was sensitive for detection of sars-cov-2. we were able to detect down to the equivalent of approximately 304 viral copies. bharda et al have also reported that use of all six of our rt-lamp primers can detect down to 100 copies of sars-cov-2 genomic rna [11] . the viral load in patients has been reported to range from 641 copies/ml to 1.34×10 11 copies/ ml, with a median of 7.99×10 4 in throat samples and 7.52×10 5 in sputum samples [10] . as such, rt-lamp is sensitive enough for detection of sars-cov-2 in clinical samples.we sought to determine if this rt-lamp assay worked in a range of different samples that might be collected in a clinical setting or as a possible non-invasive screening tool. this was important to determine since it may not be feasible to always collect certain specimens. for example, swabs used for nasopharyngeal sampling as well as viral transport media has experienced shortages recently. although sars-cov-2 has been reported to not be detectable in serum of all patients [13] , serum may also be difficult to collect from patients who are critically sick or dehydrated, or from elderly, children, and neonates. furthermore, not all biological samples may be compatible with rt-lamp. some sample types may contain chemicals that inhibit nucleic acid assays if the sample is tested directly without first isolating the rna. rt-lamp worked in all the human sample types tested when sars-cov-2 control olgios were spiked into the samples. we tested this in samples collected from several individuals to control for variation in sample composition across different people. we also demonstrated that rt-lamp has similar performance to qrt-lamp in detecting sars-cov-2 in rna isolated from clinical nasopharyngeal samples. overall, rt-lamp was positive for 95% (n = 19/ 20) of samples positive by qrt-pcr and rt-lamp was also negative for 90% (n = 18/20) of samples negative by qrt-pcr. the two samples that were positive by rt-lamp but negative by qrt-pcr could represent false positives, contamination, or increased sensitivity of rt-lamp compared to qrt-pcr. while rt-lamp can be prone to false positives, we have taken several precautions to control for this in our assay set-up and false positives will usually not be positive if the samples are tested again. on retesting these samples, they were still positive which suggests that they are not false positives. while we use good laboratory practice to reduce contamination, we cannot exclude this possibility. lastly, it is possible that rt-lamp can be more sensitive than qrt-pcr as this has been previously described, although one of the samples that was positive by qrt-pcr was negative by rt-lamp [14] .we previously demonstrated that rt-lamp for zikv does not require prior rna isolation from urine or serum samples [4, 5] . the use of unprocessed samples could save considerable time and reduce costs. therefore, we tested rt-lamp with nasopharyngeal swabs placed in viral transport media directly without an rna isolation step. in order to detect low levels of viremia, we increased the sample volume added to the rt-lamp reaction from 2-3 μl and also increased the rt-lamp incubation time from 30 to 45 minutes. rna was also isolated from these samples to verify which samples contained sars-cov-2 by qrt-pcr. rt-lamp detected 40% (n = 4/10) of sars-cov-2 positive by qrt-pcr patients, and was negative for 100% (n = 10/10) of the sars-cov-2 samples also negative by qrt-pcr. the samples that were positive by rt-lamp all had a high level of viremia, as indicated by the ct values less than 24 ct by qrt-pcr. this data suggests that the viral transport media may contain inhibitor(s), possibly glucose, that make rt-lamp less effective. hence, rt-lamp was only able to detect sars-cov-2 in samples with high levels of virus. for clinical utility, rt-lamp has better performance in rna purified samples compared to direct testing of nasopharyngeal swabs placed in viral transport media. it may be that direct testing of nasopharyngeal swabs is possible for clinical utility by rt-lamp if the nasal swabs are placed in an alternative matrix, such as saline, water, or ideally a preservative that can stabilize the rna and render the virus inactive. the potential for direct rt-lamp testing of other sample types, such as saliva, is also possible.primers were designed for a conserved span of sars-cov-2 sequence that was found in 27 isolated sars-cov-2 strains but was a sequence that was also divergent from related coronavirus sars. given that all the isolated strains of sars-cov-2 thus far have shown very little genetic differences, we anticipate that this rt-lamp will detect sars-cov-2 with the same level of confidence as qrt-pcr. as with any molecular test, including pcr, it is possible that viral evolution may impact primer binding, but this can be monitored as new strains are sequenced. of the mutations thus far reported as of april 5, 2020 [15] , none of the reported mutations corresponded to the sequence targeted by these rt-lamp primers. this sars-cov-2 rt-lamp assay was highly specific as it did not give a positive result for mers, btcov, and mhv. the rt-lamp primers also had significant mismatch with numerous strains of sars (27-40% mismatch) and common cold associated human coronavirus strains 229e, nl63, hku1, or oc43 (49-54% mismatch), making it highly unlikely to have crossreactivity with these other respiratory viruses. we tested a range of temperatures from 57˚c to 65˚c; all the temperatures gave comparable results, indicating that rt-lamp for sars-cov-2 has a large working temperature range with an optimal temperate of 63˚c. we also tested a range of incubation times from 15-45 minutes. the optimal time for detection of rt-lamp products was 30-45 minutes, however sars-cov-2 rt-lamp products were detectable by uv light excitation or banding patterns on gels in as little as 15 minutes.this study has several limitations. first, sars-cov-2 is biosafety level 3 so our laboratory was unable to work directly with purified virus. as such, most of the experiments presented here used a nucleotide oligo of sars-cov-2 corresponding to the genbank mn908947 sequence. similarly, we were unable to directly test related coronaviruses and instead used nucleotide oligos from the same region of those viruses. the primers were further evaluated for specificity by blasting them to related coronavirus sequences. however, we have demonstrated that rt-lamp can detect sars-cov-2 in rna isolated from nasopharyngeal swab samples at a similar detection rate with qrt-pcr. furthermore, rt-lamp could detect sars-cov-2 in some nasopharyngeal swab samples directly without an rna isolation step. this does represent a proof-of-feasibility for this assay, in that these rt-lamp primers can detect sars-cov-2 in clinical samples and should be highly specific for sars-cov-2 and not detect other related viruses. although rt-lamp reactions are highly specific, it is not a quantitative test. other groups are working at improving the read outs of rt-lamp assays including the use of smartphone-integrated sensors to make interpretation of the assay even more user-friendly [16] . rt-lamp reactions can have a higher rate of false positives compared to qrt-pcr. as such, we took several precautions including having a lateral work flow for experiments, using filter pipet tips, and including a thermolabile uracil-dna glycosylase (udg) in all reactions to prevent possible carry-over contamination of rt-lamp products from previous reactions. this study was not powered to determine sensitivity in a clinical population. lastly, this is a rapidly developing area of study and all the information presented at the time of publication represent the authors' best knowledge at the time. as our understanding of sars-cov-2 continues to develop, this information may change.here we describe a fast and robust assay for detection of sars-cov-2 in 30-45 minutes. this simple assay could be used outside of a central laboratory on various types of biological samples. this assay can be completed by individuals without specialty training or equipment and may provide a new diagnostic strategy for combatting the spread of sars-cov-2 at the pointof-risk. chancellor.respiratory virus infections represent a major public health problem because of their worldwide occurrence, ease of spread in the community and considerable morbidity and mortality. mortality from respiratory virus infections in healthy individuals in developed countries is rare; however, in less developed countries childhood mortality can be quite high with an estimated 5 million children globally under 5 years dying annually from respiratory virus infections. their worldwide occurrence results in people of all ages being susceptible to respiratory virus infections. however, on average, children are infected two to three times more frequently than adults, with acute respiratory virus infections being the most common infections experienced by healthy children and often resulting in loss of school time and a significant socioeconomic cost in medical visits, medications and parents' loss of work time.most viruses are transmitted by direct contact or droplets, although some are transmitted by aerosols. viruses that primarily infect the respiratory tract include influenza, adenoviruses, parainfluenza viruses, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), coronaviruses, human metapneumovirus, rhinoviruses and enteroviruses. more recently, a new virus, bocavirus, has been identified. influenza, parain-fluenza, human metapneumovirus (hmpv) and rsv occur in epidemics while adenovirus, coronavirus and rhinoviruses occur endemically. other viruses which can cause respiratory diseases, more commonly in immunosuppressed people, include measles, varicella zoster virus (vzv), herpes simplex virus (hsv) and cytomegalovirus (cmv).aetiological diagnosis of viral respiratory tract illness requires laboratory confirmation as the symptoms and signs of the clinical illness lack specificity to permit aetiological recognition on clinical grounds alone. development of safe chemotherapeutic agents and highly immunogenetic and protective vaccines for each of the individual respiratory viruses is a continuing priority: except for influenza virus, this goal remains elusive.respiratory virus infections often have a seasonal distribution, especially in temperate climates, and while the peak incidence varies year to year there is often a predominant seasonal occurrence. rsv and influenza both have a peak incidence in winter and these peaks usually do not coincide but overlap. parainfluenza virus (piv) 3 usually peaks in winter with piv 1 and piv 2 peaking in autumn and early winter. the picornaviridae cause infections all year round with enteroviruses more common in summer and autumn while rhinoviruses are more common in winter and spring. adenoviruses tend to cause infections year round as do the herpesviridae, except for varicella which is more prevalent in the late winter and early spring.viral culture is the original method used for diagnosing respiratory virus infections and culture for viruses using primary and immortalized cells was expanded for wider diagnostic use in the 1950s. the main advantage of traditional cell culture methods is the ability to isolate and identify a wide range of viruses. 1 this has enabled the identification of many viruses, including those commonly causing respiratory infections -influenza, rsv, piv 1-4, adenoviruses, measles, enteroviruses, rhinoviruses, vzv, cmv and hsv. more recently recognized viruses such as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and hmpv have also been grown in cell culture.for virus isolation to be successful careful attention needs to be paid to a number of issues. these include the selection of appropriate patients, collection of adequate specimens, transport of the specimen to the virology laboratory under optimal conditions and processing methods of the clinical samples.respiratory samples for virus isolation include nasopharyngeal aspirates, nasopharyngeal and/or oropharyngeal swabs, nasopharyngeal washes, bronchioalveolar lavages, sputum and lung biopsies. other than open lung biopsies all other specimens are contaminated with commensal respiratory flora. dacron or polyester swabs collected from the respiratory tract should be placed into viral transport medium containing antibiotics. the specimens should be kept cool at 2-8 8c or on wet ice until inoculation of the cell cultures to maintain virus infectivity, especially for labile viruses such as rsv. 2 detection of viruses in cell culture requires considerable expertise and is performed by microscopic examination looking for degenerative morphological changes in the cell monolayer called cytopathic effect (cpe). not all viruses grow in all cell types so clinical specimens are usually inoculated into several types of cells to provide an environment for the isolation of a suitable range of viruses. the use of a broad range of cell types potentially allows for the isolation of agents which are not expected rather than limiting detection to only a few virus types. this approach will also allow the detection of more than one virus in any given specimen which can occur in up to 5-10% of immunocompetent individuals and more frequently in immunocompromised patients especially with viruses which have latency such as cmv and hsv. recently, commercially produced co-cultivated cryopreserved cells have become available for the rapid identification of viruses. r-mix rapid cell culture (diagnostic hybrids) is a patented cell monolayer containing a mixture of a549 and mink lung (mv1lu) cells. 3 after 24-72 h of culture, using pooled or single fluorescein isothiocyanate (fitc)-labelled monoclonal antibodies directed against influenza a and b, rsv, parainfluenza 1-3 and adenoviruses, rapid identification of a respiratory virus infection can be established.growth of a virus in cell culture indicates the presence of viable, replication competent virus, a finding which cannot be determined using antigen or nucleic acid detection. in addition, the propagation of an isolate provides virus for antiviral susceptibility testing, serotyping and epidemiological studies.more recently newer viral culture formats have been developed which allow for more rapid detection of viruses, which is very useful for detection of those viruses which grow slowly in conventional cell culture. decreasing the time until cpe is detectable has been achieved for many viruses by centrifugation of the culture after the sample has been added. as viruses are unable to be centrifuged with conventional centrifuges, the enhanced detection may result from better contact between cells in the specimen and the cell culture thus allowing for earlier and more extensive infection of the cell culture sheet. furthermore, the detection of viral protein production (antigen detection) before there is evidence of cpe in conventional culture has also decreased the time to identify a virus and thus enhanced clinical utility of viral culture testing. the detection of viral protein production is usually performed using a fluorescent-labelled (e.g. fitc) monoclonal antibody directed against a viral protein. processing and reading these cultures is labour intensive; however, most common viruses can be detected in 24-48 h. alternatively enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa) detection of viral proteins in cell culture supernatants has also been performed.to activate the promoter. 4 this technology has been exploited to allow detection of hsv-1 or -2 using the baby hampster kidney (bhk) cell line stably transformed with the promoter of ul39 from hsv linked to the escherichia coli lacz gene. hsv can be detected within 24 h of infection using chromogenic substrate which turns infected cells from colourless to blue. hsv infected cells are easily identified and this technique could be expanded to determine viral titre in specimens if required. this system is marketed by diagnostic hybrids under the name elvis (enzyme-linked virus-inducible system). 5 the ability to detect viruses was significantly enhanced by the development of monoclonal antibodies (mab) directed against specific viral proteins for the viruses hsv-1, hsv-2, vzv, cmv, influenza a, influenza b, parainfluenza 1-3, and adenovirus, and linked to the fluorescent molecule fitc. these staining procedures are rapid: samples are batch run and results are usually available within 1-3 h depending on the number of specimens tested. rapid immunofluorescent (if) staining methods for the direct detection of viral antigens in respiratory specimens have excellent specificity and very good sensitivity. most respiratory viruses produce cpe in conventional cell cultures but often this is slow or very minimal in extent. the rapid detection of the respiratory viruses influenza a, influenza b, parainfluenza 1-3 and adenovirus by if is available in many laboratories and is extremely useful for the detection of these viruses, especially in paediatric patients who shed relatively large amounts of virus and for a longer period than do adults. the performance characteristics of the test depend on the type of specimen, age of the patient, duration of illness, mab reagent and level of expertise of the laboratory staff. generally, if methods for respiratory viruses are a little less sensitive than culture with the exception of rsv. however, the greater sensitivity of rsv if compared with rsv culture is due to the lability of rsv which is rapidly inactivated in samples that are not kept refrigerated and transported to the laboratory quickly for inoculation into cell cultures within a short period after collection of the specimen. the reported sensitivities of if detection of respiratory viruses varies but are broadly 90% for rsv, 80% for influenza a and b, 70% for parainfluenza 1-3 and 50% for adenoviruses. 6 mabs directed against hmpv have been developed and are currently under investigation to establish their clinical utility.membrane-based (cassette-based) enzyme immunoassays (eias), optical immunoassays and immunochromographic or lateral-flow systems have been introduced for less technically demanding detection of respiratory viruses. 7 some can now differentiate viruses, e.g. influenza a from influenza b, rsv from influenza a, and include a positive control to monitor performance of both the assay and the user. a significant aim of the manufacturers of these tests is to allow for testing to occur in the consulting physician's office. these techniques have the advantage of decreasing turn-around time for test results and have considerably simplified the technical component, but these tests are not as sensitive or specific as viral culture or direct if (dif) for detection of respiratory viruses. the positive predictive value of these assays is usually higher when there is a greater prevalence of disease in the respiratory virus season and the virus in question has been shown to be circulating in the community by viral culture or if. during periods of relatively high prevalence positive results can usually be accepted as correct; however, negative results should be confirmed by a second method, e.g. dif or culture. 8viruses can be detected in clinical samples using highly specific nucleic acid probes that are complementary in sequence to viral rnas or viral dnas, or by using a nucleic acid amplification technique such as polymerase chain reaction (pcr), branch chain dna detection (bdna) or nucleic acid sequence based amplification (nasba). these techniques are becoming increasingly available in diagnostic laboratories but testing for multiple viruses using molecular methods is considerably more expensive than with conventional techniques and the methodology needs to be developed in house. evidence would suggest that testing using molecular methods is a little more sensitive than conventional approaches but the information available to date is variable. 9influenza a virus was isolated in 1933, influenza b in 1940 and influenza c virus in 1951. influenza a and b viruses belonged to the family orthomyxoviridae and are in the genus influenzavirus. influenza c virus belongs to a separate genus. influenza virions are enveloped particles (i.e. surrounded by a lipid bilayer membrane of cellular origin) containing a single-stranded negative-sense segmented rna genome that is surrounded by a helical capsid, with influenza a and b containing eight segments of rna and influenza c containing seven segments. only influenza a and b are clinically important. influenza c infection occurs uncommonly and is usually associated with the mild upper respiratory tract illness; rarely it can cause bronchitis or pneumonia.the enveloped virion has peplomers or spikes consisting of two glycoproteins -haemagglutinin (h) which is involved in the attachment of the virus to cells and the initiation of infection, and neuraminidase (n) which facilitates release of newly formed virions from the cells. the two glycoproteins, h and n, exhibit substantial antigenic variation among influenza a viruses with 16 h subtypes and 9 n subtypes recognized. influenza b has only one type of h and n glycoproteins. the occurrence of annual influenza epidemics throughout the world is due to the high rate of antigenic variation from a stepwise mutation of the h and/ or n genes and reflected in variations of the antigenic characteristics of these proteins (and thus escape from immune memory) by the h and n glycoproteins of influenza a and b viruses. this stepwise mutation of h and n results in antigenic drift and the recurrent annual influenza epidemics seen each winter. the virus can infect and produce disease among populations who would otherwise possess immunity from previous infection because their antibodies fail to recognize the new antigenic variation(s). this is the reason for the necessity for annual influenza vaccination with differing serotypes of influenza a and b viruses.additionally, the segmented nature of the influenza genome allows for antigenic shift -the re-assortment of genome segments from two different influenza a viruses with major changes in the h or n proteins or both. it is this major variation in genetic make-up which gives the influenza a virus the potential for the development of global pandemics.during the past few years, new influenza viruses isolated in hong kong, h5n1, appear to have spread from poultry to a small number of persons, who have shown a high mortality rate. this has caused a high degree of global concern as spread of avian influenza a strains to humans is usually very uncommon but several hundred human cases of h5ni infection have been identified in countries across the world. 10 the major limitation to this virus causing a pandemic with a huge impact on health and the economy is the failure of the h5n1 influenza a to establish sustained human-to-human transmission. were this to occur a pandemic would be inevitable. commonly available routine diagnostic tests in laboratories can differentiate influenza a from influenza b; however, they are unable to identify the subtype. identification of the strain of influenza can be performed by a variety of methods at reference laboratories if required. 11 laboratory diagnosis of influenza virus infection by isolation of the virus in cell culture is the 'gold' standard technique. this technique however is slow and does not allow for diagnosis within the time frame for specific treatment. however, virus isolation remains critically important for epidemiological studies, the recognition of specific types of influenza circulating in the community and identification of new types and thus pandemics. the information on influenza types is used to design vaccines for the upcoming influenza season.influenza culture can be performed on nasopharyngeal aspirates, nasopharyngeal swabs, throat swabs and sputum, or lung biopsy tissue or bronchoalveolar lavages. specimens should be kept at 4 8c until processed. more recently, rapid cultures involving growth of influenza for up to 3 days and then labelling cells with antibodies directed against influenza a using an immunoperoxidase or fluorescence technique have been developed. these techniques are rapid and relatively inexpensive but do require a high degree of technical competency. they can accurately differentiate influenza a or b from other viruses but are not suitable for identifying the h type of influenza a. thus these tests would not be diagnostic in the early stages of a pandemic when the new h type of influenza a would be co-circulating with the old h type. direct detection of viral antigen in respiratory specimens can also be performed and is the technique of choice for a rapid sensitive assay. reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) is now available in many laboratories and can differentiate influenza a and b and other viruses. it can also be used to identify differing h or n types of influenza a.detection of an immunological response, with a fourfold or greater rise in serum antibody titres using haemagglutination inhibition or complement fixation techniques when acute and convalescent samples are compared, also provides evidence of acute infection with the influenza a or b virus. serological tests are rarely diagnostic in individual cases within a timeframe that allows judicious use of anti-influenza drugs but they are very useful for tracking epidemics in the community. elisa tests for igm on a single sample are also available. igm and iga specific antibodies against influenza peak about 14 days after infection and igg specific antibody peaks at about 4-7 weeks. serological diagnosis and typing of influenza virus can be complicated by the fact that the anamnestic response to infection is highest for the strain causing the primary infection, even when there is subsequent infection by other strains. this has been termed the 'doctrine of original antigenic sin' and can lead to a lack of strain specificity with serological tests.parainfluenza virus types 1, 2 and 3 occur worldwide and among persons from all age groups. parainfluenza viruses 4a and 4b are much less frequent.parainfluenza 1 occurs in epidemics usually during autumn in alternate years, parainfluenza 2 occurs sporadically and parainfluenza 3 tends to cause annual winter epidemics in temperate climates. parainfluenza 1-3 are the main causes of croup in infants and young children under 5 years of age. parainfluenza 3 can also cause viral pneumonia and bronchiolitis in infants and small children. parainfluenza 4 occurs very infrequently and is usually associated with mild symptoms of upper respiratory tract illness (rhinorrhea, pharyngitis and cough). primary infection with parainfluenza provides some measure of immunity but this immunity is not complete or long lasting and reinfections occur commonly but they are rarely as severe as the illnesses seen with primary infection.laboratory diagnosis of parainfluenza infection is based on viral isolation in tissue culture and this remains the 'gold' standard. respiratory secretion specimens must be kept at 4 8c until processed. parainfluenza grows relatively slowly, taking 3-5 days, and as these viruses do not cause a direct cpe, they are detected using haemadsorption (adsorption of guinea pig red blood cells to infected cells). rapid diagnostic tests for detection of viral antigen in respiratory specimens using dif are specific for each of the parainfluenza virus types and show high sensitivity and specificity. rt-pcr procedures can either detect single viruses or parainfluenza as a group, with high sensitivity and specificity.a serological response with detection of a fourfold of greater rise in serum antibody levels between acute and convalescent samples, collected about 3 weeks after the onset of acute illness, may also provides evidence of infection. antibody can be measured using complement fixation, haemagglutination inhibition or neutralization. interpretation of a serological test relative to the parainfluenza type producing the infection may be complicated by heterotopic antibody responses seen in some infected individuals.rsv was first isolated in 1956 from a laboratory chimpanzee with an illness resembling the common cold, and shortly after it was demonstrated to be a human pathogen. epidemiological studies have shown that rsv represents the single most important cause of serious lower respiratory tract disease, especially bronchiolitis and pneumonia, in infants and children. rsv can cause severe pneumonia and death in persons with underlying immune deficiency.rsv belongs to the family paramyxoviridae and the genus pneumovirus. it is an enveloped virus with a single-stranded, negative-sense, non-segmented rna genome with at least 10 viral proteins. antigenic analysis of rsv has identified two subgroups, a and b, based on their reactivity to a panel of monoclonal antibodies with the b strain further differentiated into two variants, b1 and b2. annual epidemics of rsv occur during winter in temperate climates and the two subgroups usually co-circulate in the same geographical area, often with a predominance of subgroup a.diagnosis of rsv is commonly made by direct examination of respiratory secretions using if or an eia technique. a number of commercial rapid point-of-care diagnostic eia kits which identify rsv antigen in respiratory secretions are now available. these kits provide a high degree of sensitivity or specificity, although they are not as sensitive as dif. rsv can also be grown in cell cultures but the virus is extremely labile and great care must be taken in transport to ensure that is remains at 4 8c. rsv can also be diagnosed serologically using complement fixation by the detection of a fourfold rise in antibody titre. however, like most respiratory virus serology, this testing is not clinically useful because of the delay in diagnosis. furthermore, infants may possess maternal antibodies, thus complicating interpretation of serological data.adenoviruses were isolated from the primary cell cultures of adenoids from children in the early 1950s. adenoviruses are non-enveloped particles which contain linear doublestranded dna surrounded by an icosahedral capsid with fibre-like projections extending from each of the 12 capsid vertices.adenovirus infections occur worldwide and transmission varies from sporadic to epidemic. since adenoviruses are very stable they can be easily transmitted in the environment by fomites. adenoviruses are an important cause of upper and lower respiratory tract disease with types 1, 2, 3, 5 and 7 accounting for about 85% of all infections. rarely, adenoviruses can be isolated from the lungs, livers, kidneys and brains of patients with fatal infection.adenoviruses can be isolated in cell cultures and presumptively recognized by their characteristic cytopathic effect. currently 52 human adenovirus serotypes have been identified and they can be grouped into six subgenera, designated a through f, based on differing classification schemes concerned with the guanine (g) and cytosine (c) content of their dna, determined using dna restriction analysis procedures or pcr. 12 individual isolates can be serotyped using haemagglutination inhibition, neutralization or if. however, this is very time consuming and not routinely available. adenoviruses can be detected directly in respiratory secretions using if, pcr, elisa and immunochromatography. adenovirus infection can be diagnosed serologically using complement fixation by detection of a fourfold or greater rise in antibody titre during convalescence. type-specific antibody responses can be assayed by haemagglutination inhibition, elisa and neutralization assay. however, except for epidemiological investigations, antibody determination is a much less efficient means for determining infection than using direct methods such as pcr or antigen detection.rhinoviruses are a group of more than 100 serotypes and cause more common cold (minor upper respiratory tract) illness than any other virus that infects the respiratory tract. they account for about one half of common colds occurring in children and consequently cause substantial absenteeism from schools. in persons with underlying lung disease and immune disorders, rhinoviruses can cause pneumonia.rhinoviruses belong to the family picornaviridae, which are small, non-enveloped viruses with a single-stranded, positive-sense rna genome. unlike enteroviruses (also picornaviridae), rhinoviruses are inactivated when exposed to mild acid (ph <5), accounting for their failure to infect the gastrointestinal tract.rhinoviruses also caused otitis media in infants and children, being recovered from middle ear fluid in 10% of subacute or chronic cases that are negative for bacteria. recent studies associate rhinovirus infection with exacerbations of asthma and with acute lower respiratory tract disease, especially in persons with chronic obstructive airway disease and cystic fibrosis, and those who are immunocompromised. rhinoviruses prefer to grow at lower temperatures than many other respiratory viruses (33-34 8c), and grow less well at the higher temperature of the lungs than in the nose; however, they can establish infection in the lung.type-specific immunity develops following infection and is characterized by igg neutralizing antibodies in serum and secretions. long lasting immunity best correlates with the level and secretion of iga antibody from the nasal mucous membranes.diagnosis of rhinovirus infection rarely requires laboratory testing but virus isolation, detection of viral rna by rt-pcr, antigen detection by dif in cells from respiratory secretions or detection of a fourfold rise in antibody titres by neutralization test or eia can be performed if required. viral isolation in cell culture is very sensitive, especially when collected early in the illness. viral isolation is labour intensive and requires several days, with confirmation of the individual rhinovirus serotype requiring further antigenic characterization with type-specific antibody. therefore, it is not used as a routine diagnostic test. rt-pcr is unlikely to be available except as a research procedure.the human coronaviruses 229e and oc43 are an important cause of the common cold and belong to the family coronaviridae, genus coronavirus. they are enveloped with a helical nucleocapsid possessing a single-stranded, positivesense rna genome.coronavirus infections occur sporadically throughout winter and spring and are distributed worldwide. they are spread by large droplets via the respiratory route. children commonly experience one coronavirus infection per year, which is about three times more frequently than adults. coronaviruses are associated with 10-15% of upper respiratory tract illness, mainly causing common colds and otitis media. pneumonia rarely occurs with non-sars coronavirus infection.type-specific antibodies to single coronavirus types develop in response to infection and persist for about 4 months. circulating and mucosal antibody confers protection from illness and the possession of coronavirus antibodies increases with age, with circulating antibody found in most children older than 6 years. nevertheless, re-infections are common.laboratory diagnosis of coronavirus infections can be achieved using virus isolation, detection of viral antigen by if, detection of viral rna by rt-pcr and/or demonstration of a fourfold or greater rise in antibody titre during convalescence. virus isolation is complicated and is not generally recommended as a routine diagnostic test since most illnesses are minor common colds. procedures for antibody measurement include elisa, neutralization and hemagglutination inhibition.sars was first recognized in china in november 2002 and rapidly spread around the world with significant morbidity and mortality, and clusters of affected patients, e.g. healthcare workers and family contacts. 13 a coronavirus was identified as the cause. interestingly children and adolescents had significantly less severe disease than adults. 14 the sars coronavirus can be detected using rt-pcr or viral culture. due to the very high transmissibility of this agent and the severe outcomes, any patient considered to have sars should be isolated and laboratory specimens collected with high level precautions. the laboratory should be notified as culture of the sars coronavirus should only be attempted in high biocontainment facilities and specimens may need referral to external public health laboratories.dutch researchers reported the isolation of an agent that induced cytopathic effects on cultured cells, from 28 respiratory specimens collected over a 20 year period. 15 electron microscopy revealed filamentous viral-like particles, suggesting that the agent was a virus. using random arbitrarily primed-pcr, the virus discovered was found to be a member of the paramyxoviridae family and the first human pathogen of the genus metapneumovirus; it was named human metapneumovirus (hmpv). since its initial discovery, hmpv has been identified worldwide. in general, hmpv infection accounts for approximately 2-12% of paediatric lower respiratory illness. 16 rt-pcr detection is the only reliable method of detection at present. there are no standard methods for isolating hmpv in culture, although this is possible, and monoclonal antibodies to detect the virus by dif are being tested for clinical utility.human bocavirus is a newly discovered parvovirus that was first identified in sweden but which occurs globally. 17, 18 bocavirus has been detected in young children with respiratory distress, many with pneumonia with interstitial infil-trates noted on chest x-ray. however, whether bocavirus is a cause of respiratory disease is yet to be fully determined.common colds are very common and are usually selfdiagnosed. the term 'cold' does not constitute a single viral entity but rather a syndrome of nasal congestion, sneezing, rhinorrhoea and pharyngitis, with more severe clinical disease associated with high fever in children. colds are generally self-limiting with a median duration of 9-10 days. many viruses from a variety of viral families may be associated with this syndrome but the pattern of symptoms associated with colds does not appear to vary significantly between agents. approximately 40-50% of colds are found to be associated with rhinovirus infection with other frequently occurring agents, including coronaviruses, enteroviruses and non-primary infections with parainfluenza virus and rsv. transmission of most of the viruses responsible for the common cold is by direct contact and inoculation of virus into the upper respiratory tract. infection with rhinovirus results in the development of long lasting antibody which is protective against re-infection with the same serotype. this also produces a degree of resistance to challenge with heterologous rhinovirus serotypes but this protection is incomplete and short lived.recognized complications of colds include secondary bacterial infection of the paranasal sinuses and/or middle ear and exacerbations of asthma or bronchitis. viral otitis media commonly complicates colds in children, probably due to eustachian tube dysfunction, with rhinoviruses, 19 rsv, influenza virus and adenovirus 20 detected in the middle ear fluids in 20-40% of cases of otitis media with effusion in children.specific viral diagnosis is generally not attempted but if required, isolation of the aetiological agent in cell culture can be performed. rt-pcr may be more sensitive for detection of these agents, especially rhinoviruses, enteroviruses and coronaviruses.pharyngitis is a very common reason for seeking outpatient medical care. it can be divided into a syndrome with nasal symptoms, which has a predominately viral cause, and cases without nasal symptoms and caused by a diverse spectrum of aetiological agents, including group a and non-group a streptococci, chlamydia pneumoniae, mycoplasma pneumoniae and epstein-barr virus.croup or viral laryngotracheobronchitis is a clinically distinct illness that predominately affects children under 3 years of age. the characteristic physical finding in croup is inspiratory stridor.pivs account for about 75% of cases of croup 21 of which piv 1 and piv 2 are the most commonly associated. other causes of croup include rsv, influenza a and b, rhinoviruses, adenoviruses, as well as m. pneumoniae. m. pneumoniae and influenza tend to cause croup in older children. piv 2 and influenza a are associated with more severe disease, 22 but generally the clinical presentation of the croup syndrome due to individual agents is similar. measles, which is a rare cause of croup, can cause especially severe disease. 23 a specific viral cause for croup can be established with viral culture but is not routinely performed as the clinical syndrome is sufficient for diagnosis and management.bronchiolitis is due to inflammation of the bronchioles leading to a clinical syndrome characterised by obstruction of expiratory airflow usually proceeded by nasal congestion and rhinorrhea. there may often be history of exposure to an adult or sibling with a cold or minor respiratory illness or exposure to another infant with bronchiolitis within the day care setting. mild conjunctivitis may occur in about one third of cases and otitis media is recognized in 5-10%. the hospital course is variable but most infants improve within 3-4 days. 24 bronchiolitis is a disease predominately of infancy and the epidemiology of this disease closely parallels the incidence of the major infectious cause, rsv. the peak incident age is in infants between 2 and 6 months with over 80% of cases occurring in the first year of life. 25 rsv causes the majority of cases of bronchiolitis however other respiratory viruses include pivs, influenza and rhinoviruses. piv 3 and adenovirus types 3, 7 and 21 are relatively uncommon but may be associated with more severe disease including bronchiolitis obliterans. 26 rhinoviruses can cause bronchiolitis in infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia. [26] [27] [28] pertussis is occasionally confused with bronchiolitis. anatomic defects such as vascular rings, foreign bodies and gastro-oesophageal reflux are additional differential diagnoses.bronchiolitis and pneumonia are both part of the spectrum of lower respiratory tract involvement, frequently co-exist and cannot be clearly distinguished. pneumonia is defined by the development of abnormalities in alveolar gas exchange accompanied by inflammation of the lung parenchyma, often associated with visible changes on chest xray, ct scanning or gallium scanning. there can be considerable variety to the presentation of viral pneumonia depending on the age and immunological competence of the host, as well as the specific viral pathogen. viral pneumonia is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in individuals with a compromised immune system.the clinical presentation varies considerably with the specific causative agent but typically includes fever and lower respiratory tract symptoms and signs, such as tachypnoea, non-productive cough, wheeze and increased breath sound. very young infants may present with apnoeic episodes with minimal fever. bacterial superinfection is a potential and serious complication of viral lower respiratory tract infection, particularly with influenza. underlying cardiopulmonary disease such as valvular heart disease or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are well recognized risk factors for increased severity of disease with viral pneumonia.diagnosis of the specific cause of an acute pneumonia due to a particular viral agent is complicated by difficulty in obtaining appropriate lower respiratory tract samples for culture and in isolating or detecting certain pathogens, and additionally by the frequent asymptomatic shedding of some viruses, e.g. herpes simplex virus or adenoviruses. while viruses are clearly important and frequent causes of pneumonia in young children, they are less apparent in older children. rsv has been associated with the largest proportion of viral pneumonia in young children, particularly if accompanied by bronchiolitis. 29 piv 3 and influenza a and b are significant causes of pneumonia in children, especially during periods of epidemic prevalence. 30 adenoviruses are frequently isolated from children with respiratory disease and are implicated in about 10% of childhood pneumonias. however, their true impact is difficult to access because of the long intermittent asymptomatic respiratory shedding of adenoviruses in children. adenoviruses have been described as cause of significant outbreaks of viral pneumonia in institutionalized children. pneumonia is the most frequent serious complication of measles. rhinoviruses have been associated with community-acquired pneumonia in children despite their apparent temperature sensitivity. other occasional causes are enteroviruses, hsv and vsv.serological diagnosis essentially establishes a temporal but not a causal relationship between a viral infection and a clinical syndrome, and a positive serological result may be misleading during times of high prevalence of a particular viral agent.the covid-19 pandemic is probably the most challenging health crisis of the modern era. as of april 2020, more than 180 countries around the world have registered at least one confirmed case of the novel coronavirus infection, with more than 2.5 million positive patients around the world [1] .as the world health organization's general director pointed out, testing is crucial [2] . the detection of sars-cov-2, the virus that causes covid-19, is achieved via the detection of the viral rna by real-time polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) [3] . when properly collected and if the specimens collected for the analysis contains the virus, rt-pcr has high specificity and sensitivity. however, this technique has some limitations, such as the narrow number of patients that can be tested in a given time, the increased risk of exposure to a high-dose of virus for the healthcare workers collecting the sample (throat-swabbing can generate aerosol) and a considerable amount of time from the test to its response [4] . in addition, if the sample is not properly collected, which may be the case in a mass emergency screening where a single operator performs hundreds of swabs in a single shift, this may lead to a high number of false-negative results, with an overall sensitivity of about 30-40% [5, 6] . furthermore, the rt-pcr requires certified laboratories, expensive equipment, and trained technicians to operate.finally, a major constraint remains the cutoff value to ascertain whether a test is positive or not. generally, when a given value is reached, the specimen tested is considered positive. however, the degradation of the probe-based fluorophore, by cross-contamination or by nonspecific amplification of background nucleic acids, forces the adoption of an arbitrary cut off, below which the medical report is given as negative. this operating procedure, outside the clinical context, can lead to evaluation errors, raising the number of false-negative results. moreover, real-time amplification efficiency varies within and between laboratories, and a set cutoff might not be constant across runs. therefore, it is recommended to normalize cutoff with relative or absolute quantification approaches [7] .the world health organization (who) has fostered the development of new strategies to standardize the diagnosis of covid-19 [8] . yet, most countries have been completely unprepared for the onslaught of the virus.a possible alternative to rt-pcr is the assessment of the immune response of the host to the virus. however, we cannot research covid-19 by merely translating the technologies and the know-how already in place, and that comes from the study of other not comparable diseases. in these three months since the beginning of the outbreak, no protocols or real experimental studies have been carried out. we still do not know about the immune response of the human body to sars-cov-2, and it is still unclear how we can evaluate the antibody production for the diagnosis of covid-19 and how to use igm and igg detection in single patients and the population for epidemiological purposes. only recently, the idea of producing easy-to-use decentralized point-of-care (poc) tests emerged and then deploying them widely [9] . poc tests are simple, easy to administer and to interpret, and they can accelerate clinical decision-making and take some of the workload off centralized test laboratories; for example, sheridan [9] recently reported the current main commercial rapid test for sars-cov-2 in nature biotechnology.some are ten-min lateral flow immunoassays that detect igm and igg antibodies directed against sars-cov-2 [xiamen amonmed biotechnology (fujian, china; technical specifications available from http://www.biotime.cn/en_pr_index_gci_80.html), sugentech (daejeon, korea; technical specifications available from https://sugentech.com/products/products-view.php?ct=7&target=32), and cellex]. biotech (guangzhou, china; technical specifications available from https://en.wondfo.com. cn/products/?catid=637&level=1) developed a similar test called wondfo sars-cov-2 antibody test. other similar tests promoted by jiangsu medomics medical technologies (nanjing, china) [10] and innovita biological technology are now in shipping. abbott produced the poc pcr isothermal test that delivers a positive result in five minutes and a negative result in thirteen minutes [11] approved by the food and drug administration (fda) for emergency use (eu). the fda approved a multiplex pcr test as well that runs on the automated aries system and delivers a result in two hours. snibe diagnostic (shenzhen, china; technical specifications available from http://www.snibe.com/zh_en/en_ products.aspx?id=65) created an automated central laboratory rapid test that runs on the maglumi chemiluminescence immunoassay system. pharmact (berlin, germany) deployed the poc 20-min test for detecting sars-cov-2 exposure through the identification of igg and igm antibodies. biotech, xiamen amonmed biotechnology, sugentech, snibe diagnostic and pharmact obtained the ce mark for their serological test. cellex developed a similar one, which is now also approved for the eu by the fda.the available poc tests need to be studied in the current emergency setting. the who proposed a protocol template better to assess the effectiveness of serology testing [12] ; this is also consistent with what is suggested in the updated version of "laboratory testing for coronavirus disease (covid-19) in suspected human cases" [8] . however, it is currently impossible to assess and compare all the different poc tests because of the lack of reliable data.as our aim is to evaluate the efficacy of covid-19 rapid tests and serological assays in real-life settings with a particular focus on territorial emergencies and the ongoing pandemic, we designed a research protocol aimed to establish how to use these diagnostics correctly, taking into account the different possible clinical and epidemiological scenarios.covid-19 is the clinical presentation of the infection of the virus sars-cov-2 [13] . the diagnosis is currently based on the detection of the rna of the virus via a nucleic acid amplification test (naat). according to corman et al. [14] , rt-pcr has a sensitivity and specificity of about 100%, provided that the sample is taken with the proper and timely technique. the choice of the perfect samples to use for rt-pcr is still under debate. wenling et al. [15] analyzed samples from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, sputum, nasal swabs, fibro-bronchoscopy (brush biopsy), pharyngeal swabs, stools, and blood.rt-pcr on bronchoalveolar lavage fluid demonstrated the highest positive rates (93%), followed by sputum with 72%. recent studies suggest the use of rt-pcr on stools because the virus can attack the bowel [16] . according to ai et al. [17] , the combined use of computed tomography (ct) and pcr can increase diagnostic sensitivity. however, ct often is not available in territorial settings and primary care or for screening purposes. according to el-tholoth et al. [18] , rt-pcr has some limitations for the screening and diagnosis of covid-19, because the test is difficult to use in the community, and because of the high number of false-negatives observed.the detection of specific igm and igg antibodies against sars-cov-2 is a possible strategy to diagnose the infection. the immune response triggered by the infection is currently under investigation. similarly, the long-term modification of the antibodies' levels cannot be known at the moment. the use of a fast performing, validated, a serological assay is requested by different authors, such as xiao [19] and hick [20] , but also the national health commission and state administration of traditional chinese medicine suggests the use of a serological test with igm and igg for covid-19 to confirm the negative results. an emblematic example came from the recent italian experience: "patient zero" was negative to all tests performed during the onset of the symptoms, namely the pharyngo-nasal swab for rt-pcr and the serological test [19] . these observations support the idea that two negative serological tests are necessary to rule out the infection. when a quantitative analysis is available, the following procedure should be respected: two paired serum samples should be taken from the patient with a suspected diagnosis of covid-19 (patients with clinical symptomology suggestive of the disease, or close contacts with patients with a known positive test for sars-cov-2 infection). baseline serum should be taken as early as possible within the incubation period of contact, and convalescent serum should be taken 2-4 weeks after the last contact. positive serum-specific igm, or specific igg antibody title in the recovery phase~4 times higher than that in the acute phase, can be used as diagnostic criteria for suspected patients with negative naat. igm is usually measurable 10 days after symptom onset, while igg is detectable 12 days after the patient is symptomatic. in fact, the optimal timing for the convalescent sample needs still to be established.when compared to naat, the serological test appears more suitable for screening purposes in a population. a recent study from jin et al. [20] emphasizes the utility of the serological test in a wide cohort, also when there are few positive patients (not only when the probability pre-test is high); bai et al. [21] used igm to define negative and positive case in wide samples from a general population and encouraged the use of the serological test also in asymptomatic patients to confine the spread of the outbreak. this is also consistent with an interesting article by li et al. [22] that recommends the use of serological surveys to determine the incidence of subclinical infections.this test, however, may have some limitations. to avoid false-positives because of cross-reactivity, the antigen used for the serological test should come from properly purified sars-cov-2. according to meyer et al. [23] , and following the who's recommendations, the right choice and the appropriate purification of antigens is essential to obtain validated serological tests. in fact, cross-reactivity to other coronaviruses can be challenging. therefore, only the most recent tests-validated from laboratories that have isolated the virus-can be used.serum antibody determination methods include, among others, colloidal gold immunochromatography, elisa (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay), chemiluminescence immunoassay. xiang et al. [24] recently compared elisa to gica (colloidal gold-immunochromatographic assay). both have high sensitivity and specificity without a significant difference (h0/ha 0.05).to enhance the accuracy of the diagnosis, liu et al. [25] suggested using rt-pcr in the first days from the infection and then to use the serological test alone for the disease monitoring.li et al. [10] described the results from the use of a rapid serological test in 525 patients. the test had a sensitivity of 88.6% and a specificity of 90.63% for the diagnosis of sars-cov-2.immune response to a first-time infection needs time to grow, symptoms can occur while the organism is preparing to fight, and in the first days from infection, the immunoassay can be negative. indeed, no cross-reactivity was detected in subjects with previous coronaviruses infection [26] . a similar level of precision is reported by cassaniti et al., in a letter to the editor, where the authors do not endorse the use of the colloidal gold rapid test in emergency settings for triage of patients with suspected covid-19 [26] . nevertheless, this recommendation remains controversial as there are some inconsistencies within the results presented, the sampling methods, the data processing, and the patients targeted for the study. on the other hand, more recently, long q.x. et al. emphasized the importance of serological testing both in clinical and epidemiological settings [27] .a rapid test for sars-cov-2 is the colloidal gold-based immunochromatographic strip assay. zhang et al. [27] demonstrated that the eukaryotic spike proteins expressed (rs1 and rs-rbd-mfc) are more appropriate than the prokaryotic nucleocapsid proteins for covid-19 serological diagnosis. the gica sandwich used to detect total antibodies is a powerful complement to the current standard rna-based tests. they prepared six recombinant proteins, including three s (spike) proteins (rs1, rs-rbd, rs-rbd-mfc) and three n (nucleocapsid) proteins (rn, rn1, rn2). because the s protein is a transmembrane protein, three s protein fragments were prepared using a eukaryotic expression system, while three n proteins were prepared using a prokaryotic expression system. preliminary evaluation by indirect elisa revealed that the three s proteins (rs1, rs-rbd, rs-rbd-mfc) were superior in performance (lower background and higher optical densit values) to the three n proteins. however, the antigenicity of s proteins and that of the n proteins could not be confirmed in this study, because the influence of prokaryotic expression method used to produce the n proteins is difficult to predict. they speculated that this difference is due to the relatively high sensitivity and early response to the s antigen compared to the n antigen in patients with covid-19. thus, the n protein's antigenicity should be studied after expression in a eukaryotic system in future.zhang et al. [28] selected two recombinant proteins with the highest elisa titers (rs1 and rs-rbd-mfc) to develop a sandwich-format gica strip to detect total antibodies (igm and igg) against hcov-19. gica (colloidal gold immunochromatography assay), a simple and rapid serological method, is especially suitable for timely diagnosis and large-scale sample screening. the performance of the gica strip, which was evaluated with 814 clinical samples, showed to be rapid (10 min), highly sensitive (86.89%), and specific (99.39%) by diagnosing covid-19 in rt-pcr-negative patients who were clinically confirmed covid-19 positive by ct. a recent study showed that the sensitivity of the total antibody (igm and igg) test is higher than that of the igm or igg test [29] .the vivadiag™ kit, an example of colloidal gold rapid test, is produced by jiangsu medomics medical technologies and may be another potential candidate for reliable and rapid (15 min) testing. the test is based on a lateral flow qualitative immunoassay for the rapid determination of the presence or absence of both anti-sars-cov-2-igm and anti-sars-cov-2-igg in human specimens (whole blood, serum, and plasma). the test has been reported to be based on the utilization of anti-human igg and anti-igm against the recombinant antigen representing the receptor-binding domain of the covid-19 spike protein (mk201027), developed and purified at medomics. the recombinant antigen is transient transfected in cell culture and purified by protein a affinity chromatography and size-exclusion chromatography (sec) [10] . the design of the antigen was based on the published sars-cov-2 sequence. the strip test is composed of nitrocellulose membrane, with mouse anti-human-igm monoclonal antibody, mouse anti-human-igg monoclonal antibody, and anti-rabbit-igg immobilized in different positions (m and g lines) and the control line (c line), respectively. when testing, 10-15 µl of the specimen was added into the sample port, followed by the addition of sample dilution buffer. the blood samples move forward along the test device, which was sprayed with a mixture of aunp-covid-19 recombinant antigen conjugate and aunp-rabbit-igg. if the sample contains igm antibodies, antibodies will bind to the virus antigen labeled with colloidal gold, then form a sandwich complex with the coated anti-human igm monoclonal antibody at the igm line (m line), the igm line will appear purplish red, prompting the covid-19 igm antibody is positive. if the sample contains igg antibodies, antibodies will bind to the virus antigen labeled with colloidal gold, then form a sandwich complex with the coated anti-human igg monoclonal antibody at the igg line. the igg line will appear purple-red, showing the covid-19 igg antibody is positive. if either line igg or igm does not show color, the negative result will be displayed. the test device also contains a quality control line c; whether there is a test line or not, the quality control line c should display. each test was evaluated by two operators, and a picture was taken.currently, there is no gold standard for the identification of covid-19 positive or negative subjects; however, the commonly adopted standard is the rt-pc, carried out with the methods suggested by the who [2] . we, therefore, selected the articles and data set, where the control was the rt-pcr, carried out on selected groups of people, certainly negative (e.g., healthy rt-pcr negative volunteers) or affected by covid-19 (rt-pcr positive symptomatic patients).the data for the test validation are derived from li [10] , capello [30] , paradiso [31] , cassaniti [26] as well as the data provided by the manufacturer (provided by the producer alpha pharma inc., bitonto bari 70031, italy available on https://www.a-ps.it/). in the article by paradiso [31] , it was not possible to deduce the data referring only to igm.it should be noted that the specificity was very high in all studies (table 1 ): all the trials included patients enrolled in the early stage of pandemics, with no known exposure to sars-cov-2 and no symptoms of covid-19 (i.e., healthy volunteers with no contact and asymptomatic and with negative rt-pcr); those patients could be reasonably considered true negative subjects. starting from this assumption, basically, no false positives were recorded. nevertheless, because of the peculiarity of this infection, and because of the epidemiology of the pandemic, a negative rt-pcr and a negative medical history cannot rule out a possible sars-cov-2 infection even in asymptomatic patients, so that it would be difficult to compare the results of any test with a gold standard, aimed to assess the sensitivity and sensibility of the test itself. thus, research protocols in the future should consider some specific features of the infection, of the way it spreads among the population, and of the immune response of the host to the disease. for this reason, the comparison with rt-pcr alone is not enough to establish the effectiveness of quantitative or qualitative serologic tests. besides, the long-time persistence of immunoglobulins in the serum of the immunized persons should be addressed, as well as the absence of viral rna at the sites of the swabs that can give negative pcr results in healed immunized patients. table 1 shows the sensitivity and specificity data of the colloidal gold rapid test, versus rt-pcr oropharyngeal swab, as published in individual articles (cassaniti-a column was computed based on data reported in the article relative to igm). still, because of these reasons, the collected sensitivity values may vary widely among the different studies. consequently, at present, we cannot establish a mean sensitivity value. in addition, the variations are possibly determined by the time of testing and by the eligibility criteria, which were not uniform in the different studies.in any case, the high precision indicates the absence of analytical errors determined by cross-reactivity, as also reported by some authors [26] .to better understand the variability in sensitivity and better assess the accuracy of the test, we considered results of igg and igm testing separately. we performed the analysis via the meta analytic approach to evaluate the heterogeneity of the effect size; the results are shown in the forest plots of figure 1 to better understand the variability in sensitivity and better assess the accuracy of the test, we considered results of igg and igm testing separately. we performed the analysis via the meta analytic approach to evaluate the heterogeneity of the effect size; the results are shown in the forest plots of figure 1 (igg) and figure 2 (igm).for the igg (figure 1 ) odds ratios, we found both significant fixed (p < 0.001) and random effects (p = 0.001); heterogeneity was very high, with cochran's q = 4.61 (p < 0.0001), while the i2 statistic (accounting for variations due to actual heterogeneity and not to chance) was 90.2% (ci 95%: from 79.9% to 95.2%). performing a second meta-analysis (data not shown) using all the pooled cassaniti igg data, we did not find substantial differences: for fixed effects we found again p < 0.001, whereas for random effects we obtained p = 0.002; cochran's q was 37.78 (p < 0.0001), and the i2 statistic was 89.4% (ci95%: from 78.1% to 94.9%). to better understand the variability in sensitivity and better assess the accuracy of the test, we considered results of igg and igm testing separately. we performed the analysis via the meta analytic approach to evaluate the heterogeneity of the effect size; the results are shown in the forest plots of figure 1 (igg) and figure 2 (igm).for the igg (figure 1 ) odds ratios, we found both significant fixed (p < 0.001) and random effects (p = 0.001); heterogeneity was very high, with cochran's q = 4.61 (p < 0.0001), while the i2 statistic (accounting for variations due to actual heterogeneity and not to chance) was 90.2% (ci 95%: from 79.9% to 95.2%). performing a second meta-analysis (data not shown) using all the pooled cassaniti igg data, we did not find substantial differences: for fixed effects we found again p < 0.001, whereas for random effects we obtained p = 0.002; cochran's q was 37.78 (p < 0.0001), and the i2 statistic was 89.4% (ci95%: from 78.1% to 94.9%). for the igg (figure 1 ) odds ratios, we found both significant fixed (p < 0.001) and random effects (p = 0.001); heterogeneity was very high, with cochran's q = 4.61 (p < 0.0001), while the i2 statistic (accounting for variations due to actual heterogeneity and not to chance) was 90.2% (ci 95%: from 79.9% to 95.2%). performing a second meta-analysis (data not shown) using all the pooled cassaniti igg data, we did not find substantial differences: for fixed effects we found again p < 0.001, whereas for random effects we obtained p = 0.002; cochran's q was 37.78 (p < 0.0001), and the i2 statistic was 89.4% (ci95%: from 78.1% to 94.9%).in addition, for the igm (figure 2 ) odds ratio, we found significant fixed and random effects (p < 0.001 in both cases); heterogeneity was less high than igg; for cochran's q we got 6.09 (p = 0.1072), thus a not significant heterogeneity, even keeping p < 0.1, as significance cutoff as suggested by higgins et al., given the low number of studies [32] and the i2 statistic was found 50.8% (ci95%: from 0.0% to 83.7%). furthermore, for igm we performed a second meta-analysis (data not shown) using all the pooled cassaniti igm data: for fixed and random effects we found again p < 0.001, with a cochran's q = 5.02 (p = 0.1702), and the i2 statistic was 40.3% (ci95%: from 0.0% to 79.8).both meta-analyses revealed a high inconsistency, at least in its broad confidence interval: the i2 statistic is given by the ratio (q-d)/q, where d accounts for the degrees of freedom of the system, e.g., the number of meta-analyzed studies minus one (in the case d > q, then one keeps i2 = 0, with a ci of 95% from 0.0% to 100%). for this reason, adding a study to the meta-analysis can potentially decrease the inconsistency if the studies are very few, as in our case. however, the heterogeneity observed, and, therefore, the inconsistency, can also be explained by the differences in patient selection, and in the timing of the test (the time-lapse from time 0-the moment of the possible contact and infection-to the time the test was performed). it would be, therefore, advisable to produce clinical protocols that could standardize the procedure and the classification of patients, including the time of possible exposure, the prevalence of the disease in a population, the time of the onset of the symptoms, and the type and timing of other tests performed on the subjects. in fact, as the heterogeneity in sensitivity observed in the previous studies may depend on the different settings and the different timing, it would be advisable to serially test patients, recording and evaluating the immune response dynamics over time.because of the complexity of this disease-whose fine clinical, immunological, and epidemiological features are mostly unknown and still under investigations-we cannot rely on the results of a test alone to make a diagnosis or to forecast the clinical evolution of the disease in a single patient as well as its epidemiological dynamics in a community. in the common practice, when we investigate a hypothesis, the trial we designed is aimed at assessing the main outcome of a single intervention or an exposure factor in a specific population. it means that in a research protocol, we consider one variable at a time, or in the better cases, a basic pool of parameters at a time. it also implies that we already know most of the big picture, so that we can concentrate on these fine details that may lead to different outcomes.when it comes to covid-19, however, we have to concede that we are in completely unexplored territory, with most of the clinical and epidemiological long-term implications impossible to evaluate or predict at the moment.the scientific community is joining forces to fight the virus, but every group of study focuses only on specific aspects of the disease. a lot of pieces are, therefore, missing because, in such a brief time, it was almost impossible to portray the complexity of the whole picture. the amount of data is still limited, as well as the research settings and the experimental scenarios. in addition, most of the publications on this subject have been, reasonably, fast-tracked, skipping, or bypassing the traditional processes a research paper normally goes through. some of these published papers are reports posted as letters to the editor, often reporting findings that-although accurate-represent a limited number of observations in specific groups and in specific conditions.on the contrary, to better understand the virus, and to find useful hints on how to fight the disease, we must consider the whole picture and how every and each individual factor influence the results of a study.in table 2 , we summarize some of the independent variables that should be theoretically addressed in each study, for a proper interpretation of any experimental observation or the evaluation of any outcome of an intervention. table 2 . prototypic examples of independent variables that should be considered when clustering the results and evaluating the outcomes. for a well-known disease, some of these variables are known. therefore, we cannot estimate a priori whether they can or cannot affect the outcome and design the research protocol, accordingly, setting inclusion or exclusion criteria. for covid-19, the weight of every variable in affecting the outcome of an experimental observation or intervention is generally unknown.demographic and environmental feature thus, if we want to understand the efficacy of a test, we have to integrate its result and the outcomes of any other investigation with other relevant information, as the clinical presentation (signs, symptoms, medical examination, laboratory investigation, imaging), the epidemiological background, and a patient's medical history (to name a few: the time of the possible contact; epidemiological context; behaviors, actions or events that may have increased the chances of exposure; assessment of the risk profile of the patient, secondary to personal and professional conditions that could increase the chance of exposure; assessment of the risk of the possible exposure, secondary to the circumstances of the possible contact with other positive cases).besides, because we do not know how this virus behaves in the human body, we still must consider that there may be some clinical features, some analytes or other some peculiarities that come from other investigations that may be pathognomonic of the disease. table 3 summarizes typical symptom-described to date, imaging, and laboratory findings, which can suggest the diagnosis and prognosis of covid-19. although not specific, fever, dyspnea, and cough are common presentations of the disease, as well as a lymphocytopenia and increased lactate dehydrogenase. the role of interleukin 38 and interleukin 39 as a suppressor of inflammation has been recently studied [33] , suggesting-as already observed with other immunomodulators-that the immune response of the host may be the cause of most of the complication of the disease [34] .even if not of particular interest for research purposes, the modification of some clinical scores used to assess patients' conditions has also been used to corroborate the diagnosis and the possible outcome of the infection. table 3 .clinical, laboratory, and imaging findings commonly found in patients with sars-cov-2 infection.symptoms fever (temperature ≥ 37.3 • c); cough, sputum, shortness of breath, myalgia, fatigue, diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, conjunctivitis, anosmia, dysgeusia . . .hypertension, heart failure, coronary heart disease, diabetes, kidney failure, cancer, chronic obstructive lung disease, immunodeficiency, stroke, cerebrovascular accident, gastrointestinal disease, transplant . . .white blood cell count, lymphocyte count, hemoglobin, platelet count, albumin, creatinine, alt/ast, lactate dehydrogenase, high-sensitivity cardiac troponin i, prothrombin time, d-dimer, il-6, il-1, il-8, il 38; il-39, tnfα, ccl-2, ccl-3, ccl-5, ip-10, mcp-1, procalcitonin, c-reactive protein, ph, lactate, vitamin d score curb-65; quick-sofa, sofa, apache ii imagine findings consolidation, ground-glass opacity, bilateral pulmonary infiltration histo-and cytopathological findings sign of inflammation, alveolar damage with exudate, lymphocyte, multinucleated giant cells . . . the bottom line is that we must consider sars-cov-2 as an incognita. we do not know yet, and because this is a new infection, we will not know for a long period, if the virus can perpetuate in the human organism, if it can cause chronic sequelae, if it can remain dormant for decades and then relapses, if and how it can re-infected and cause a secondary disease, or if other microbiological factors, as well as other genetic or external factors, can affect the virulence of the virus in seropositive patients. then, when researching covid-19, we should record as many data as possible. it means that we must collect even the information that may not have a practical use at the moment, or that may appear irrelevant for the purpose of the study. therefore, we cannot produce research protocols only based on the evaluation of the clinical performance of a test, especially if the same test is aimed to screen patients or a population for diagnosis or follow up. on the contrary, we must gather all the possible available information to stratify the population better and understand how the test works in different scenarios. the level of uncertainty rises if we consider that because of the unicity of this virus, most of the time, we cannot establish when and how a patient or a population has been exposed to the same virus.we, in fact, have to address the complexity, and we must become aware that we cannot rely on a simplified model to produce usable results.from this point of view, a major issue, scarcely addressed in most of the research papers in this field produced up to now, remains the inceptions' point. in figure 3 , the specific timeline is presented.because the interpretation of the test rests on the inception point (time = 0; https://www. researchgate.net/publication/24398055_how_to_design_a_good_case_series and https://books.google. it/books?id=uwzndwaaqbaj&pg=pa303&lpg=pa303&dq=%22inception+point%22+clinical+ methodology&source=bl&ots=lx6su2yxyd&sig=acfu3u2wkkmakhky0xh-zuus4nitln1lyg& hl=it&sa=x&ved=2ahukewjfqqomqivpahwb_aqkhyhhbf4q6aewdxoecakqaq#v= onepage&q=%22inception%20point%22%20clinical%20methodology&f=false) considered, we have to select a particular lapse time depending on the category the patients tested for covid-19 belong to:people with possible exposure to the virus (based on epidemiological context and/or on medical history). these people belong mainly to the general population or a specific group; table 4 .because the interpretation of the test rests on the inception point (time = 0; https://www.researchgate.net/publication/24398055_how_to_design_a_good_case_series and https://books.google.it/books?id=uwzndwaaqbaj&pg=pa303&lpg=pa303&dq=%22inception+p oint%22+clinical+methodology&source=bl&ots=lx6su2yxyd&sig=acfu3u2wkkmakhky0xh-zuus4nitln1lyg&hl=it&sa=x&ved=2ahukewjfqqomqivpahwb_aqkhyhhbf4q6aewdxoec akqaq#v=onepage&q=%22inception%20point%22%20clinical%20methodology&f=false) considered, we have to select a particular lapse time depending on the category the patients tested for covid-19 belong to:1. people with possible exposure to the virus (based on epidemiological context and/or on medical history). these people belong mainly to the general population or a specific group; 2. high-risk groups (healthcare workers, ridders) that may have an increased risk of exposition to a significant viral load; 3. people who incidentally underwent the test for several reasons, not related to clinical reasons; 4. patients who developed mild to severe symptoms of covid-19.according to the risk of exposure, for each category, there is a pre-test positive probability difference that should be considered before the administration of the test. 19 . it suggests what measures will be needed in the long-term, defining what protocols are needed in designing a study tailored to given categories of people. using the correct protocol, in fact, is the weapon to fight the infection. indeed, a detailed and clear protocol should be proposed to study and stratify patients' outcomes. the table should be read as an extension of figure 3 to define a patient's history. table 4 . table 4 . the table summarizes the main possible outcomes of covid-19. it suggests what measures will be needed in the long-term, defining what protocols are needed in designing a study tailored to given categories of people. using the correct protocol, in fact, is the weapon to fight the infection. indeed, a detailed and clear protocol should be proposed to study and stratify patients' outcomes. the table should be read as an extension of figure 3 to define a patient's history. according to the risk of exposure, for each category, there is a pre-test positive probability difference that should be considered before the administration of the test.based on these argumentations, and to better understand the clinical and epidemiological potentiality of serological testing, we hereby present a template that we strongly suggest to use for the design of any study on diagnostic tools, and broadly on every research protocol aimed to investigate covid-19.this is a research protocol based on a template addressing complexity, that is aimed mainly to investigate the possible use of a rapid test for the evaluation of the disease in a population when specific conditions are considered.although the result of a rapid diagnostic test offers only binary information (positive or negative igm; positive or negative igg), the result can be crucial in assessing a patient when all the complexity of this disease is considered. moreover, it can provide a useful tool for the continuous screening of high-risk populations for the implementation of public health programs.however, as advised before, the information coming from the test alone can be worthless if we do not consider the whole picture.according to these criteria, we classified the patients to be tested according to the possible inception point, and, therefore, the possible clinical scenario. we then produced different groups, based on exposure and risk of exposure, on the selection criteria, and on the immune response to the different tests used to detect the infection. these criteria are summarized in table 5 . table 5 . the different classification of the patients enrolled in the study. the different clusters represent different clinical and epidemiological scenarios. the information coming from the clinical history of a patient combined with the results of the test and its modification over time will serve to portray a picture of the possible interpretation of the test according to the different phases, as per figure 3 timeline.exposure/risk classification a. people with known close contact b.people with no clear history of close contacts c. people constantly exposedi. randomized population ii.high exposition subjects iii.incidental diagnosis (see text) iv.symptomatic patient's data1. clinical criteria 2.serological testing 3.molecular testing 4.pathognomonic laboratory findings 5.pathognomonic instrumental findings this classification allows the evaluation of the upper and the lower limits of the time-lapse where we can place the inception point for each group considered, as for figure 3 .aside from selected and limited cases, in fact, we cannot establish the exact time of the infection. yet, we can still gather valuable information if we evaluate the results of the test in different clusters and populations. we consider for this specific purpose patients routinely attending primary care facilities or an outpatient department, a general practitioner's survey, or any other health center in the community.we might apply a similar scheme also in acute settings. however, we consider the peculiarity of the territorial emergency, where asymptomatic patients can unconsciously spread the infection, and the characteristics of a primary care department where patients can be followed-up over a longer period. for our purpose, enrolled patients would be classified according to the groups presented in table 5 , and for their demographic features. in addition, all the available information on the recent and past medical history should be recorded, with a particular focus on pre-and post-covid-19 results of laboratory testing and other investigations (see table 3 ), and on behaviors or medical conditions that may increase the risk of becoming infected and of becoming seriously ill.patients will be serially tested with the colloidal gold vivadiag™ covid-19 igm/igg rapid test. the suggested frequency is weekly. a shorter interval may be suggested in high-risk settings. each patient enrolled in the study would perform an rt-pcr test at the beginning of the study and if symptomatic.patients should be regularly tested up to six months after the estimated time of contagion. investigators will record the symptoms and any other medical investigation together with their date of onset and resolution.the primary outcomes are:1.to establish the accordance of the test with the clinical features of the disease and to assess how the test results change over time in the different clusters of patients, as summarized in table 5 .to establish the reliability of the serologic rapid test to detect a sars-cov-2 infection and, therefore, its sensitivity and specificity when the integration of anamnestic, clinical, laboratory, molecular, imaging criteria are considered as the gold standard.the secondary outcome is the comparison of the serological rapid test with the rt-pcr commonly used to make an etiological diagnosis of covid-19.in fact, we cannot classify patients according to the results of a single test is positive or negative patients. moreover, the immune response of the host is still unknown, as well as the level of immunity secondary to the infection. thus, the negative or positive status cannot be assessed and cannot be established by the result of a test. the serological response should be interpreted with information coming from the clinical reports. consequently, before drafting conclusions, the data analysis at the end of the study must consider the following considerations:if the test is positive, even in the presence of a negative pcr, the patient should be considered positive and treated according to his or her clinical picture. when igm alone is positive, the serological test shows a recent infection, even if the patient has not developed any symptoms yet. on the other hand, if the test is positive for igg alone and the patient is asymptomatic, the result can be used for epidemiological purposes. some recent investigations [27] , however, show an inconsistent response of igm and igg in different patients, with a seroconversion of both the immunoglobulin classes that reach 100% after a window period.if the test is negative in a symptomatic patient with a high exposure risk, the serological test should be routinely repeated, considering the window period between the time 0 of the infection and the production of circulating antibodies.even if rapid tests are designed to reduce the measure errors, to avoid a false negative, it is essential to follow the producer's instructions to avoid procedural mistakes. for this reason, we chose for our research protocol a test based on a very easy procedure, such as those already in use for other diseases also in very limited settings and laboratories with very poor resources, or auto-diagnostic kits. the test is also easy to perform and to read for minimally trained personnel. nevertheless, because we do not have yes-or-no tests available and given the characteristic of covid-19, it is unlikely that those can be created in the future, the clinical assessment of the patients remains crucial. this implies that medical history should be correctly collected, and clinical signs must be accurately recorded to increase the chance of making a proper diagnosis, prognosis, and management plan.lastly, all the data collected should be shared with other researchers to prompt further studies, and, consequently, the whole dataset should always be made available.this protocol dubs a first research trial (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04316728. available from http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/nct04316728) aimed at evaluating the immune response of negative patients during a covid-19 outbreak, plus the clinical performance of the test in early detection the infection, and the reliability of the test in those patients who develop clinical signs of covid-19 during the trial. preliminary unpublished data match the observations reported in table 1 , showing a good correspondence with other research studies and also suggesting a role of serological test for the screening of asymptomatic patients.the 2020 novel coronavirus pandemic is showing how weak the idea of global health is. this worldwide emergency asks and needs prompt answers and original solutions. the early diagnosis of coronavirus remains a major issue, as a proper screening strategy can improve the design and implementation of workable public health models aimed to confine the virus and to reduce its devastating effect on the population. it is, therefore, paramount-also considering the clinical complexity of this new disease-to develop accurate, user-friendly kits, that can help doctors and healthcare workers to make a diagnosis of covid-19. thus, molecular scientists must be front-runners in this race against the virus, providing their expertise and the unique research capability of their field.we investigated the quick detection approach targeting viral igm or igg antibodies, with the colloidal gold-based immunochromatographic (icg) strip assay, in comparison with real-time rt-pcr testing. the advantages of the icg strip viral antibody detection are obvious. first of all, the sensitivity of the icg strip is comparable, especially after 7 days of onset; the detection capacity in nuclear acid-negative "clinically diagnostic" patients is impressive. therefore, icg strips are highly recommended to be utilized as the supplementary diagnostic approach in clinical applications. the icg strip can also be widely adopted in areas where diagnostic capacity is limited. secondary, the icg strip assay is operational as it is ready to use and timesaving. the assay can be finished within 15 min without specialized equipment. third, unlike oral swab sampling that may cause stimulated retching and coughing, which increases the exposure risk of laboratory technicians, the blood collection could avoid the unnecessary risk and reduce the operation steps that may cause aerosol. fourth, the detection of antibodies may also indicate the disease recovery, as immunoglobulins are among the most important soldiers in the battle of viruses. patients who initially detected as virus-positive and gradually became negative but with detectable igg or igm during the disease progression may be considered as recovered from this battle. it is noteworthy that the icg strip can only provide qualitative results, but the serological elisa assay against the viral antibody offered the quantitative antibody titer and is regarded as the superior alternation at this point. last, but not least, the strip can be used for community surveillance and, therefore, for the design of public health strategies aimed to confine the dissemination of the virus, to contain an ongoing epidemic, and to call off whatever restrictions and measures are needed to reduce the spread of the disease in a timely manner.in conclusion, the main advantages of the serological test are higher accuracy in detecting a sars-cov-2 infection even in asymptomatic patients or before the onset of the symptoms when the test is performed after a significant amount of time from the suspect day of contagion, and the simpler way of use that allows operators with minimal training to screen a high number of people with fewer sampling mistakes. finally, it reduces the exposure of health workers performing the test to the virus.taking into account the background and, in particular, long results [27] , we speculate that serological tests, although needing to be more thoroughly studied, could be indispensable weapons for front-line doctors who work in a decentralized setting to have rapid answers.therefore, it is crucial to gather all the possible information every time a patient is tested and assessed to understand better how the infection and the immune response work so that we can build risk classes and individual and population profiles that could help clinicians and health policy-makers to define a better strategy to fight the infection and the spread of the disease, allowing at the same time, people and society to safely go back to normal or more regular life.we finally endorse and foster a proactive collaboration among molecular researchers and clinicians, with the creation of multicentric studies aimed to produce tools that can be used as weapons for the war against this invisible enemy that may undermine the future of the same humankind. in 1998, a triple-reassortant swine influenza virus from human, swine, and avian genomes was identified in the usa [1] . ten years later, humans were found to be infected with these influenza viruses [2] . a novel human influenza a (h1n1) virus caused a worldwide respiratory disease outbreak in april 2009. the major transmission route for influenza virus is via respiratory droplets released while coughing [3e5] . influenza virus replicates in the epithelial cells of the upper respiratory tract, which destroys the host cells, further spreading to infect other cells. the clinical manifestations of influenza are fever, headache, myalgia, fatigue, rhinorrhea, sore throat, and cough. the impact of influenza outbreaks is much higher in children than in adults. most healthy adults will recover after 3e7 days [6e8] . influenza a/h3n2 was the predominant serotype during the 2010e2011 season, whereas the a/h1n1 2009 virus still cocirculated with the a/h3n2 and influenza b strains [9] . the pandemic influenza a/h1n1 outbreak resulted in over 18,449 deaths in over 214 countries until 2012 [10, 11] .conventional diagnostic testing of influenza virus included virus incubation and nucleic acid amplification test. virus incubation is the first method used to diagnose virus infections, while it takes about 7 days to amplify the virus in the host cells. a nucleic acid amplification test is the most sensitive method to detect virus infection, but pretreatment of the sample, including virus isolation and nucleic extraction, still requires about 1 day. the above methods are not suitable for the rapid screening of influenza virus [12] . in vitro diagnostic devices (ivds) play crucial roles in disease diagnosis because of their rapid and convenient properties. diagnostic accuracy of ivds is dependent on their sensitivity and specificity. a previous study evaluated the 3m rapid detection test for the respiratory syncytial virus, and found the sensitivity and specificity of the device to be 74% and 100%, respectively [13] . in april 2011, a study conducted by iregbu et al [14] on the performance of dual path platform testing kits revealed a sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 99.5%. by contrast, a study by shrivastava et al [15] reported that the commercial dengue ns1 antigen kit had a sensitivity of 26% against 91 clinical samples. few studies have reported the sensitivity of influenza ivds (flu-ivds) in detecting influenza a. these previous studies used four commercialized rapid test kits [16e20].flu-ivd rapid test kits are based on immunochromatographic tests. this type of ivd is designed for easy and fast operation, which enables physicians to obtain results at the primary influenza screening sites. the flu-ivd rapid test kits have been classified into a low-risk class i device according to the medical device regulation and risk assessment in taiwan. they are applied and approved by the taiwan food and drug administration (fda) for pre-market approvals via the fast tract pathway, that is, they are exempt from the substantial performance review.in this study, we collected taiwan-fda-approved flu-ivds from the taiwanese market and evaluated their performance. the standard antigens prepared from viral cultures and purified hemagglutinins (has) were used to evaluate the analytical sensitivity and specificity of the flu-ivds. the results represent the actual responses of these rapid test kits and provided references for future amendments in regulations. flu-ivds were purchased directly from the manufacturers and local distributors in 1e3 different lots. the product name, lot number, and manufacturing country of each flu-ivd are listed in tables 1 and 2.the appearance of the products and the labels on the flu-ivds were compared with information on their licenses, including chinese and english names, license numbers, name of manufacturer, address of manufacturer, and expiration dates.sensitivity was assayed as described previously, with modifications [21] . the sensitivity of the collected flu-ivds was specified as ha concentrations or ccid 50 . the ha standards consisting of influenza antigens a/california/7/2009 (h1n1), a/victoria/210/2009 (h3n2) and b/brisbane/60/08 were diluted individually to 0.25e50,000 ng/ml, 0.25e13,000 ng/ml, and 0.25e13,500 ng/ml, respectively, with the dilution buffer provided in the flu-ivds. additionally, the influenza a/ taiwan/9042/2008 (h1n1) and a/taiwan/439/2009 (h3n2) viruses were prepared from infected rhabdomyosarcoma (rd) cells and diluted to concentrations of 101.3e105.3 ccid 50 /ml and 101.23e107.23 ccid 50 /ml, respectively, with minimum essential medium (gibco, grand island, ny, usa). the sensitivity assay of each flu-ivd, including the positive and negative controls, was carried out by following the instructions in j o u r n a l o f f o o d a n d d r u g a n a l y s i s 2 2 ( 2 0 1 4 ) 2 7 9 e2 8 4 the operation manuals. two independent and well-trained technicians performed the experiments.hcov-oc43 was prepared from infected mrc-5 cells. the extract containing 1 â 107 ccid 50 /ml of virus was used to evaluate the specificity of flu-ivds. the experimental protocol was carried out in accordance with the operation manuals of each flu-ivds. two independent and well-training researchers carried out the experiments.flu-ivds are classified as class 1 medical devices, indicating that the license could be easily obtained through document reviews. therefore, the quality of flu-ivds needs to be investigated and monitored. in taiwan, suspected influenza patients are immediately tested with flu-ivds at the primary screening site in epidemics areas. the therapeutic strategies are divided into two parts based on the test results. if the test result is positive and the patient exhibits influenza-like symptoms, the patient is immediately administered antiviral drugs such as osletamivir (tamiflu) and continuously monitored with flu pcr test kits. however, negative test results indicate that the patient only has a common cold, and no antiviral drug treatment is given. the use of flu-ivds plays a crucial role in controlling influenza epidemics. hence, falsepositive outcomes may cause inappropriate administration of osletamivir, which could lead to future challenges in the prevention of influenza. prior to 2009, several commercial flu-ivd rapid test kits were approved in taiwan. however, after the influenza a/h1n1 pandemics in 2009, the taiwan fda issued many licenses for similar products. we thus aimed to examine the analytical sensitivity and specificity of flu a-ivds used in taiwan.a total of 38 products with 19 flu-ivd licenses were collected, of which seven were domestic and 31 were imported flu-ivds. product labels of 20 samples did not comply with the regulations in taiwan fda. for example, those with unsatisfactory product labels lacked a product name and/or license number on the packaging or buffer containers. some products had no package insert in them, and some package inserts did not indicate the sensitivity of the product. the percentage of unsatisfactory product labels in domestic and imported kits was 43% (3/7) and 55% (17/31), respectively.based on the reaction principles, the detecting targets of the collected samples were grouped as ha and viral particles. the flu-ivds belonging to the ha group were evaluated for their analytical sensitivity with the world health organization (who) international standard influenza antigens a/california/7/2009 (h1n1), a/victoria/210/2009 (h3n2), and b/brisbane/60/08. as shown in table 3 , seven products of three flu-ivd licenses (aec) that were manufactured in the usa and spain used ha concentrations as their sensitivity label. the analytical sensitivity of these flu-ivds against a/h1n1, a/ h3n2, and flu b was 500e1000 ng/ml, 1000 ng/ml, and 1000 ng/ml, respectively. for a/h1n1 detection, products a j o u r n a l o f f o o d a n d d r u g a n a l y s i s 2 2 ( 2 0 1 4 ) 2 7 9 e2 8 4 and b displayed higher analytical sensitivity than product c. the sensitivity results for a/h3n2 and flu b were identical in these samples. we obtained seven products from three domestic flu-ivds (def) and 17 products from eight flu-ivds (gen) imported from china, the uk, finland, singapore, usa, and korea with ccid 50 labels. in the past 5 years, type a/ taiwan/439/2009 (h3n2) and type a/taiwan/9042/2008 (h1n1) were the two main strains of influenza outbreak in taiwan. hence, these two virus strains were used as influenza viral particle standards for ccid 50 test [22] . the averages of a/h1n1 and a/h3n2 sensitivity were log 10 5.8 ae 0.5 ccid 50 /ml and log 10 6.6 ae 0.5 ccid 50 /ml, respectively. in fig. 1 , the unbroken, broken, and dotted lines represent the mean, mean ae 1 standard deviation (sd) and mean ae 2 sd in the sensitivity tests, respectively. for a/h1n1, the sensitivity of all products was within mean ae 1 sd (fig. 1a) . as to a/h3n2 sensitivity, however, the products e, i, l, and m fell into the mean ae 2 sd range (fig. 1b) . seven products from five imported flu-ivds did not have test sensitivity labeling. therefore, ha concentrations were used to determine their sensitivities. in table 4 , the sensitivities of these seven samples against h1n1, h3n2, and flu b were 500e1000 ng/ml, 500e3250 ng/ml, and 1000e6750 ng/ml, respectively. previous researchers have used clinical specimens to monitor the clinical performance of flu-ivds. a study by drexler et al [17] found that binaxnow influenza a&b rapid test kits had a poor clinical sensitivity; the sensitivity was 11.1% for the pandemic (h1n1) 2009 virus (16 positive cases against 144 polymerase-chain-reaction-confirmed cases). a study by uyeki et al [20] also showed that the quickvue influenza a þ b test had a low sensitivity (27%) for the detection of both influenza a and b viruses. the center for disease control and prevention screened 45 specimens with positive results for novel influenza a (h1n1) using directigen ez flu a þ b and obtained a sensitivity of 49% [23] .we assumed that one of the reasons for the discrepancies was that the human epidemic strains of influenza viruses used in the flu-ivds did not match the current influenza virus outbreak strains. pandemic influenza virus strains varied from year to year and from country to country. for example, the influenza a/texas/1/77 strain was used as the master influenza virus strain to develop the monoclonal antibodies in the binaxnow influenza a&b rapid test; however, the major virus strain that caused the influenza outbreak in taiwan was the type a/taiwan/439/2009 (h3n2) and type a/taiwan/9042/ 2008 (h1n1). other flu-ivds failed to mention the master influenza virus strain used in their preparations. therefore, inappropriate master influenza virus strains used in the flu-ivd preparations may contribute to the low detection sensitivity. moreover, studies have shown that analytical sensitivity did not directly reflect the clinical sensitivity on patient specimens. the analytical sensitivity of influenza h5n1 detection and seasonal influenza was the same, although their clinical performances were poor [23, 24] . manufacturers j o u r n a l o f f o o d a n d d r u g a n a l y s i s 2 2 ( 2 0 1 4 ) 2 7 9 e2 8 4should follow who recommendations for the annually pandemic influenza virus strains to be used in their preparation of the flu-ivds in order to improve the quality. we also suggest that the class level for flu-ivds in taiwan for government regulations be elevated so that the government can monitor the quality of ivds using a lot release system. furthermore, taiwan fda should establish a reference or proficiency panel to evaluate in vitro flu-ivds in the near future.patients suffering from respiratory illness such as cough, asthma, and emphysema are usually diagnosed with acute respiratory tract infections. viruses such as influenza virus, coronavirus, and respiratory syncytial virus commonly cause respiratory tract infections [25] . several studies have conducted a specificity test by real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis for different respiratory-tract-infection-related viruses [26, 27] . the specificity of flu-ivds played an important role in the selective interaction of influenza a and b viruses.according to the epidemiological studies, hcov caused >15% of common colds in adults, of which oc43 was the most common [28] . hence, we used the common hcov-oc43 to determine the specificity of flu-ivds in this study and the result showed that not all flu-ivds cross-reacted with hcov-oc43, suggesting good specificity (table 5 ).in conclusion, seven domestic and 31 imported flu-ivds were collected to analyze the sensitivity and specificity. analytical sensitivity of flu-ivds for a/h1n1, a/h3n2, and flu b was 500e1000 ng/ml, 1000 ng/ml, and 1000 ng/ml, respectively. average sensitivity of a/h1n1 and a/h3n2 for flu-ivds was log 10 5.8 ae 0.5 ccid 50 /ml and log 10 6.6 ae 0.5 ccid 50 /ml, respectively. no products cross-reacted with hcov-oc43. our results could provide more information for future policymaking strategies and preparedness against seasonal and pandemic influenza. table 5 e specificity results of all influenza in vitro diagnostic devices.cross-reactivity specificity rate human coronavirs-oc43 0/38 100% j o u r n a l o f f o o d a n d d r u g a n a l y s i s 2 2 ( 2 0 1 4 ) 2 7 9 e2 8 4cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2). in temperate regions endemic hcovs usually display a winter seasonality, although hcov-229e has been detected sporadically throughout the year [12] . endemic hcovs are globally distributed and are maintained in the human population. the sars-cov pandemic came to an end in 2003 (https://www.who.int/csr/resources/ publications/cds_csr_aro_2004_2.pdf?ua=1. accessed 3 february 2020), less than a year after the first reported case. in contrast, human cases caused by mers-cov continue to be reported at the time of writing, more than seven years after the first reported case. most laboratory-confirmed mers cases have occurred in the eastern mediterranean region, and the majority of those in saudi arabia. unlike the endemic hcovs, sars-cov and mers-cov are maintained in zoonotic reservoirs. the sars and mers outbreaks were driven in part by super-spreading events in which individuals directly infected a disproportionally large number of contacts [13] . the sars-cov-2-caused coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) epidemic originated in a wuhan, china market that sold exotic animals for consumption. based on genetic relatedness to other betacoronaviruses, sars-cov-2 likely has a zoonotic reservoir. however, the precise source of sars-cov-2 that initially infected humans remains to be confirmed. the sars-cov-2 appears to be substantially more contagious than sars-cov ( table 1 ). the distribution of sars-cov-2 in different mammalian species is unknown. an interesting question is the susceptibility of farm animals and pets, and their role in the epidemiologic cycle as their angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor shares similarity with human ace2 [14] .infections caused by endemic hcovs have an incubation period of 2-5 days and are associated with mild upper respiratory symptoms (the "common cold"). endemic hcovs are among the most frequent cause of upper respiratory tract infections. lower respiratory tract infections (bronchiolitis, pneumonia) are rare. following an incubation period of usually 4-5 days, patients infected with sars-cov often present with symptoms of fever, headache, and myalgias. respiratory symptoms including cough and dyspnoea usually develop from several days to a week after illness onset. atypical pneumonia and respiratory deterioration occur in 20-30% of cases. the incubation period and clinical course of mers are similar to that of sars, the exception being a higher proportion of cases progressing to respiratory deterioration and distress. the incubation period and clinical course of sars-cov-2 infection are probably similar to that of sars. li et al. first reported a mean incubation period of 5.2 days [15] . fever and cough are frequently reported early in the course of illness [16, 17] . infections are also characterized by dyspnoea, respiratory distress and positive chest x-ray [10] . lower respiratory symptoms often develop about 1 week from the onset of initial symptoms [16] .globally over 8000 cases and over 900 deaths due to sars-cov were reported, with a case-fatality ratio of approximately 11% (https://www.who.int/csr/sars/en/ whoconsensus.pdf. accessed 3 february 2020). between september 2012 and november 2019, there were 2494 laboratory-confirmed cases of mers, with 858 deaths (https://www.who.int/emergencies/merscov/en/. accessed 4 february 2020). the mers casefatality rate of 34.4% is about triple that of sars, and persons in the 50-59 year age group are at highest risk for primary cases. in the short time from its emergence in december 2019 to 15 march 2020, the sars-cov-2 has been reported in 134 countries. at the time of writing, the situation was evolving rapidly, with over 142,000 confirmed cases reported globally (over 81,000 in china) and 3194 deaths in china (3.9% case-fatality rate) and over 2100 deaths outside of china. of countries and continents outside of china, south korea, iran, and europe (particularly italy) have experienced a high number of covid-19 cases (https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coro navirus-2019/situation-reports/. accessed 15 march 2020). mortality rates vary widely, and depend on the age of patients, underlying risk factors, and the denominator definitionhospitalized cases, all symptomatic cases, only moderate to severe cases, etc. in a study of adult patients (mean age 59.7 y; 40% with chronic illnesses) with sars-cov-2 pneumonia admitted to the intensive care unit (icu), 61.5% died within 28 days [18] . in contrast, a study of hospitalized patients (median age 47.5 years) across beijing showed [8, 20, 22, 59] 18% of cases to be severe and 73% mild, with a fatality rate of 0.9% [19] . mortality is highest in older persons, with a median age of 59-75 years [15, 17] . treatment for all severe hcov infections is supportive although a randomized, double-blinded, control clinical trial has been conducted on a gilead drug remdesivir [20] based on one study focused on children, a total of 28 children aged from 1 month to 17 years have been reported in china. all paediatric cases with laboratory-confirmed sars-cov-2 infection were mild cases with no deaths reported [21] . during the first 2 months of the current outbreak, covid-19 spread rapidly throughout china and caused varying degrees of illness with a death rate of 1.3%. patients often presented without fever, and many did not have abnormal radiologic findings [22] . the chinese centers for disease control and prevention team analysed more than 72,000 patient records, of which 44,672 were laboratory-confirmed cases, 16,186 suspected cases, 10,567 clinically diagnosed cases, and 889 asymptomatic cases. of the confirmed cases, about 14% of the illnesses were severe, which included pneumonia and shortness of breath, and about 5% have the critical disease, marked by respiratory failure, septic shock, and multi-organ failure. the overall case-fatality rate was 2.3%, and of 1023 deaths included in the study, the majority were in people age 60 and older or those with underlying medical conditions http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/ 2020/02/more-outbreak-details-emerge-covid-19-casestop-70000 (accessed 18 february 2020).it must be appreciated that no matter how accurate and fast laboratory testing methods are, the diagnosis of viral pneumonias such as caused by sars-cov-2 involves collecting the correct specimen from the patient at the right time. the endemic hcovs have been detected from a variety of upper and lower respiratory sources including throat, nasal nasopharyngeal (np), sputum, and bronchial fluid [12, 23, 24] . wang et al have just reported that oropharyngeal (op) swabs (n = 398) were used much more frequently than np swabs (n = 8) in china during the covid-19 outbreak; however, the sars-cov-2 rna was detected only in 32% of op swabs, which was significantly lower than that in np swabs (63%) [25] . the us centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) recommends collecting the upper respiratory np swab. collection of an op specimen is a lower priority, and, if collected, should be combined in the same tube as the np swab (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/ 2019-ncov/lab/guidelines-clinical-specimens.html. accessed 16 march 2020). swab specimens should be placed in a universal or viral transport medium. nasopharyngeal aspirates are also suitable specimens for the detection of hcovs.for the most sensitive detection of sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2, the collection and testing of both upper and lower respiratory samples [sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (bal)] is recommended [26] . however, the collection of sputum and particularly bal via bronchoscopy increases biosafety risk to healthcare workers through the creation of aerosol droplets. proper use of personal protective equipment (ppe) by healthcare workers is important. bronchoscopy is a highly technical procedure requiring well-trained staff and may not be available in many parts of the world. upper respiratory specimens are easy to collect, thereby increasing access to testing for patients with mild symptoms, and in the resource limited settings. sars-cov and mers-cov rna are also detected from stool, urine and blood specimens, although generally less reliably than from respiratory specimens [26] [27] [28] ]. an exception is sars-cov rna which is consistently detected in feces at about two weeks after symptom onset [26, 29] . for the most sensitive detection of endemic hcovs, upper respiratory specimens should be collected within the first few days of symptom onset. the dynamics of rna shedding in mers and sars patients may reflect the specimen source, severity of illness, as well as underlying risk factors. among hospitalized patients who did not require ventilator support, mers-cov rna levels in the upper respiratory tract usually peaked in the first week after symptom onset. among eventual fatal cases requiring ventilation, rna levels in lower respiratory tract specimens peaked between weeks 2 and 3 [27] . similar shedding patterns were seen for sars-cov: rna positive rates peaked in upper respiratory tract specimens at 7-10 days after symptom onset and then steadily declined after that, while rna positive rates in lower respiratory tract specimens remained higher throughout 3 weeks after onset of illness [26] . in one study, diabetes was associated with prolonged mers-cov rna shedding in the respiratory tract [27] . viral pneumonias typically do not result in the production of purulent sputum. thus, a nasopharyngeal swab/wash is usually the collection method used to obtain a specimen for testing. nasopharyngeal specimens may miss early infection; a deeper specimen may need to be obtained by bronchoscopy. alternatively, repeated testing can be used because over time, the likelihood of the sars-cov-2 being present in the nasopharynx increases. self-collected saliva specimens were tested positive in 11 of 12 covid-19 patients, suggesting it is a promising non-invasive specimen for diagnosis, monitoring, and infection control in sars-cov-2 infections [30] . at the time of writing there was little data on the performance of upper vs. lower respiratory tract specimens for the detection of sars-cov-2 [16] . serum is another source for the detection of sars-cov-2. however, only 15% of patients hospitalized with pneumonia had detectable rna in serum [16] . specimens collected for laboratory testing of hcovs should be maintained at refrigerated temperature for up to 72 h, or frozen at −70°c or below (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/ 2019-ncov/lab/guidelines-clinical-specimens.html. accessed 15 march 2020). rectal specimens have been reported positive in patients infected with sars-cov-2 [20] .if the patient's travel or exposure history or symptoms suggest possible infection with a high-risk, novel agent, sars-cov, or mers-cov, then the initial handling of the specimen should be performed under biosafety level 3 (bsl-3) conditions until the specimen or an aliquot is rendered noninfectious by lysis or another method. virus isolation should not be routinely performed in this situation (https://www.asm.org/ articles/policy/laboratory-response-network-lrn-sentinel-level-c. accessed 4 february 2020). the u.s. cdc biosafety guidelines state that routine diagnostic testing of specimens from suspected or confirmed sars-cov-2 patients, can be handled in a bsl-2 laboratory using standard precautions (https://www.cdc. gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/lab/lab-biosafetyguidelines.html. accessed 21 march 2020).isolation of hcovs in cell culture is not routinely performed for diagnostic purposes due to the lack of permissive cell lines, time to results, labour and expertise requirements, and the lack of commercial antisera for culture confirmation (table 2) . sars-cov and mers-cov and sars-cov-2 will grow in primary monkey cells and cell lines such as vero and llc-mk2, but cell culture should not be performed for suspect cases in routine diagnostic laboratories for biosafety reasons [2, 6, 31, 32] . however, virus isolation in cell cultures is critical to obtain isolates for characterization and to support the development of vaccines and therapeutic agents.rapid antigen tests would theoretically provide the advantage of fast time to results and low-cost detection of hcovs but are likely to suffer from poor sensitivity based on the experience with this method for influenza (flu) viruses [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] (table 2 ). in a pre-peer reviewed article, diao et al. reported that a fluorescence immunochromatographic assay is an accurate, rapid, early and simple method for detecting nucleocapsid protein of sars-cov-2 in np swab for diagnosis of covid-19 (https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03. 07.20032524v2. accessed 15 march 2020). the incorporation of colloidal gold-labeled immunoglobulin g (igg) as the detection reagent is an approach that may increase the sensitivity of rapid antigen tests for respiratory viruses [38] . monoclonal antibodies specifically against sars-cov-2 have been under preparation. novel approaches to concentrate antigen, or to amplify the detection phase are needed if these methods are to have clinical utility. sona nanotech (halifax, canada) is developing a quick-response lateral-flow test to screen covid-19 patients targeting to produce results in 5-15 min (https://sonanano.com/sona-develops-rapidscreening-test-for-coronavirus/. accessed 15 february 2020). timing of specimen collection, when viral titres are highest, may improve the diagnostic sensitivity of rapid antigen tests for hcovs [39] .serological assays are not routinely used for diagnosis of hcov infections due to the lack of commercial reagents, let alone commercial reagents that have been vetted by clinical trials and the regulatory review process [40, 41] (table 2 ). serological assays, on the other hand, are important for understanding the epidemiology of emerging hcovs, including the burden and role of asymptomatic infections.it has been particularly important for antibody detection in the diagnosis of cases of novel and emerging hcovs, such as sars-cov and mers-cov [2, 3] . in these situations, affected patients may not test positive for viral rna, particularly in the early phase of the disease, but retrospectively can be shown to have developed an immune response. when sars-cov-2 was identified, especially when rapid antigen testing and/or molecular assays are neither available nor stable, serology can be used as a supplementary diagnostic tool. a recent study demonstrated that both igm and igg antibodies were detected 5 days after onset in all 39 patients infected with sars-cov-2 infection. the authors recommended to use serology to facilitate the diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infections when an np swab specimen was collected inappropriately and the molecular assays were performed unsatisfactorily [42] . in china, six serology devices have just received urgent approval from the national medical products administration (nmpa) by 12 march 2020 (table 3) . proper specimen handling and storage are important to maintain the integrity of specimens and the performance of serologic tests.random-amplification deep-sequencing approaches played a critical role in identifying mers-cov and sars-cov-2 [6, 11, [43] [44] [45] [46] [47] . for the clinical diagnostic application, the genetic heterogeneity of hcovs precludes a single "pan-hcov" molecular assay [48] [49] [50] [51] ( table 2 ). some pan-cov assays use degenerate primers [52] , some utilize multiple primer sets [53] , and others employ a single set of nondegenerate primers [54] . current molecular respiratory panels that detect the endemic hcovs (hcov-nl63, hcov-hku1, hcov-oc43, and hcov-229e) require multiple sets of pcr oligonucleotides [12, [55] [56] [57] . sars-cov-2 cases tested negative for endemic hcovs included in molecular respiratory panels [10] .in china, at the time of revising, eleven molecular devices from shanghai zj bio-tech, shanghai geneodx biotech, bgi biotech (wuhan), mgi tech, da an gene, sansure biotech, shanghai biogerm medical biotech capitalbio (chengdu), beijing applied biological technologies, maccura biotechnology, and wuhan easydiagnosis biomedicine have received urgent approval from nmpa and their characteristics are contrasted in table 3 . variable performance has been reported on these devices [47, 58] . in their registration certificates, it was clearly indicated that the certificate was for urgent and supplemental diagnosis of pneumonia caused by sars-cov-2. additional multi-centre clinical trial data are needed for extension after one year. among them, one (mgi tech) uses its ngs technique to detect all pathogens in a given specimen including sars-cov-2 and the other one (innovita) uses its isothermal amplification followed by chip detection. the other nine devices incorporated real-time pcr technique with hydrolysis probes. after nucleic acids get extracted (separated reagents and systems), the extracts are transferred to a real-time pcr thermocycler (e.g. abi 7500 fast dx real-time pcr instrument) for nucleic acid amplification and detection.several rt-pcr protocols for detection of sars-cov-2 rna have been posted by the world health organization at https://www.who.int/emergencies/ diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/technical-guidance/ laboratory-guidance. (accessed 15 march 2020). three of these protocols are listed below.the us cdc developed developed a rt-pcr diagnostic panel for universal detection of sars-like betacoronaviruses and specific detection of sars-cov-2 [20] . three separate rt-pcr reactions target the n gene. one primer/probe set detects all betacoronaviruses, while two sets are specific for sars-cov-2. all 3 assays must be positive to report presumptive positive for sars-cov-2 (https://www.fda.gov/ media/134922/download. accessed 15 march 2020). specimen types included upper and lower respiratory specimens (such as np or op swabs, sputum, lower respiratory tract aspirates, bal, and nasopharyngeal wash/aspirate or nasal aspirate). it the charité algorithm (berlin, germany) begins with two rt-pcr assays that detect e and rdrp genes of subgenus sarbecovirus (sars-cov, sars-cov-2, and bat-associated betacoronaviruses). both assays must be positive to advance to the next step in the testing algorithm. the second step consists of a [52] [53] [54] naat, monoplex, specific-hcovhigh sensitivity and specificity for special species, potential quantification 1-8 h diagnosis (detection, differentiation, and limited typing) and research [69, 70] naat, multiplex high sensitivity and specificity, covering other pathogens, filmarray rp ez is clia-waived 1-8 h diagnosis (detection, differentiation, and limited typing) and research [12, [55] [56] [57] naat, poct rapid and safe, good sensitivity and specificity, some are clia-waiveddiagnosis (detection and limited differentiation) and research [63, 67] note: eia, enzyme immunoassay; ifa, immunofluorescent assay; naat, nucleic acid amplification test; clia, clinical laboratory improvement act. sars-cov-2 specific rt-pcr that targets rdrp [59, 60] . exclusivity testing showed that alphacoronaviruses (cov-nl63 and −229e) and betacoronaviruses hcov-oc43, hcov-hku1 and mers-cov were not detected (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/ coronaviruse/protocol-v2-1.pdf?sfvrsn=a9ef618c_2. accessed 8 february 2020).the university of hong kong li ka shing faculty of medicine protocol uses two assays (n gene screening assay followed by orf1b assay for confirmation) to detect subgenus sarbecovirus [30, 61] . since sars-cov is not circulating in humans currently, cases that are positive should be considered as sars-cov-2 infected cases. exclusivity testing showed that 229e, oc43 and mers, 229e, hku1, nl63, oc43 yielded negative results (https://www.who.int/docs/defaultsource/coronaviruse/peiris-protocol-16-1-20.pdf? sfvrsn=af1aac73_4. accessed 8 february 2020).all three novel coronaviruses are highly contagious. fast, safe, simple to use diagnostic devices performed at or near the point of care (poc) (figure 1 ) which have been shown to impact patient management and control of infectious disease epidemics [62], are extremely desirable in poc when biosafety facility is limited (table 3) . several manufactures have been spending efforts to generate devices for poc testing (poct) [63] . the id now™ (previously alere i) influenza a & b assay (abbott, san diego, ca) was cleared by the us fda for direct use on np swabs as the first-ever clinical laboratory improvement amendments (clia)-waived nucleic acid-based test in january 2016 [64, 65] . similarly, the xpert® xpress flu/rsv (cepheid, sunnyvale, ca) and cobas® liat® flu a/b & rsv (roche molecular systems, pleasanton, ca) assays are integrated nucleic acid extraction-independent devices that have recently received fda clearance and clia-waiver for simultaneous detection and identification of flua, flub, and rsv in nasopharyngeal swabs [66] . the filmarray® respiratory ez panel (biofire, salt lake city, ut) so far so far is the only clia-waived syndromic panel that covers a set of 14 respiratory viral and bacterial pathogens including classical coronavirus species [67] .considering the increased levels of mortality and infectivity associated with three novel-coronavirus outbreaks, these random-access, safe and simple tests, which offer fast and accurate detection and identification, are likely to have an immediate impact on prompt clinical and epidemiological decisions [7, 63] . lysis buffer can be used to inactivate the infectivity of specimens so the testing can be run at poc when a biosafety cabinet is not available. fast near-patient and poct could help more efficiently triage of suspected cases of novel coronavirus, helping to focus limited resources on enabling appropriate use of quarantine. a handful of diagnostics developers are now striving to bring fast sars-cov-2 tests to market as soon as possible, with hopes of ultimately assisting with the ongoing outbreak in china. molecular diagnostic tests for use at the are in development from cepheid and hibergene (dublin, ireland). cepheid has some advantages in the molecular poct space because it already has instruments placed in china. mobidiag, meanwhile, may offer additional benefits with a multiplex test for coronavirus and flu viruses (https://www. genomeweb.com/pcr/diagnostics-firms-rush-developrapid-point-care-tests-novel-coronavirus#.xkea3sgzy 2x. accessed 15 february 2020).mjl and y-wt are employees of cepheid, the commercial manufacturer of the xpert xpress sars-cov-2 test. figure 1 . evolutions in molecular testing procedures. the point-of-care test (poct) devices incorporate nucleic acid extraction, amplification and detection together into an integrated and sealed cartridge making it simple, rapid and safe. during end-point pcr, dna is detected or measured at the completion of pcr amplification, requiring post-pcr processing. real-time pcr is a closed-tube system in which dna is detected or measured during the exponential phase of amplification.in december 2019 the outbreak of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) started in wuhan in china [1] , but the coronavirus disease 2019 rapidly spread to other countries as well [2] . the first infected patient in the netherlands was detected on the 27 th of february 2020 [3] . accurate diagnostics are fundamental in the fight against this increasing pandemic. moreover, hospitals would benefit from rapid detection of this virus infection in patients who acutely present to hospitals with respiratory symptoms suspected for covid-19. time delay in the establishment of diagnosis increases logistic challenges and causes stagnation of patient flow in emergency departments as these patients are unable to be transferred to appropriate hospital wards or intensive care units (icus) when results of the diagnostic tests are still pending [4] .nucleic acid amplification tests (nats) are the gold standard because of the high specificity, although sensitivity may depend on the timing of disease presentation, sampling location and severity of illness [5] . nevertheless, it usually takes about 4 to 24 hours before laboratory-based results become available depending on specific nat platforms and laboratory organisation. therefore, numerous lateral flow immunochromatographic assays (lfas) have been introduced into the market, and some countries have stocked up on such rapid tests. these lfas detect the presence of igm and igg against sars-cov-2.this study aimed to assess the diagnostic performance of lfas, and compare these to an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa) and nats in suspected covid-19 patients.patients presenting to a teaching hospital in the netherlands were eligible between march 17, 2020 and april 10, 2020 when they had respiratory symptoms that were suspected for respiratory tract infection. patients were sampled from the oral cavity and subsequently from the nasal cavity using the same nasopharyngeal swab, which was tested by nats. in some cases, sputum samples were tested, because of persisting clinical suspicion on covid-19 despite a negative nat on nasopharyngeal swabs. nats were performed according to the national reference method that was established after international collaboration [6] , or by the ce-ivd kit genefindertm covid-19 plus realamp kit using the sample to result platform elite ingenius®. the institutional review board waived the need for informed consent as tests were performed on samples which had been acquired for routine clinical care (irb protocol number 2020-034), and according to hospital procedure all patients were informed about the possibility of an opt-out if they had objections against the use of left-over material for research to improve or validate diagnostic testing procedures. the study was conducted in accordance with helsinki declaration as revised in 2013.first, in a pilot phase 20 nat-positive and 5 nat-negative patients were retrospectively selected for which six lfas were performed on heparin plasma samples obtained upon hospital presentation ( figure s1 ), which corresponded to the dates of molecular testing. lfas were included from boson biotech, cellex, dynamiker biotechnology, orient gene biotech, prometheus bio, and wantai rapid test. any visible band for either igg, igm or unspecified ig was indicative for a positive result. second, based on the sensitivity and specificity results in the pilot study, the best performing lfa was further evaluated in an extended cohort of randomly selected patients. third, this lfa was prospectively tested in consecutive patients between april 6 and april 10. fourth, specificity was additionally tested in a historical control group of randomly selected sera of 50 adult patients in september 2019 as sars-cov-2 was not circulating at that time. finally, samples were also analysed by the wantai sars-cov-2 ab elisa kit, which detects total antibodies, and interpreted according to manufacturer's instructions. both clinical information and reference standard results were unavailable to the performers of lfas and the elisa.all analyses were performed using sas 9.2 (cary, north carolina). we compared groups using non-parametric tests for continuous variables and chi-square test or fisher's exact test for categorical variables as appropriate. p-values <0.05 were considered to be statistically significant.in the pilot study sensitivity characteristics of lfa were very heterogenous ranging from 2/20 (10%; 95% confidence interval (ci) 0-23%) to 11/20 (55%; 95%ci 33-77%)) ( table 1) . we decided to continue with the orient gene biotech covid-19 igg/igm rapid test (ogbrt) as it had the highest sensitivity.a total of 111 patients (including the 25 from the pilot study) were retrospectively selected between march 16 and march 29. subsequently, 117 consecutive patients were prospectively included between april 6 and april 10. in total, 228 patients were included with a median age of 61 years (interquartile range (iqr) 46-74), 117 (52%) were male, 21 (9%) were admitted to the icu within 24 hours and median c-reactive protein (crp) upon hospital presentation was 31 (iqr 7-95) mg/l (table s1 ). median time from symptom onset to sample collection was 7 (iqr 4-14) days.ogbrt had an overall sensitivity of 43/99 (43%; 95%ci 34-53%) and specificity of 126/129 (98%; 95%ci 95-100%) ( table 2) . sensitivity increased to 31/52 (60%; 95%ci 46-73) in patients with at least seven days of symptoms, and to 21/33 (64%; 95%ci 47-80) in patients with crp >100 mg/l upon presentation. however, there was no significant difference between patients requiring icu figure s2 ).in the randomly selected historical control sera, the lfa and the elisa specificity was 49/50 (98%; 95%ci 94-100) and 50/50 (100%; 95%ci 100-100), respectively; lfa showed a very weak igg line in one sample.this study shows that the sensitivity of lfa was low in patients suspected for covid-19 presenting to the hospital, but it improved in patients with at least seven days of symptoms and in those with crp levels >100 mg/l upon presentation. specificity of lfas and the elisa was very high, and fulfilling a frequently used criterium of at least 98%. the elisa had a higher sensitivity compared to lfas.several countries, including spain and the united kingdom, have purchased one or more of these lfas. however, our study findings underline that cautiousness is required when considering implementation of such tests. interestingly, cellex rapid test, which is currently the only rapid diagnostic test that is fda approved, performed less than ogbrt in our pilot study. another rapid test was reported to have a sensitivity below 20% in acute patients referred to emergency department [7] . other studies showed higher sensitivities of lfas up to 90% in unspecified patient groups with more time between disease onset and testing or missing information regarding timing of sampling [8, 9] . test performance characteristics as provided by manufacturers were higher than those observed in our study, which is related to different selection of positive and negative controls.in our study we primarily included consecutive patients presenting to the hospital, which represents clinical practice and clinical sensitivity (i.e. diagnosing covid-19 upon hospital presentation) rather than analytical sensitivity (i.e. detecting the presence of antibodies at that moment). the observed higher sensitivity in patients with at least seven days of symptoms is in line with findings from other studies [10, 11] .there are some study limitations to consider. this study included a wide comparison of six different lfas, an elisa and nats, but more tests are available on the market. nevertheless, bothlfas and the elisa were limited in sensitivity, suggesting that antibody production is not always detectable or at least not yet detectable during the early phase of infection. second, nat as reference standard remains suboptimal, and it remains possible that in some cases actual infections were missed. in some patients nats were only positive in sputum and negative in nasopharynx, whereas the majority of patients were only tested by nasopharyngeal swabs. third, the subgroup of patients admitted to the icu was limited, precluding definite conclusions in this group.in conclusion, the high specificity of lfas may contribute to rapidly confirm covid-19, accelerate decision-making in emergency rooms and routing to appropriate hospital wards. yet, negative lfa results are unreliable to exclude covid-19 due to the limited sensitivity of these tests. therefore, these lfa tests cannot replace molecular diagnostics in acute care settings, but should only be used as an additional triage tool when improvement of hospital logistics is expected and their limitations are carefully considered.the authors declare no conflicts of interest. middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) was first reported from saudi arabia in 2012, in the patient's respiratory samples with severe pneumonia leading to acute respiratory distress syndrome and death [1] . since september 2012, 27 countries have reported cases of mers and who has been notified of 2079 laboratory-confirmed cases with at least 722 deaths by the end of august 2017 [2] . mers coronavirus (mers-cov) is a novel virus * corresponding author.e-mail addresses: samy.kassem@vet.kfs.edu.eg, samy kasem1976@yahoo.com (s. kasem) . that belongs to the family coronaviridae and the genus betacoronavirus causes the disease [3] . human-to-human transmission appears to be limited to family and health care settings [4] . in general, a significant proportion of the cases are suspected to be a result of zoonotic transmission. serological evidence of mers-cov infection of dromedaries was reported from saudi arabia, united arab emirates (uae), oman, qatar, jordan, pakistan and africa [2, 5, 6] . in addition, mers-cov rna has been detected in nasal swabs of dromedaries in qatar, oman, saudi arabia, egypt and uae [2, 6, 7, 8] . moreover, widespread circulation of different genetic variants of mers-cov in camels, with geographic clustering of human and camel mers-cov sequences [6, 9] [12] . in this study, mers prevalence rates in relation to locations and seasons were investigated in livestock markets and slaughterhouses in saudi arabia. moreover, the sensitivity and specificity of the bionote ® rapid mers-cov ag test was assessed compared with the real-time reverse transcriptase pcr (rtrt-pcr).this study was conducted from december, 2015 to august, 2017 at the ministry of environment, water and agriculture (mewa), riyadh, saudi arabia. a total of 698 dromedary camels were examined including 435 animals in the livestock markets (jeddah, al-gandria, al-toki, arar and najran) and 263 animals in south riyadh slaughterhouse (table 1) . two swabs were collected from each camel, one on viral transport media (copan italia, italy), examined for rtrt-pcr and the second swab on the buffer of rapid mers-cov ag test.all collected nasal swabs from dromedaries on viral transport media, were transferred to the riyadh veterinary laboratory within 24-72 h after collection to be investigated for mers-cov rna by rtrt-pcr.camels less than two years of age were considered young, while those over two years old were considered adult. the majority camels in slaughterhouses were young (less than 2 year age). sampling procedures were approved by the ethics committee of the mewa, saudi arabia.® rapid mers-cov ag test kit is a qualitative test. it was performed for all samples according to the manufacturing protocol. briefly, the camel nasal swabs were transferred directly into a tube containing the assay diluents. the test strip was then placed into the test tube, with the arrows on the strip pointing down, and the results were read after 15 min. the test was considered negative when only the control (c) line appeared, whereas it was considered positive when both the test line (t) and the control line (c) appeared. in the absence of the control line (c), the test was considered invalid.mers-cov rnas were extracted from nasal samples by qiagen viral rna extraction kit, according to the manufacturer's protocol (qiagen gmbh, hilden, germany). the rtrt-pcr targeting upstream gene (upe) of mers-cov was used for screening [13] . confirmation was done using the open reading frame (orf) 1a. 5 l of extracted rna was subjected to rtrt-pcr using upe primers using a lightmix molecular dx mers-cov upe kits (roche) according to the manufacturer's protocol. all positive samples by the upe assay were then confirmed by orf1a, previously described [14] .to investigate the genetic relationship between the ten mers-cov isolates and other strains whose genomes are available in genbank, the whole-genome for ten positive rtrt-pcr samples {riyadh (5) and jeddah (5)} were ion torrent sequenced according to the primer/amplicon combinations (123 sequencing reactions) as described earlier [15] . the evolution analysis based on full genome sequencing of mers-cov was carried out with mega7. the evolutionary distances were estimated by means of the neighbor-joining method, based on kimura 2-parameter method. bootstrap analyses were performed with 1000 repeat samples of the data sets [16] .data collected from the study animals were entered in a microsoft excel sheet, then imported into the statistical package for social sciences (spss) for windows ® version 22.0 (spss inc., chicago, illinois) for statistical analyses appropriate for each variable. the association between mers-cov prevalence in camels and the study variables (location, season and age) were analyzed using the 2-tailed chi-square test and logistic regression model. the statistical significance was considered when p ≤ 0.05.the results of rapid mers-cov ag assay showed that positive samples of mers-cov were 23 in jeddah livestock market, 14 in al-gandria, 13 in al-toki, 2 in najran, 58 in south riyadh slaughterhouse and no positive samples were recorded in northern boundaries (table 1 ). in general, the prevalence of mers infection in camels in animal markets and slaughterhouses by rapid screening assay showed 15.8%.mers-cov rna detection rate by rtrt-pcr from nasal swabs was showed that 95 positive samples for mers-cov rna in jeddah market, 33 samples in al-ganderia market, 50 in al-toki market, 2 in northern boundaries market, 4 in najran market and 210 in south riyadh slaughterhouse (table 1 ). in general, the prevalence of mers infection in camels in animal markets and slaughterhouses by rtrt-pcr was 56.4%.the genomic sequences obtained from ten camel's nasal samples, were assembled with mers-cov genomic sequences obtained from the genbank. the analysis showed complete similarity between mers-cov camel isolates and mers-cov sequences recovered from human cases (fig. 1) .the rapid mers-cov ag assay was used to examine 698 camel nasal swabs compared to rtrt-pcr. 195 nasal swabs were positive in the rapid screening assay showing rapid specificity of 100%. in addition, 199 nasal samples that were negative in the rapid assay compared to rtrt-pcr, showed rapid assay sensitivity of 49.49% ( table 2) .the result revealed that a high prevalence rate of mers infection in winter months, ranging from 20% in al-toki livestock market (may, 2017), 28.6% in najran market, 33.7% in al-ganderia market, 76% in al-toki market (january, 2017), 85% in jeddah market to 91.5% in south riyadh slaughterhouse.the prevalence of mers infection showed a decreased pattern in summer months ranging from 4.8% in al-toki livestock market (august, 2017), 8.1% in south riyadh slaughterhouse (august, 2017) to 10% in arar livestock market.the overall prevalence of mers-civ rna in dromedaries in summer mothers (june-august) were lower either by rapid assay (0.62%) or by rtrt-pcr (6.2%) in comparison to higher prevalence rates in winter months (december-may) by rapid assay (20.3%) or by rtrt-pcr (71.5%) ( table 1 ).the prevalence rates of mers-cov rna were significantly higher in young animals (<2 years of age) indicating increased infection of young camels and high rates of positive samples recorded either by rapid assay (22.3%) or by rtrt-pcr (71.6%). while mers-cov rna prevalence rates were lower in dromedaries >2 years of age either by rapid assay (5.8%) or by rtrt-pcr (33%) ( table 1 ).dromedary camels are likely to be the primary source of middle east respiratory syndrome virus (mers-cov) infection in humans. the routes of direct or indirect zoonotic transmission are yet unknown. in this study, the prevalence rates of mers-cov were investigated in dromedaries at the livestock markets and slaughterhouse in saudi arabia. this study was based on the screening of nasal swab samples by bionote ® rapid mers-cov ag test kit and by real-time pcr assay targeting the upe and orf1a genes and characterizing genetic diversity of the mers-cov genome sequences.the presented study showed that high rates of mers-cov infection among dromedary camels in livestock markets and slaughterhouses in saudi arabia. the overall prevalence of mers infection in camels in livestock markets and slaughterhouses by rtrt-pcr was 56.4%. previous studies reported a prevalence of 29.2% of mers-cov infection in al-ahsa province slaughterhouse [17] . also a high proportion of 59% of dromedaries (62/105) shed mers-cov rna in the central doha animal market and adjoining slaughterhouse in qatar [18] . in egypt, the mers-cov rna prevalence in nasal swabs at slaughterhouses was 14.7% % among 584 camels [7] .the analysis of the obtained data based on the season demonstrated that high mers infection rates in winter months, varied from 20% in al-toki livestock market to 91.5% in south riyadh slaughterhouse. while, the prevalence of mers infection showed a decreased pattern in summer months varied from 4.8% in al-toki livestock market to 10% in arar livestock market. in general, prevalence rate of mers infection in camels in winter months by rtrt-pcr was 71.5% and summer months was 6.2%. in addition, the analysis of the data based on age showed that young camels (<2 years of age) had higher prevalence of mers-cov rna (71.6%) compared with adult camels (>2 years of age) (33%), indicating increased rates of mers-cov infection of young camels. these results were in agreement with the previous reports, showed that the mers-cov infection in camels was recorded in winter season and young age camels appear to be the highest risk of mers-cov infection [5, 6, 7] .the sequences of mers-cov genome were aligned with reference sequences obtained from the genbank. the phylogenetic analysis was performed using mega7. genetic analysis revealed a fig. 1 . the evolutionary analysis of full genome sequences of ten mers-cov isolates recovered from camels using mega7. the ten mers-cov camel samples were aligned with mers-cov reference strains retrieved from the genbank. the analysis was inferred using the neighbor-joining method and distance calculations were computed using kimura 2-parameter method. sequences from the current study are indicated by solid circle. complete identity between camel mers-cov isolates from riyadh and jeddah regions and mers isolates recovered from human patients. the similarity of mers-cov sequences recovered from camels and human patients indicating the increased risk of potential zoonosis and camels act as intermediate hosts transmitting the virus to humans. these results are consistent with many previous studies [6, 9, 10] .the performance of commercial rapid mers-cov ag assay to detect mers-cov antigen was compared with the mers upe and open reading frame 1a (orf1a) real-time reverse transcriptase pcr (rtrt-pcr) assay in camel nasal swabs. the data showed that out of the 698 camel nasal swabs tested, 195 were mers-cov positive and 503 were negative by the ica, while 394 were positive and 304 were negative by the upe and orf1a real-time rtpcr, therefore, the sensitivity and specificity of the ica compared to those of the realtime rt-pcr were 49.49% and 100%, respectively. previous reports recorded sensitivity and screening quality of the ica assay found to be 93.9% and 100%, respectively, compared with that of rtrt-pcr. also they reported that the ica was less sensitive for the detection of mers-cov antigen (10 5 tcid50) than was the upe real-time pcr (10 4 tcid50). the difference between the assay sensitivities might be regarded to the release of subgenomic rna after the onset of cytopathogenic effect (cpe) in cell culture, including the upe target fragment, as previously reported [13, 14, 19] . also the rapid mers-cov ag assay cannot detect mers-cov loads < 10 4 or ct value >30. previous report pointed out that the mers-cov rtrt-pcr assay is the specific assay for molecular studies in a variety of animal species and human [12, 13] . overall, rapid screening tests are less sensitive than are confirmatory tests; however, the advantages of using rapid screening tests are the high throughput and rapid turnaround time, without requirements of sample preparation and the use of special equipment. therefore, the ica is considered satisfactory to be used for screening camel herds against mers-cov antigen across animal markets, and slaughterhouses, followed by a confirmatory test for positive samples.in conclusion, the high prevalence of mers-cov infection among dromedary camels in livestock markets and slaughterhouses, especially in winter months and young age animals, should be considered as high-risk areas for zoonosis, especially for peoples with professional contact with live camels and their bodies. in addition to these locations are the drivers of mers-cov circulation.no funding sources.acute respiratory tract infections (rtis), which are considered the "forgotten pandemic", remain the leading cause of all cause mortality in children worldwide (bryce et al., 2005) . in spite of public health prevention measures and advanced in therapeutics, incidence rates of rtis in the united states have varied little over the past 70 years (monto et al., 1974) , and etiologic diagnosis remains challenging. the lack of broad based rapid and accurate diagnostic tools leads to over-prescribing of antibiotics, delayed definitive diagnosis with potential for increased complications, and ineffective epidemic control.molecular diagnostic assays have the greatest potential for impacting clinical practice for infectious agents, such as viruses, where conventional microbiologic methods (i.e. culture) do not provide timely results (ratcliff et al., 2007) . while nucleic acid amplification tests (naats) have been developed for multiple individual viruses (liolios et al., 2001) , the utility in clinical settings has been further extended by the availability of single platform systems, which can simultaneously detect multiple pathogens (liao et al., 2009; pabbaraju et al., 2008; raymond et al., 2009; wu et al., 2009) .electrospray ionization mass spectrometry following broad-range reverse transcription-pcr (rt-pcr/esi-ms), one of the single system platforms, has the potential to rapidly detect and semi-quantify different pathogens simulatenously. to date, studies with rt-pcr/emi-ms have been restricted to evaluation with individual respiratory bacteria and viruses (i.e. streptococcus , coronavirus (sars) , adenovirus (russell et al., 2006) , and influenza viruses (sampath et al., 2007) ), or detailed characterization (e.g. resistance gene recognition , genotyping of the organism ). the capacity of rt-pcr/emi-ms for broad range detection and rapid turnaround may provide a useful tool for clinicians in health care settings to aid in early diagnosis of rtis.we aimed to 1) demonstrate capacity of the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform to identify and subtype multiple respiratory viruses in nasopharyngeal aspirates (npas); 2) and examine the performance characteristics of the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform in a pilot hospital-based retrospective proof of concept study.seven clinically relevant viral pathogens (coronavirus, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), influenza a and b, parainfluenza type 2 and 3, adenovirus, and coronavirus (sars)) were obtained from zeptometrix with given concentrations (buffalo, ny). pooled negative npas tested by rt-pcr/esi-ms were used for the mock-up experiments. to determine the limit of detection (lod), serial of 2-fold dilutions from 1000 to 1 genome copies/well (1.3x 10 5 to 133 genome copies/ml) were spiked into the negative nasopharyngeal aspirates (npa). each concentration was repeated five times indepentently to ensure the precision. the lod was determined by the least concentration for which five out of five repeats were detected by rt-pcr/esi-ms.clinical samples were derived from patients who presented with suspected respiratory tract infection in a tertiary inner city teaching hospital according to a standardized collection procedure from may 2006 to november 2007. "excess" clinical samples were stored at -80°c until nucleic acid extraction. the microbiology database was queried for standard clinical virological results including rapid immunochromatographic tests for influenza and rsv (binex now, inverness, bedford, uk), direct fluorescent antibody staining tests (d3 ultra dfa respiratory virus id kit, diagnostic hybrids, athens, oh), rapid shell vial culture identification (r-mix too, diagnostic hybrids, athens, oh), roller tube culture, and hemadsorption tests ( figure 1 ). routine pcr testing was not performed in the clinical virology laboratory. two negative npas by clinical virology were obtained to match each positive sample in the same month of collection. the study was approved by the johns hopkins university institutional review board.samples were processed for total nucleic acid extraction using the thermo king-fisher (waltham, ma) robot according to an ambion (abi, foster city, ca) magmax viral kit extraction protocol. all samples were processed by a dedicated investigator (k.c.), who was masked to the clinical virology laboratory results at the time of processing.one-step rt-pcr was performed in a 5ul reaction mix consisting of 4 u of amplitaq gold (applied biosystems, foster city, ca); 20 mm tris, ph 8.3; 75 mm kcl; 1.5 mm mgcl2; 0.4 mbetaine; 800 mmmix of datp, dgtp, dctp, and dttp (bioline usa inc., randolph, ma); 10 mm dithiothreitol; 100 ng sonicated polya dna (sigma corp., st louis, mo); 40 ng random hexamers for the rt (invitrogen corp. carlsbad ca); 1.2 u superasin (ambion corp, austin, tx); 400 ng t4 gene 32 protein (roche diagnostics corp., indianapolis, in); 2 u superscript iii (invitrogen corp, carlsbad ca.); 20 mm sorbitol (sigma corp.); and 250 nm of each specific pcr primer. rt-pcr cycling conditions were: 60°c for 5 min, 4°c for 10 min, 55°c for 45 min, 95°c for 10 min, followed by 8 cycles of 95°c for 30 seconds, 48°c for 30 seconds, and 72°c for 30 seconds, with the 48°c annealing temperature increasing 0.9°c each cycle. the rt-pcr was continued for 37 additional cycles of 95°c for 15 seconds, 56°c for 20 seconds, and 72°c for 20 seconds. the rt-pcr cycle ended with a final extension of 2 min at 72°c followed by a 4°c hold. rt-pcr was used for both rna and dna virus amplification.the assay was performed using the ibis t5000 respiratory virus surveillance ii kit (ibis biosciences, inc., carlsbad, ca), designed to detect and subtype viruses from seven groups: conventional viruses (rsv, influenza a and b, parainfluenza types 1-4, adenoviridae type a-f) and viruses not conventionally identified in our clinical virology laboratory (coronaviridae, human bocavirus, and human metapneumovirus). in this research-use-only kit, there were 16 primer pairs distributed in a 96-well plate, in which each well contained one pair of primers. most viruses had two primer sets but there were 4 sets of primers for influenza viruses. each plate was able to test six patient samples with each specimen being tested in 16 wellsthe ibis t5000 platform performed automated post-pcr desalting, esi-ms signal acquisition, spectral analysis, and data reporting to analyze rt-pcr product as described previously . briefly, the steps were as follows: 15 ul aliquots of each pcr reaction were desalted and purified using a weak anion exchange protocol as described elsewhere (ward et al., 2004) . accurate mass (61 ppm), high-resolution (m/dm.100,000 full-width half-maximum) mass spectra were acquired for each sample using highthroughput esi-ms protocols described previously (sampath et al., 2007) . for each sample, approximately 1.5 ul of analyte solution was consumed during the 74-second spectral acquisition. raw mass spectra were post-calibrated with an internal mass standard and deconvolved to monoisotopic molecular masses. unambiguous base compositions were derived from the exact mass measurements of the complementary single-stranded oligonucleotides. semi-quantitative results of pathogens were obtained by comparing the peak heights with the internal pcr calibration internal mass standard present in every pcr well at 100 molecules, which was also treated as the internal positive control in each well. a negative control was implemented in each batch of processing with sterile viral transport media as well.our clinical virology laboratory does not perform pcr tests routinely for all respiratory viruses. accordingly, those samples for which clinical virology laboratory and rt-pcr/ esi-ms did not agree and which had enough remaining volume (200ul) were sent to viracor (lee's summit, mo) for identification by another pcr-based platform (luminex respiratory assay, austin, tx), which is able to detect all the viruses rt-pcr/esi-ms could detect except for human bocavirus (pabbaraju et al., 2008) .sample throughput for rt-pcr/esi-ms, which included using one king/fisher extraction robot, one janus automated dispensing robot, four eppendorf thermocyclers, and one t5000 cleanup and injection automation system was evaluated.for the primary analysis evaluating performance of rt-pcr/esi-ms, standard clinical virology laboratory results were used as the reference test. figure 2 describes the number of subjects, each of which had one npa sample evaluated. the number of 'evaluable results' was operationally defined for purposes of primary and secondary performance evaluation as the number of individual evaluable results which could be compared to one another, since each npa sample could yield test results (by culture or rt-pcr/ms-esi) of 'negative', single positive, or multiple viral detections (figure 2 ). in the secondary analysis, we combined clinical virology laboratory results and the secondary (i.e. luminex) pcr-based results as the reference test. samples containing viruses for which the hospital's clinical virology laboratory had no protocol available (i.e. bocavirus and coronavirus detection) were excluded from the primary analysis but included in the secondary analysis if the viral agent could be detected by the other (luminex) rt-pcr-based method (i.e. all viruses except bocavirus). confidence intervals for sensitivity, and specificity were based on exact binomial probabilities. two-sample wilcoxon mann-whitney test was used for comparing the viral load in the clinical virology positive group with the negative group.all the mocked npa samples in seven viruses groups were detected successfully by the rt-pcr/esi-ms to the level of 150 copies/well (figure 3) . the rt-pcr/esi-ms was most sensitive in detecting adenovirus and least sensitive in detecting rsv (lod: 7 and 150 genome copies/well, respectively). (figure 2 ). after exclusion, overall agreement was 87.9 % (95% confidence interval (c.i.): 83.3-91.7%); sensitivity, and specificity, excluding those non-conventional viruses for which jhu has no identification protocols (14 coronavirus and 3 metapneumovirus) were 77.9% (95% c.i.: 68.2-85.8%) and 92.1% (95% c.i.: 86.9-95.7%), respectively (table 1) . among 257 samples for which results were available for the first accuracy analysis, 34 samples were found to disagree between rt-pcr/esi-ms and clinical virology laboratory. for individual pathogens identified in clinical virology, rt-pcr/esi-ms detected 98.9% rsv, 77.8% adenovirus, 70.3% parainfluenza and 59.1% influenza viruses (table 2) . rt-pcr/esi-ms also successfully subtyped eight influenza a, five influenza b, two parainfluenza type 1, 14 parainfluenza type 3 that were identified by clinical virology, as well as seven adenovirus types b and c that clinical virology had no protocol to subtype, but miss-subtyped one parainfluenza type 2 and one parainfluenza type 3, that were identified by the virology laboratory as parainfluenza type 3 and parainfluenza type 4, respectively. the median storage time was 10 months (range 7-19).viral load was semi-quantifiable by rt-pcr/esi-ms and ranged from 2,400 to > 320,000 copies/ ml. viral loads of rt-pcr/esi-ms positive samples in the clinical virology negative group were significantly lower than in the clinical virology positive group (median: 66,960 vs. > 320,000 copies/ml, respectively, p=0.04). figure 2 ). among the 51 original samples with results in disagreement between rt-pcr/esi-ms and conventional virology assays or for which jhu had no protocols, 25 (43%) had sufficient volume to be sent to for another pcr-based method, 12 had confirmed rt-pcr/esi-ms results, including 7 positive conventional viruses (3 influenza a, 2 rsv, 2 parainfluenza). two coronavirus and 1 metapneumovirus detection not detectable by conventional clinical virology protocols were confirmed as well. the overall agreement, sensitivity and specificity, after secondary analysis of available samples were 90.7% (95%c.i.86.5-94.0%), 83.2% (95%c.i 74.4-90.0%) and 95.6% (95%c.i 91.1-98.2%), respectively (table 3) .time to first result from sample preparation to detection of rt-pcr/esi-ms was 8 hours: 1 hours of rna extraction, 4 hours of rt-pcr, and 3 hours of processing in esi-ms. the estimated throughput of rt-pcr/esi-ms was 300 samples with 2 technicians and 24 working hours, which represented 1,080 pcr reactions.this study was a hospital-based retrospective pilot proof-of-concept study designed to demostrate the capacity and to determine the performance of the novel rt-pcr/esi-ms platform on mock-up samples and previously frozen clinical samples compared to clinical virology assays. our study showed that this novel assay was rapid and able to detect and subtype multiple respiratory pathogens in the hospital with 87.9 % accuracy, compared to conventional clinical virology assays. our study also indicated that pathogens not detectable by traditional clinical virology methods could be successfully detected by the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform.the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform has several advantages including rapid turnaround time and a more detailed pathogen characterization (i.e. relative semi-quantification, typing, and subtyping of species) versus conventional culture methods. the current common diagnostic methods in our clinical virology laboratory are culture-based, which may take days to yield results and are labor-intensive and expensive (anzueto et al., 2003) . although some rapid antigen tests offer faster detection times, their individual lower sensitivity and specificity limits their clinical utility as a sole methodology (ginocchio, 2007) . the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform has the capability to detect multiple pathogens efficiently and with high sensitivity, as well as the ability to determine the quantity of pathogens, which would be potential biomarkers of infection course or severity. however, further prospective validation study will be needed to determine clinical performance of this assay.while determining the performance of novel assays, similar problems have appeared for the discordant analysis of results between the new assays and reference standard tests. some researchers confirmed result of the novel assays discordant to the conventional culture or rapid antigen test by another multiplex rt-pcr assays (liolios et al., 2001; pabbaraju et al., 2008) . it remains controversial regarding how to examine a potentially more accurate novel assay versus the current "alloyed" standard. doring et al. proposed that clinical evidence of infections should be included in the validation of the novel nucleic acid test (doring et al., 2008) , however, our study design did not permit detailed clinical data collection.we recognize several limitations of our design. first, the operation of rt-pcr/esi-ms was performed almost a year after the initial tests done in clinical virology. utilizing "excess" npa obtained from clinical virology resulted in some specimens not being processed until more than a year after collecting them from patients. although the effect of length of storage of npa has been shown to be minimal within 2 months (ward et al., 2004) , the impact of longer periods of storage remains unknown. ward et al. demonstrated that multiple freezing thawing cycles did not significantly alter the concentrations measured prior to freezing the influenza samples (ward et al., 2004) , while frisbie et al. indicated influenza rna could degrade in the -70°c freezer and may result in some loss of sensitivity (frisbie et al., 2004) . the second limitation is that we could not send every specimen for secondary analyses due to insufficient volume of some samples. this is an inherent limitation of the retrospective design used here. however, since almost half of the discordant results verified by another pcr-based method (12 out of 25), it might have little impact on the estimate. future study is merited to perform parallel comparison on every sample by another reference tests (e.g. another pcr based method) in order to better characterize the performance of the platform. thirdly, we could not test the performance of rt-pcr/esi-ms on every subtype of clinical revelant respiratory viruses because of the design of the study. for those viral subtypes not demonstrated in this pilot study (i.e. parainfluenza type 2 and 4, adenovirus type a and d-f), further study will be required to determine the performance of this novel platform. lastly, we only performed five repeats in the lod experiment, in which we utilized the 100% detection (5/5) criteria to determine the lod but not the 95% detection rule that generally applied in lod studies. althought the fewer repeats in our study may have limitation in precision of the lods, the 100% detection still should be considered a conservative estimate in this pilot study that could provide some evidence for futher studies.in conclusion, we demonstrated that the innovative rt-pcr/esi-ms technology could rapidly and accurately detect and subtype most viruses identified by conventional virological methods. detection of conventional viruses missed by clinical virology and unconventional viruses required additional confirmatatory testing to further determine the performance characteristics. the rt-pcr/esi-ms method is a promising diagnostic platform for the rapid identification of conventional and unconventional viruses and merits further prospective evaluation. diagnostic algorithm used in clinical virology laboratory to detect respiratory viruses mainly divided into respiratory season or non-respiratory season. respiratory season defined as october to the following january (october to november for rsv, december to january for influenza). immunochromatographic assays were used in respiratory season as the sole screening test for rsv and influenza, which will stop the testing algorithm if results are positive. respiratory panel cocktail dfa tests serve for adenovirus, influenza a and b, parainfluenza type 1-3 and rsv, which will stop the testing algorithm if results are positive in non-respiratory season or for those screened negative by immunochromatographic assays in respiratory season as well. bocavirus that were not detectable in both clinical virology laboratory and another pcrbased platform were excluded (n=7). after further excluding 14 coronavirus and 3 humane metapneumovirusdetections that clinical virology laboratory had no protocol to detect, 257 were included in the primary performance analysis as in table 1. twenty-five samples for which clinical virology laboratory and rt-pcr/esi-ms did not agree or clinical virology laboratory has no protocol to detect with sufficient volume left were sent to another pcrbased assay for secondary analysis. seven clinically relevant viral pathogens (coronavirus, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), influenza a and b, parainfluenza type 2 and 3, adenovirus, and coronavirus (sars)) were spiked into pooled negative npas tested by rt-pcr/esi-ms to determine the limit of detection (lod) with five repeats of serial of 2-fold dilutions from 1000 to 1 copies/well (1.3x 105 to 133 copies/ml). the rt-pcr/esi-ms was most sensitive in detecting adenovirus (lod: 7 copies/well) and least sensitive in detecting rsv (lod: 150 copies/ well). one copies/well is approximate to 133 copies/ml. overall agreement, sensitivity, and specificity, excluding those non-conventional viruses for which jhu has no identification protocols were 87.9 %, 77.9% and 92.1%, respectively.* excluding 24 viruses (14 coronavirus, 7 bocavirus, and 3 metapneumovirus), which were detected by rt-pcr/esi-ms for which clinical virology had no identification protocols.diagn microbiol infect dis. author manuscript; available in pmc 2012 february 1.acute respiratory tract infections (rtis), which are considered the "forgotten pandemic", remain the leading cause of all-cause mortality in children worldwide (bryce et al., 2005) . in spite of public health prevention measures and advances in therapeutics, incidence rates of rtis in the united states have varied little over the past 70 years (monto and ullman, 1974) , and etiologic diagnosis remains challenging. the lack of broad-based rapid and accurate diagnostic tools leads to overprescribing of antibiotics, delayed definitive diagnosis with potential for increased complications, and ineffective epidemic control.molecular diagnostic assays have the greatest potential for impacting clinical practice for infectious agents, such as viruses, where conventional microbiologic methods (i.e., culture) do not provide timely results (ratcliff et al., 2007) . while nucleic acid amplification tests have been developed for multiple individual viruses (liolios et al., 2001) , the utility in clinical settings has been further extended by the availability of single platform systems, which can simultaneously detect multiple pathogens (liao et al., 2009; pabbaraju et al., 2008; raymond et al., 2009; wu and tang, 2009) .electrospray ionization mass spectrometry following broad-range reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr/esi-ms), one of the single system platforms, has the potential to rapidly detect and semiquantify different pathogens simultaneously. to date, studies with rt-pcr/ emi-ms have been restricted to evaluation with individual respiratory bacteria and viruses [i.e., streptococcus , coronavirus (sars) , adenovirus (russell et al., 2006) , and influenza viruses (sampath et al., 2007) ], or detailed characterization [e.g. resistance gene recognition , genotyping of the organism ]. the capacity of rt-pcr/emi-ms for broad-range detection and rapid turnaround may provide a useful tool for clinicians in health care settings to aid in early diagnosis of rtis.we aimed to 1) demonstrate capacity of the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform to identify and subtype multiple respiratory viruses in nasopharyngeal aspirates (npas) 2) and examine the performance characteristics of the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform in a pilot hospital-based retrospective proof-ofconcept study.seven clinically relevant viral pathogens [coronavirus, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), influenza a and b, parainfluenza types 2 and 3, adenovirus, and coronavirus (sars)] were obtained from zeptometrix with given concentrations (buffalo, ny). pooled negative npas tested by rt-pcr/esi-ms were used for the mock-up experiments. to determine the limit of detection (lod), serial of 2-fold dilutions from 1000 to 1 genome copy/well (1.3 × 10 5 to 133 genome copies/ml) were spiked into the negative npas. each concentration was repeated 5 times independently to ensure the precision. the lod was determined by the least concentration for which 5 out of 5 repeats were detected by rt-pcr/esi-ms.clinical samples were derived from patients who presented with suspected rti in a tertiary inner-city teaching hospital according to a standardized collection procedure from may 2006 to november 2007. "excess" clinical samples were stored at −80°c until nucleic acid extraction.the microbiology database was queried for standard clinical virologic results including rapid immunochromatographic tests for influenza and rsv (binex now, inverness, bedford, uk), direct fluorescent antibody staining tests (d3 ultra dfa respiratory virus id kit, diagnostic hybrids, athens, oh), rapid shell vial culture identification (r-mix too, diagnostic hybrids, athens, oh), roller tube culture, and hemadsorption tests (fig. 1) . routine pcr testing was not performed in the clinical virology laboratory. two negative npas by clinical virology were obtained to match each positive sample in the same month of collection. the study was approved by the johns hopkins university institutional review board.samples were processed for total nucleic acid extraction using the thermo king-fisher (waltham, ma) robot according to an ambion (abi, foster city, ca) magmax viral kit extraction protocol. all samples were processed by a dedicated investigator (kc) who was masked to the clinical virology laboratory results at the time of processing.one-step rt-pcr was performed in a 5-μl reaction mix consisting of 4 u of amplitaq gold (applied biosystems, foster city, ca); 20 mmol/l tris, ph 8.3; 75 mmol/l kcl; 1.5 mmol/l mgcl 2 ; 0.4 mol/l betaine; 800 mmol/l mix of datp, dgtp, dctp, and dttp (bioline usa, randolph, ma); 10 mmol/l dithiothreitol; 100 ng sonicated polya dna (sigma, st. louis, mo); 40 ng random hexamers for the rt (invitrogen, carlsbad, ca); 1.2 u superasin (ambion, austin, tx); 400 ng t4 gene 32 protein (roche diagnostics, indianapolis, in); 2 u superscript iii (invitrogen); 20 mmol/l sorbitol (sigma); and 250 nmol/l of each specific pcr primer. rt-pcr cycling conditions were 60°c for 5 min, 4°c for 10 min, 55°c for 45 min, 95°c for 10 min, followed by 8 cycles of 95°c for 30 s, 48°c for 30 s, and 72°c for 30 s, with the 48°c annealing temperature increasing 0.9°c each cycle. the rt-pcr was continued for 37 additional cycles of 95°c for 15 s, 56°c for 20 s, and 72°c for 20 s. the rt-pcr cycle ended with a final extension of 2 min at 72°c followed by a 4°c hold. rt-pcr was used for both rna and dna virus amplification.the assay was performed using the ibis t5000 respiratory virus surveillance ii kit (ibis biosciences, carlsbad, ca), designed to detect and subtype viruses from 7 groups: conventional viruses (rsv, influenza a and b, parainfluenza types 1-4, adenoviridae types a-f) and viruses not conventionally identified in our clinical virology laboratory (coronaviridae, human bocavirus, and human metapneumovirus). in this research-use-only kit, there were 16 primer pairs distributed in a 96-well plate, in which each well contained one pair of primers. most viruses had 2 primer sets, but there were 4 sets of primers for influenza viruses. each plate was able to test 6 patient samples with each specimen being tested in 16 wells.the ibis t5000 platform performed automated post-pcr desalting, esi-ms signal acquisition, spectral analysis, and data reporting to analyze rt-pcr product as described previously . briefly, the steps were as follows: 15-μl aliquots of each pcr reaction were desalted and purified using a weak anion exchange protocol as described elsewhere (ward et al., 2004) . accurate mass (61 ppm), high-resolution (m/dm.100 000 full-width halfmaximum) mass spectra were acquired for each sample using high-throughput esi-ms protocols described previously (sampath et al., 2007) . for each sample, approximately 1.5 μl of analyte solution was consumed during the 74-s spectral acquisition. raw mass spectra were post-calibrated with an internal mass standard and deconvolved to monoisotopic molecular masses. unambiguous base compositions were derived from the exact mass measurements of the complementary single-stranded oligonucleotides. semiquan- fig. 1 . diagnostic algorithm of clinical virology laboratory for respiratory samples. diagnostic algorithm used in clinical virology laboratory to detect respiratory viruses mainly divided into respiratory season or nonrespiratory season. respiratory season defined as october to the following january (october to november for rsv, december to january for influenza). immunochromatographic assays were used in respiratory season as the sole screening test for rsv and influenza, which will stop the testing algorithm if results are positive. respiratory panel cocktail dfa tests serve for adenovirus, influenza a and b, parainfluenza types 1-3, and rsv, which will stop the testing algorithm if results are positive in nonrespiratory season or for those screened negative by immunochromatographic assays in respiratory season as well. rsv = respiratory syncytial virus; flu = influenza a or b viruses; piv = parainfluenza virus; hsv = herpes simplex virus; cmv = cytomegalovirus; hmpv = human metapneumovirus; dfa = direct fluorescent antibody test; cpe = cytopathic effect; rbc = red blood cells; id = identified. titative results of pathogens were obtained by comparing the peak heights with the internal pcr calibration internal mass standard present in every pcr well at 100 molecules, which was also treated as the internal positive control in each well. a negative control was implemented in each batch of processing with sterile viral transport media as well.our clinical virology laboratory does not perform pcr tests routinely for all respiratory viruses. accordingly, those samples for which clinical virology laboratory and rt-pcr/ esi-ms did not agree and which had enough remaining volume (200 μl) were sent to viracor (lee's summit, mo) for identification by another pcr-based platform (luminex respiratory assay, austin, tx), which is able to detect all the viruses rt-pcr/esi-ms could detect except for human bocavirus (pabbaraju et al., 2008) .sample throughput for rt-pcr/esi-ms, which included using 1 king/fisher extraction robot, 1 janus automated dispensing robot, 4 eppendorf thermocyclers, and 1 t5000 cleanup and injection automation system, was evaluated.for the primary analysis evaluating performance of rt-pcr/esi-ms, standard clinical virology laboratory results were used as the reference test. fig. 2 describes the number of subjects, each of which had one npa sample evaluated. the number of "evaluable results" was operationally defined for purposes of primary and secondary performance evaluation as the number of individual evaluable results that could be compared to one another because each npa sample could yield test results (by culture or rt-pcr/ms-esi) of "negative", single positive, or multiple viral detections (fig. 2) . in the secondary analysis, we combined clinical virology laboratory results and the secondary (i.e., luminex) pcr-based results as the reference test. samples containing viruses for which the hospital's clinical virology laboratory had no protocol available (i.e., bocavirus and coronavirus detection) were excluded from the primary analysis but included in the secondary analysis if the viral agent could be detected by the other (luminex) rt-pcrbased method (i.e., all viruses except bocavirus). confidence intervals (cis) for sensitivity and specificity were based on exact binomial probabilities. two-sample wilcoxon mann-whitney test was used for comparing the viral load in the clinical virology-positive group with the negative group.all the mocked npa samples in 7 viruses groups were detected successfully by the rt-pcr/esi-ms to the level of 150 copies/well (fig. 3) . the rt-pcr/esi-ms fig. 2 . flow diagram of patient recruitment and analysis. bocavirus that were not detectable in both clinical virology laboratory and another pcr-based platform were excluded (n = 7). after further exclusion of 14 coronavirus and 3 human metapneumovirus detections that clinical virology laboratory had no protocol for detection, 257 were included in the primary performance analysis as in table 1 . twenty-five samples for which clinical virology laboratory and rt-pcr/esi-ms did not agree or clinical virology laboratory has no protocol to detect with sufficient volume left were sent to another pcr-based assay for secondary analysis. was most sensitive in detecting adenovirus and least sensitive in detecting rsv (lod: 7 and 150 genome copies/well, respectively).a total of 274 examinable results from 280 npa samples collected from clinical virology previously frozen repository from march 2006 to november 2007 were identified, after excluding bocavirus detection unexaminable in both clinical virology diagnostic algorithm and the secondary pcr-based assay (fig. 2) . after exclusion, overall agreement was 87.9% (95% ci, 83.3-91.7%); sensitivity and specificity, excluding those nonconventional viruses for which johns hopkins university (jhu) has no identification protocols (14 coronavirus and 3 metapneumovirus), were 77.9% (95% ci, 68.2-85.8%) and 92.1% (95% ci, 86.9-95.7%), respectively (table 1) . among 257 samples for which results were available for the first accuracy analysis, 34 samples were found to disagree between rt-pcr/esi-ms and clinical virology laboratory.for individual pathogens identified in clinical virology, rt-pcr/esi-ms detected 98.9% rsv, 77.8% adenovirus, 70.3% parainfluenza, and 59.1% influenza viruses (table  2) . rt-pcr/esi-ms also successfully subtyped 8 influenza a, 5 influenza b, 2 parainfluenza type 1, and 14 parainfluenza type 3 that were identified by clinical virology, as well as 7 adenovirus types b and c that clinical virology had no protocol to subtype, but missubtyped 1 parainfluenza type 2 and 1 parainfluenza type 3, fig. 3 . lod of rt-pcr/esi-ms for respiratory viruses in npa mock-up samples. seven clinically relevant viral pathogens [coronavirus, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), influenza a and b, parainfluenza types 2 and 3, adenovirus, and coronavirus (sars)] were spiked into pooled negative npas tested by rt-pcr/esi-ms to determine the lod with 5 repeats of serial of 2-fold dilutions from 1000 to 1 copies/well (1.3 × 10 5 to 133 copies/ml). the rt-pcr/ esi-ms was most sensitive in detecting adenovirus (lod: 7 copies/well) and least sensitive in detecting rsv (lod: 150 copies/well). one copy/well is approximate to 133 copies/ml. overall agreement, sensitivity, and specificity, excluding those nonconventional viruses for which jhu has no identification protocols, were 87.9%, 77.9%, and 92.1%, respectively. a excluding 24 viruses (14 coronavirus, 7 bocavirus, and 3 metapneumovirus), which were detected by rt-pcr/esi-ms for which clinical virology had no identification protocols. which were identified by the virology laboratory as parainfluenza type 3 and parainfluenza type 4, respectively. the median storage time was 10 months (range 7-19). viral load was semiquantifiable by rt-pcr/esi-ms and ranged from 2400 to n320 000 copies/ml. viral loads of rt-pcr/esi-ms-positive samples in the clinical virologynegative group were significantly lower than in the clinical virology-positive group (median 66 960 vs n320 000 copies/ml, respectively, p = 0.04).total examinable results were 260 (fig. 2) . among the 51 original samples with results in disagreement between rt-pcr/esi-ms and conventional virology assays or for which jhu had no protocols, 25 (43%) had sufficient volume to be sent to for another pcr-based method, 12 had confirmed rt-pcr/esi-ms results, including 7 positive conventional viruses (3 influenza a, 2 rsv, 2 parainfluenza). two coronavirus and 1 metapneumovirus detection not detectable by conventional clinical virology protocols were confirmed as well. the overall agreement, sensitivity, and specificity after secondary analysis of available samples were 90.7% (95% ci, 86.5-94.0%), 83.2% (95% ci, 74.4-90.0%), and 95.6% (95% ci, 91.1-98.2%), respectively (table 3) .time to first result from sample preparation to detection of rt-pcr/esi-ms was 8 h: 1 h of rna extraction, 4 h of rt-pcr, and 3 h of processing in esi-ms. the estimated throughput of rt-pcr/esi-ms was 300 samples with 2 technicians and 24 working hours, which represented 1080 pcr reactions.this study was a hospital-based retrospective pilot proof-of-concept study designed to demonstrate the capacity and to determine the performance of the novel rt-pcr/ esi-ms platform on mock-up samples and previously frozen clinical samples compared to clinical virology assays. our study showed that this novel assay was rapid and able to detect and subtype multiple respiratory pathogens in the hospital with 87.9% accuracy, compared to conventional clinical virology assays. our study also indicated that pathogens not detectable by traditional clinical virology methods could be successfully detected by the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform.the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform has several advantages including rapid turnaround time and a more detailed pathogen characterization (i.e., relative semiquantification, typing, and subtyping of species) versus conventional culture methods. the current common diagnostic methods in our clinical virology laboratory are culture-based, which may take days to yield results and are labor-intensive and expensive (anzueto and niederman, 2003) . although some rapid antigen tests offer faster detection times, their individual lower sensitivity and specificity limit their clinical utility as a sole methodology (ginocchio, 2007) . the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform has the capability to detect multiple pathogens efficiently and with high sensitivity, as well as the ability to determine the quantity of pathogens, which would be potential biomarkers of infection course or severity. however, further prospective validation study will be needed to determine clinical performance of this assay.while determining the performance of novel assays, similar problems have appeared for the discordant analysis of results between the new assays and reference standard tests. some researchers confirmed result of the novel assays discordant to the conventional culture or rapid antigen test by another multiplex rt-pcr assay (liolios et al., 2001;  pabbaraju et al., 2008) . it remains controversial regarding how to examine a potentially more accurate novel assay versus the current "alloyed" standard. doring et al. (2008) proposed that clinical evidence of infections should be included in the validation of the novel nucleic acid test; however, our study design did not permit detailed clinical data collection.we recognize several limitations of our design. first, the operation of rt-pcr/esi-ms was performed almost a year after the initial tests done in clinical virology. utilizing "excess" npa obtained from clinical virology resulted in some specimens not being processed until more than a year after collecting them from patients. although the effect of length of storage of npa has been shown to be minimal within 2 months (ward et al., 2004) , the impact of longer periods of storage remains unknown. ward et al. (2004) demonstrated that multiple freezingthawing cycles did not significantly alter the concentrations measured before freezing the influenza samples, while frisbie et al. (2004) indicated influenza rna could degrade in the −70°c freezer and may result in some loss of sensitivity. the second limitation is that we could not send every specimen for secondary analyses because of insufficient volume of some samples. this is an inherent limitation of the retrospective design used here. however, because almost half of the discordant results was verified by another pcr-based method (12 out of 25), it might have little impact on the estimate. future study is merited to perform parallel comparison on every sample by another reference test (e.g., another pcr-based method) to better characterize the performance of the platform. third, we could not test the performance of rt-pcr/esi-ms on every subtype of clinically relevant respiratory viruses because of the design of the study. for those viral subtypes not demonstrated in this pilot study (i.e., parainfluenza types 2 and 4, adenovirus types a and d-f), further study will be required to determine the performance of this novel platform. lastly, we only performed 5 repeats in the lod experiment, in which we utilized the 100% detection (5/5) criteria to determine the lod but not the 95% detection rule that generally applied in lod studies. although the fewer repeats in our study may have limitation in precision of the lods, the 100% detection still should be considered a conservative estimate in this pilot study that could provide some evidence for further studies.in conclusion, we demonstrated that the innovative rt-pcr/esi-ms technology could rapidly and accurately detect and subtype most viruses identified by conventional virologic methods. detection of conventional viruses missed by clinical virology and unconventional viruses required additional confirmatory testing to further determine the performance characteristics. the rt-pcr/esi-ms method is a promising diagnostic platform for the rapid identification of conventional and unconventional viruses and merits further prospective evaluation.at the end of 2019, a pneumonia of unknown cause detected in wuhan, china was first 61reported to the who country office in china. on january 9 th , 2020, the chinese health 62 authorities and the world health organization (who) officially announced the discovery of a 63 novel coronavirus, first named 2019-ncov, then officially termed sars-cov-2. this virus, 64belonging to the coronavirus family, differs from the viruses sars-cov, responsible for the 65 sars outbreak in 2003, and mers-cov, responsible for an ongoing outbreak that began in 66 2012 in the middle east. 67the sars-cov-2 virus is responsible for the infectious respiratory disease called covid-19 68 (coronavirus disease). this infection mainly results in pneumonia and upper/lower 69 respiratory tract infection. the symptoms of covid-19 infection appear after an incubation 70period of approximately 5.2 days [1] . the most common symptoms at onset of covid-19 71illness are fever, cough, and fatigue, but others include headache, sore throat, and even acute 72 respiratory distress syndrome, leading to respiratory failure. 73since the emergence of covid-19 in china at the end of last year, the sars-cov-2 virus has 74 caused a large global outbreak and has become a major worldwide public health issue. the 75who has declared this outbreak a global health emergency at the end of january 2020. on 76april 12 th , 2020, the world health organization (who) announced that the total global deaths 77 from covid-19 has surpassed 100 000. globally, by april 28 th , 2020, 2,892,688 cases of 78 covid-19 have been confirmed and 210,193 patients have died. an estimated 1.7 billion 79people have been ordered to remain at home as governments take extreme measures to 80 protect their populations. 81due to the rapid spread and increasing number of covid-19 cases caused by this new 82coronavirus sars-cov-2, rapid and accurate detection of virus and/or disease is increasingly 83 vital to control the sources of infection and prevent the progression of the disease. 84besides the main priority, which is finding an efficient treatment, one of the most important 85 research questions targets the diagnosis of covid-19. currently, the real-time rt-pcr assay 86is the gold-standard method to detect sars- cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.27.20112888 doi: medrxiv preprintthe study was approved by the local ethics committee on march 17 th 2020, and informed 103 consent was obtained from each participant. 104the study population consisted of adult patients visiting the infectious disease department 106(centre hospitalier regional orléans, france) from march, 18 th , 2020 to april 10 th , 2020. this 107 department receives patients whose symptoms, such as headache, fatigue, fever or 108 respiratory signs suggest a covid infection, and for whom a diagnosis is requested. date of 109 onset of symptoms as declared by the patient and age were collected at inclusion. according 110 to severity of disease, patients rt-pcr positive were either hospitalized in the infectious 111 diseases ward, only devoted to treat covid-19 infected patients, or invited to have regular 112 medical visits in the outpatient consultation. fingertip blood samples were performed at various 113 stages of the follow-up, even after clinical cure, in order to collect samples from convalescent 114patients. 115nasopharyngeal (np) swab specimens were collected from patients by trained surveillance 117 officers. a polyester-tipped flexible aluminum-shafted applicator (microtest m4rt, remel) was 118inserted into one of the nostrils until resistance was felt at the nasopharynx, then rotated 180 119 degrees and withdrawn. after swabbing, the swab applicator was cut off, and each absorbent 120 swab was placed into a vial containing 3 ml of viral transport media. vials were immediately 121shipped via a triple packaging system to the virology unit located in the same building of the 122 hospital, then stored if necessary at 4°c for up to 24 hours until testing. 123for whole blood samples taken at the fingertip, a lancet was used to prick the side of the 124 fingertip to let a large drop of suspended blood form. this blood sample was collected with a 125 10 µl capillary micropipette that filled automatically. the sample was then expelled by 126 squeezing the micropipette bulb to deposit the blood on the appropriate well of the test 127 cassette. retesting was performed in a same patient only if the previous test was negative. 128rt-pcr testing of sars-cov-2 was performed in unit of virology, chr orléans. nucleic acid 130 extraction was performed with automated ez1 (qiagen the sars-cov-2 igg/igm antibody test kits, covid-presto ® and covid-duo ® , are 137targeting on the antibodies specific to n-protein of sars-cov-2. they are manufactured and 138 marketed by aaz-lmb. 139 . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.27.20112888 doi: medrxiv preprinttests were conducted at the site by clinical staff, physicians or nurses, according to 140 manufacturers' instructions. health workers involved in the study received a two-hours training 141 session for each type of test prior to the beginning of the study. 142both covid-presto ® and covid-duo ® are lateral flow immune-chromatographic assays 143 (figs 1 and 2) . these tests use anti-human igm antibody (test line igm), anti-human igg 144 antibody (test line igg) and rabbit igg (control line c) immobilized on a nitrocellulose strip. the 145conjugate (recombinant covid-19 antigens labeled with colloidal gold) is also integrated into 146 the strip. when a specimen is added to the sample well, followed by assay buffer, igm and igg 147antibodies, if present, will bind to covid-19 conjugates forming an antigen-antibodies 148complex.this complex migrates through nitrocellulose membrane by capillary action. when the complex 150 meets the line of the corresponding immobilized antibody (anti-human igm and/or anti-human 151igg), the complex is trapped, forming a burgundy colored band which confirms a reactive test 152result. the result has to be read within 10 minutes by two independent operators. when the 153 control line is the only to be burgundy, the sample is negative. if the control line does not 154appear, the test is invalid and should be repeated with a new cassette. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.27.20112888 doi: medrxiv preprintoverall, 381 patients with symptoms of covid-19 who went to the hospital for a diagnostic, 173were included in the study. 174rt-pcr was performed in all patients: 62.47% were positive (n=238). based on these results, 175two sub-groups were defined: 143 patients with negative and 238 patients with positive rt-176pcr results (fig 3) . interestingly, among patient with samples collected at two different times, an elderly woman, 193 . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. when considering the distribution of igm+ and igg+ patterns among patients with a positive 208rdt test, the igm were the first antibodies to be detected and were systematically present in 209 the few positive patients with an onset of symptoms from 0 to 5 days ago (n=2 in covid-210 presto ® population; n=5 in covid-duo ® ). the igm appeared first and stayed prevalent until 211 15 days after viral infection then igg became more frequent (figs 4 and 5) . 212 213 . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. to evaluate the sensitivity of rdts was only based on positive rt-pcr results, and not a mix 261 between syndromes, imagining findings and rna detection. 262 . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.27.20112888 doi: medrxiv preprintthe results of the present study highlight two major points. firstly, as for the assessed rdt, 263 the sensitivity of elisa tests increases with the duration from symptom onset. moreover, we 264showed that direct antibody typing with whole blood is as sensitive as immunoassay performed 265with serum in a retrospective way. secondly, these diagnostic tests (either qualitative or 266 quantitative) can help to diagnose a past infection after elimination of the virus by the immune 267 system. thus, combining rt-pcr and antibody detection allows to largely diagnose covid-26819 people regardless of the delay between infection and diagnosis. 269currently, the extent and the time kinetics of humoral response against sars-cov-2 are not 270known. it is widely accepted that igm is usually the first responded antibody providing the first 271 line of defense during viral infections, prior to the generation of adaptive, high affinity igg 272responses serving as the more robust long term immunity. we were not able to study the 273 humoral response at the individual level because too few patients could have been tested more 274 than once. at the population level, the patterns of igm/igg results obtained for positive tests 275with covid-duo ® made it possible to perceive the switch between the first production of igm 276 and the later onset of igg. this coincided with our observations with the covid-presto ® . determine whether a person has already been infected by sars-cov-2. serologic tests will 317 be needed to assess the response to vaccine candidates and to map levels of immunity in 318communities. these rapid tests are particularly interesting for low resource settings such as at 319the bedside or any other locations where lab tests are less obvious. 320 321 322 . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. the authors report no conflicts of interest. the authors alone are responsible for the content 336 and the writing of the paper. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.27.20112888 doi: medrxiv preprinti nfections of the upper and lower respiratory tract can be caused by a diversity of pathogens, both viral and bacterial. community-acquired respiratory tract infections are a leading cause of hospitalization and responsible for substantial morbidity and mortality, especially in infants, the elderly, and immunocompromised patients. the etiological agent in such infections differs greatly according to season and age of patient, with highest prevalences being those of respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) in children and influenza virus in adults. rapid microbiological diagnosis of a respiratory infection is important to ensure appropriate antimicrobial therapy and for the effective implementation of isolation precautions (1) .in the last decade, many conventional diagnostic methods such as culture and antigen detection assays have been replaced by molecular assays for diagnosing respiratory tract infections. multiplex real-time pcr assays have been developed and implemented for routine diagnostic application, detecting a wide variety of pathogens (2-7). these assays have shown high sensitivity and specificity, but the limited number of fluorophores that can be used per reaction resulted in the need to run several real-time pcr assays to cover a broad range of relevant pathogens. commercial assays using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (mlpa), a dual priming oligonucleotide system (dpo), or a microarray technology were developed to overcome this problem and are able to detect up to 19 viruses simultaneously (8, 9) . all applications mentioned require nucleic acid extraction prior to amplification. for routine diagnostics, these methods are most suited for batch-wise testing, with a turnaround time of ϳ6 to 8 h. to decrease the time to result and enable random access testing, syndromic diagnostic assays have been developed. these assays combine nucleic acid extraction, amplification, and detection in a single cartridge per sample and are suitable for decentralized or even point-of-care testing (poct) with a time to result of ͻ2 h.a novel rapid diagnostic, cartridge-based assay for the detection of respiratory tract pathogens using the eplex system ( fig. 1) was developed by genmark diagnostics, inc. (carlsbad, ca). the eplex respiratory pathogen panel (rp panel) is based on electrowetting technology, a digital microfluidic technology by which droplets of sample and reagents can be moved efficiently within a network of contiguous electrodes in the eplex cartridge, enabling rapid thermal cycling for a short time to result. following nucleic acid extraction and amplification, detection and identification are performed using the esensor detection technology (fig. 2) , as previously applied in the xt-8 system (10) .in the current study, the performance of the syndromic rp panel was compared to those of laboratory-developed real-time pcr assays, using clinical specimens previously submitted for diagnosis of respiratory pathogens.the 323 positive clinical specimens contained a total of 464 respiratory pathogens as detected by laboratory-developed real-time pcr assays (table 1) . as shown in table  2 , the 57 nonnasopharyngeal (non-nps) specimens comprised 69 of the total 464 respiratory pathogens. testing all samples with the rp panel resulted in an overall agreement for 452 (97.4%) targets from 311 specimens, prior to discrepant analysis. of the specimens containing a single pathogen, the detected targets were concordant in 209/217 specimens. for samples with coinfection, the same pathogens could be identified in 77/81, 22/22, and 3/3 in the case of 2, 3, and 4 pathogens present, respectively. eight of 12 discordant targets (pcr ϩ /rp ϫ ) had a positive result with threshold cycle (c t ) values of ͼ35 (fig. 3) . retesting with a third assay confirmed 10 of 12 real-time pcr-positive targets being human bocavirus (hbov; n ϭ 3), rhinovirus (rv; n ϭ 2), parainfluenza virus type 2 (piv2; n ϭ 1)), human coronavirus (hcov) oc43 (n ϭ 1), hcov 229e (n ϭ 1), hcov hku1 (n ϭ 1), and human metapneumovirus (hmpv; n ϭ 1). the two unresolved pcr ϩ /rp ϫ results consisted of two hmpv-positive samples (c t values of 33.2 and 38.3).the rp panel yielded a positive result in 17 specimens, where the laboratorydeveloped test (ldt) remained negative (pcr ϫ /rp ϩ ), including 15 additional pathogens previously undetected by ldt in the 323 positive specimens and one influenza a h1n1 2009 virus that was detected as influenza a virus by ldt ( table 1) . seven of these 15 additional targets could be confirmed, including three of rv/enterovirus (ev) (all confirmed as rv), two of piv4, and one each of hbov and hcov nl63.one of the selected negative samples tested positive for human adenovirus (hadv) in the rp panel but could not be confirmed by discrepant testing. all other negative specimens tested negative in the rp panel as well.both middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) isolates could be detected by the rp panel. by testing a 10-fold dilution series of both isolates, it was shown that mers-cov with a c t value of ͻ30 in the laboratory-developed real-time pcr assay could be detected using the rp panel, while detection with a c t value of ͼ30 was achievable but was not reproducible in every instance.of the 12 specimens from the quality control for molecular diagnostics (qcmd) 2016 respiratory ii pilot external quality assessment (eqa) study panel, 10 were detected in full agreement with the content as reported by qcmd ( table 3 ). the 2 false-negative tested specimens both contained hcov nl63, of which one was a coinfection in an hmpv-positive sample. both specimens had been tested with the laboratory-developed real-time pcr assay as well and were found positive for hcov nl63, both with c t values of 37.4.the qnostics evaluation panel consisted of 17 samples, including 15 different respiratory pathogens and one negative sample ( table 3 ). the rp panel detected 15 of the specimens in agreement with the content, whereas hadv type 1 and chlamydophila pneumoniae were not detected. real-time pcr detection of these specimens was performed to confirm the presence of the respective pathogen in the specimen and was found positive for both hadv (c t value of 31.4) and c. pneumoniae (c t value of 35.4). the hybridized molecule is then exposed to another sequence-specific probe that is bound to a solid phase, which is a gold electrode (a). upon binding of the two molecules, the ferrocene comes in close proximity to the gold electrode, where an electron transfer that can be measured using genmark's esensor technology on the eplex system can occur (b).the performance of the eplex rp panel was assessed by retrospective testing of 343 clinical respiratory specimens (obtained in 2009 to 2016) comprising five different types of specimens. although the rp panel had been ce in vitro diagnostic (ce-ivd) cleared for detection of respiratory pathogens from nps swabs only, we included a range of alternate sample types that can be obtained and tested for respiratory pathogens in the diagnostic setting. by including a total of 57 respiratory non-nps specimens with different pathogens (table 2) , it was shown that the rp panel was able to accurately detect the pathogen(s) in the different types of specimens, as the assay showed 100% concordance with ldt. for sputum samples, preprocessing with sputasol was introduced after the initial 6 tested specimens, since 1 false-negative result was found, which was resolved on retesting with sputasol pretreatment. further studies need to determine the frequency of preprocessing of sputum samples before efficiently running the rp panel.specimens for inclusion in this study were previously tested at two different sites, using both their own systems and validated assays. although the initial setups of the ldt assays were the same (11, 12) , minor adjustments of the assays and the use of different pcr platforms may affect the performance of the ldts and therefore were a limitation of this study.comparison of the results from the rp panel with the results from the routine multiplex real-time pcr showed an agreement of 97.4% in 464 pathogens tested. targets with a c t value of ͼ40, the rp panel showed good detection rates with regard to lower viral or bacterial loads as well (fig. 3) .although the performance of the rp panel appeared to be excellent using the tested specimens in this study, for piv4 (n ϭ 2) and c. pneumoniae (n ϭ 0) the number of clinical specimens that could be analyzed was too low for a proper assessment of the assay, which was a limitation of this study.in 14 different specimens, the rp panel identified 15 pathogens that had not been detected by routine testing (pcr ϫ /rp ϩ ). in addition, one influenza a virus detected by ldt could be detected as influenza a h1n1 2009 virus by the rp panel. one of the selected negative samples was shown to contain an hadv, while all other pcr ϫ /rp ϩ targets were detected as copathogens to other positive targets in the samples. all the pcr ϫ /rp ϩ targets were found in samples obtained from 1 institute. discrepant analysis a small number of ldt-negative specimens (n ϭ 20) was included in this study since the main objective of this study was to determine the performance of the rp panel in detecting respiratory pathogens. although this is a limitation of the current study, we believe that this issue will be addressed extensively in upcoming prospective clinical studies.owing to the lack of clinical specimens containing mers-cov, dilutions of two different culture isolates were tested in this study, of which dilutions with c t values of ͻ30 as shown by the laboratory-developed real-time pcr assay could be detected consistently. it should be noted that the real-time pcr assay has been developed for research use and has not yet been validated for clinical use.assessment of the rp panel using eqa samples from qcmd and qnostics showed results that are in line with the results obtained from clinical specimens. a total of 4 targets included in the eqa samples could not be detected using the rp panel, showing c t values of ͼ35 (n ϭ 3) and 31.4 (n ϭ 1) when tested by real-time pcr.the rp panel on the eplex system enables rapid testing and can be used as a diagnostic system in either a laboratory or a decentralized setting that is closer to the patient. the assay turned out to be rapid and straightforward to perform. compared to routine testing, hands-on time of the rp panel was very low (ͻ2 min), whereas the hands-on time of the routine testing was about 30 to 45 min, depending on the nature and number of samples tested. the overall run time of the platforms was also in favor of the eplex system, as it takes approximately 90 min for nucleic acid extraction, amplification, hybridization, and detection, whereas routine testing takes up to 2 h and 45 min using different systems and multiple real-time pcr assays in multiplex. an important advantage of the eplex system is the possibility of random access testing, compared to batch-wise testing in the current diagnostic real-time pcr approach. with a relatively short turnaround time and the potential to randomly load and run up to 24 specimens, the eplex system is very suitable for testing stat samples, which require immediate testing. in contrast to ldts, where c t values represent a quantitative indicator, the eplex system generates qualitative results only. the c t value is dependent on many different factors such as sample type and course of infection and can therefore differ greatly, even within a single patient. hence, a qualitative result, e.g., identification of the pathogen, is the major factor for patient management. the costs of reagents per sample are relatively high for eplex compared to ldt. however, when taking into account the hands-on time of technicians and the clinical benefit of more rapid results, the assay will most likely be more cost-effective. studies evaluating a rapid diagnostic assay for respiratory pathogens, such as the filmarray respiratory panel (biofire diagnostics, salt lake city, ut), have already shown the impact of rapid diagnostics for respiratory pathogens, since it decreased the duration of antibiotic use, the length of hospitalization, and the time of isolation, delivering financial savings (13, 14) . although the rp panel on the eplex system has the same potential, clinical studies remain to be conducted to fulfill this potential.in conclusion, this study shows excellent performance of the genmark eplex rp panel in comparison to laboratory-developed real-time pcr assays for the detection of respiratory pathogens from multiple types of clinical specimens and eqa samples. the system provides a large amount of useful diagnostic data within a short time frame, with minimal hands-on time, helping to reduce laboratory costs for labor and deliver a faster result to the clinician in order to aid in appropriate antimicrobial therapy. therefore, this syndrome-based diagnostic assay could be used as rapid diagnostic testing in many different settings.clinical specimens selected for this study have previously been submitted and tested prospectively for diagnosis of respiratory infections at either the specialist virology center at the royal infirmary of edinburgh (rie) or the medical microbiology laboratory at the leiden university medical center (lumc). specimens were selected using the laboratory information management system of the corresponding institute, without prior selection based on c t value. ethical approval for this study was granted by the medical ethical committee provided that anonymized samples were used. diagnostic testing by lab-developed tests. in short, the routine testing method consisted of total nucleic acid extraction by the nuclisens easymag system (ϳ45 min; biomérieux, basingstoke, united kingdom) or the magna pure lc system (ϳ45 min to 1 h 30 min depending on the number of samples; roche diagnostics, almere, the netherlands), at the rie and the lumc, respectively. an input volume of 200 l per specimen and elution volume of 100 l were used for all specimen types. amplification and detection were performed by real-time pcr using the abi 7500 fast thermocycler (1 h; applied biosystems, paisley, united kingdom) or the bio-rad cfx96 thermocycler (ϳ1 h 40 min; bio-rad, veenendaal, the netherlands), at the rie and the lumc, respectively. real-time pcr assays were tested with updated versions (where needed) of primers and probes as described previously (11, 12) .rp panel. original clinical specimens were retrieved from storage at ϫ70°c and thawed at room temperature. after vortexing, 200 l of the specimen was pipetted into the sample delivery device with a buffer provided by the manufacturer. for 16 out of 21 sputum samples, preprocessing was done using sputasol (oxoid, basingstoke, united kingdom) according to the manufacturer's procedures (with the exception of washing the sputum) and incubation at 37°c for 15 min on a shaker at 500 rpm. after gentle mixing of the specimen and buffer in the sample delivery device, the mixture was dispensed into the cartridge using the sample delivery port, which was subsequently closed by sealing with a cap. after scanning of the barcode of the eplex rp panel cartridge and the barcode of the corresponding sample, the cartridge was inserted into an available bay of the eplex system. the test then started automatically and ran for approximately 90 min.a single cartridge of the rp panel is able to detect 25 respiratory pathogens, including differentiation of subtypes of influenza a virus, parainfluenza virus, and respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) ( table 1) .internal controls for extraction, bead delivery, and movement within the cartridge are present, as well as those for amplification, digestion, and hybridization of dna and rna targets. for every specimen tested, a sample detection report was created, comprising the results for all targets and internal controls. results of the targets are reported as positive or not detected. if an internal control fails, this will be noted on the detection report and samples should be retested with a new cartridge.discrepant testing. in the case of discrepant results, the discordant sample was retested either with a new eplex cartridge if the real-time pcr was positive and the rp panel was negative (pcr ϩ /rp ϫ ) or with the laboratory-developed real-time pcr assay in the case of pcr ϫ /rp ϩ results. for unresolved discrepancies, additional testing with a third pcr assay (different primers and probe) was performed for final resolution.one of the many challenges for containing the spread of 17 covid-19 is the ability to identify asymptomatic cases that 18 result in spreading of the virus to close contacts. a study of the 19 passengers on a diamond princess cruise ship forced into 20 temporary quarantine from an early outbreak of covid-19, 21 estimated the asymptomatic proportion (among all infected 22 cases) at 17.9% (95%cri: 15.5−20.2%). 1 therefore, the actual 23 number of sars-cov-2-infected individuals may be much 24 higher than currently accounted for based on positive test 25 results. 2 having accurate, convenient, and rapid testing for wide-26 spread deployment can aid in eliminating the silent spread of 27 covid-19 by asymptomatic viral carriers. table 1 in section 2.5 130 and supporting information table s1 ). 12 table 1 in section 2.5 and 139 supporting information i. 140 rt-pcr tests are constantly evolving with improved detec-141 tion methods and more automated procedures. for example, the 142 eplex sars-cov-2 test developed by genmark diagnostics, 143 inc. 21 uses "the true sample-to-answer solution" eplex instru-144 ment to detect sars-cov-2 in nasopharyngeal swabs. each test 145 cartridge contains reagents for magnetic solid-phase extraction the rt-pcr creates a cdna copy of a specific segment of the viral rna, which is converted to dsdna that is exponentially amplified. although rt-pcr is the most widely used method for 155 detecting sars-cov-2 infections, it has the disadvantage of 156 requiring expensive laboratory instrumentation highly skilled 157 laboratory personnel, and can take days to generate results. 158 as a result, a number of companies and laboratories around 159 the globe are working to further improve the efficiency and 160 timeliness of the rt-pcr technologies and develop various 161 other techniques. 162 2.2. isothermal nucleic acid amplification. rt-pcr 163 requires multiple temperature changes for each cycle, involving 164 sophisticated thermal cycling equipment. 22 isothermal nucleic 165 acid amplification is an alternative strategy that allows ampli-166 fication at a constant temperature and eliminates the need for a 167 thermal cycler. therefore, several methods based on this prin-168 ciple have been developed. as shown in table 1 step 1: at the 3′-end of the viral rna, reverse transcriptase and bip primer initiate conversion of rna to cdna.step 2: at the same end, dna polymerase and b3 primer continue to generate the second cdna strand to displace and release the first cdna strand.step 3: the fip primer binds to the released cdna strand and dna polymerase generates the complementary strand.step 4: f3 primer binds to the 3′ end, and dna polymerase then generates a new strand while displacing the old strand. lamp cycling produces various sized double-stranded looped dna structures containing alternately inverted repeats of the target sequence as detected by a dna indicator dye. reagents*: primers and master mix containing reverse transcriptase, dna polymerase with strand displacing activity, dntps, and buffers. 212 platform is distinctive because of its high testing throughput 213 (up to 1000 tests in 24 h) and its capability to simultaneously 214 screen for other common respiratory viruses whose symptoms 215 overlap with covid-19 using the same patient sample and 216 collection vial. 217 the initial step involves hybridization of the viral rna 218 target to a specific capture probe and an additional oligonu-219 cleotide containing a t7 promoter primer, which are captured 220 onto magnetic microparticles by application of a magnetic 221 field. then, the captured rna target hybridized to the t7 pro-222 moter primer is reverse transcribed into a complementary 223 cdna. the rnase h activity of the reverse transcriptase sub-224 sequently degrades the target rna strand from the hybrid 225 rna−cdna duplex, leaving a single-stranded cdna, which 226 includes the t7 promoter. an additional primer is used to gen-227 erate a double-stranded dna, which is subsequently tran-228 scribed into rna amplicons by t7 rna polymerase. these 229 new rna amplicons then reenter the tma process allowing 230 this exponential amplification process to generate billions of 231 rna amplicons in less than 1 h. the detection process 232 involves the use of single-stranded nucleic acid torches that 233 hybridize specifically to the rna amplicon in real time. each 234 torch is conjugated to a fluorophore and a quencher. when the 235 torch hybridizes to the rna amplicon, the fluorophore is able 236 to emit a signal upon excitation. 237 2.2.3. crispr-based assays. clustered regularly interspaced 238 short palindromic repeats (crispr) represents a family of 239 nucleic acid sequences found in prokaryotic organisms, such as 240 bacteria. these sequences can be recognized and cut by a set of 241 bacterial enzymes, called crispr-associated enzymes, exem-242 plified by cas9, cas12, and cas13. certain enzymes in the 243 cas12 and cas13 families can be programmed to target and 244 cut viral rna sequences. 29 245 two companies, mammoth biosciences and sherlock 246 biosciences, established by the crispr pioneer scientists, 247 are independently exploring the possibility of using the gene-248 editing crispr methodology for detection of sars-cov-2. 249 the sherlock method developed by sherlock biosciences 250 uses cas13 that is capable of excising reporter rna sequences 251 in response to activation by sars-cov-2-specific guide rna. 30 252 the detectr assay by mammoth biosciences relies on the 253 cleavage of reporter rna by cas12a to specifically detect 254 viral rna sequences of the e and n genes, followed by iso-255 thermal amplification of the target, resulting in a visual readout 256 with a fluorophore. 31 these crispr-based methods, as depicted 257 in figure 3 , do not require complex instrumentation and 258 can be read using paper strips to detect the presence of the 259 sars-cov-2 virus without loss of sensitivity or specificity. 311 of sars-cov-2 allows for potential contact tracing, molecular 312 epidemiology, and studies of viral evolution. metagenomics 313 approaches such as sequence-independent single primer 314 amplification (sispa) provide additional checks on sequence 315 divergence. this dual technique is particularly relevant to 316 sars-cov-2 in assessment of its rate of mutation and to detect 317 its possible recombination with other human coronaviruses, 318 both of which have implications for vaccine development and 319 antiviral efficacy. 320 amplicon and metagenomics minion based sequencing 321 were used by moore et al. (2020) to rapidly (within 8 h) 322 sequence the genome of sars-cov-2 and the other micro-323 biome in nasopharyngeal swabs obtained from patients with 324 covid-19 by the isaric 4c consortium. 39 for the amplicon-325 based system, the group chose 16 primer binding sites from con-326 served regions in the sars-cov-2 genome to sequentially 327 amplify roughly 1000 bp fragments with an approximately 200 bp 328 overlapping region. these primer sets were then used to gen-329 erate 30 amplicons from the cdna, which were subsequently 330 sequenced using minion. 331 a next-generation shotgun metagenomics sequencing plat-332 form has been developed by illumina with the ability not only 333 to detect the presence of multiple strains of coronaviruses but 334 also to comprehensively examine multiple pathogenic organi-335 sms present in a complex sample. the illumina metagenomics 336 workflow involves sample preparation using their truseq ribo-337 zero gold rrna depletion kit, library preparation using truseq 338 stranded total rna, sequencing using the illumina benchtop 339 375 while rt-pcr-based viral rna detection has been widely 376 used in diagnosis of covid-19, it cannot be used to monitor 377 the progress of the disease stages and cannot be applied to 378 broad identification of past infection and immunity. 379 serological testing is defined as an analysis of blood serum or 380 plasma and has been operationally expanded to include testing 381 of saliva, sputum, and other biological fluids for the presence 382 of immunoglobulin m (igm) and immunoglobulin g (igg) 383 antibodies. this test plays an important role in epidemiology and 384 vaccine development, providing an assessment of both short-term 385 (days to weeks) and long-term (years or permanence) trajectories 386 of antibody response, as well as antibody abundance and 387 diversity. igm first becomes detectable in serum after a few days 388 and lasts a couple of weeks upon infection and is followed by a 389 switch to igg. thus, igm can be an indicator of early stage infec-390 tion, and igg can be an indicator of current or prior infection. 391 igg may also be used to suggest the presence of post-infection 392 immunity. in recent years, the sophistication and sensitivity of 393 immunological assays have increased not only for the detection of 394 antibodies themselves but also for the application of antibodies 395 (primarily monoclonal antibodies) to the detection of pathogen-396 derived antigens. these tests have a huge potential for the epide-397 miology of covid-19, 32,42−45 but test results can be impacted by 398 at least three situations: (1) a subset of subjects with a positive 399 result from molecular genetic assays for sars-cov-2 infection 400 are seronegative due to the lag in antibody production following 401 infection, (2) the subjects may be seropositive yet negative for 402 molecular genetic assay results reflecting clearance of an earlier, 403 milder infection, and (3) limitation in sensitivity and specificity of 404 the assays. the last issue is particularly important because even a 405 small percentage of false positive results due to low specificity 406 (cross reaction) may lead to misleading predictive antibody 407 prevalence among a given population, which may have unde-408 sirable impact on the socioeconomic decisions and overall 409 public confidence in the results. 46,47 410 the determination of sars-cov-2 exposure relies largely 411 on the detection of either igm or igg antibodies that are 412 specific for various viral antigens including, but not exclusively, 413 the spike glycoprotein (s1 and s2 subunits, receptor-binding 414 domain) and nucleocapsid protein. the methodology for these 415 determinations includes the traditional enzyme-linked immu-416 nosorbent assay (elisa), immunochromatographic lateral flow 417 assay, neutralization bioassay, and specific chemosensors. each 418 of these formats brings advantages (speed, multiplexing, 419 automation) and disadvantages (trained personnel, dedicated 420 laboratories). complementary to these antibody-detecting 421 methods are the rapid antigen tests wherein antibodies are 422 used to detect the presence of viral antigen(s) in serological 423 samples. development of high-throughput serology tests is a 424 current focus of major diagnostic companies. 45 the fda 425 granted eua status to the first serology test, qsars-cov-2 426 igg/igm rapid test, manufactured by cellex inc., on april 1, 427 2020, 48 but continues to allow clinical laboratories and com-428 mercial manufacturers to launch serology tests without an 429 eua. 431 elisa is a microwell, plate-based assay technique designed for 432 detecting and quantifying substances such as peptides, pro-433 teins, antibodies, and hormones. the test can be qualitative or 434 quantitative, and the time to results is typically 1−5 h. in the 435 case of sars-cov-2 as shown in figure 5a , the plate wells are neutralization assays deter-460 mine the ability of an antibody to inhibit virus infection of cul-461 tured cells and the resulting cytopathic effects of viral replica-462 tion. for this assay, patient samples of whole blood, serum, or 463 plasma are diluted and added at decreasing concentrations to 464 the cell cultures. if neutralizing antibodies are present, their 465 levels can be measured by determining the threshold at which 466 they are able to prevent viral replication in the infected cell 467 cultures. the time to results for neutralization assays is 468 typically 3−5 days, but recent advances have reduced this to 469 hours. 49,50 this type of testing requires cell culture facilities, 470 and in the case of sars coronavirus, biosafety level 3 (bsl3) 471 laboratories. despite these limitations, determination of neu-472 tralizing antibodies is important in the short term for the 473 therapeutic application of convalescent plasma and, in the long 474 term, for vaccine development. biosensor tests rely on converting the 486 specific interaction of biomolecules into a measurable readout 487 via optical, electrical, enzymatic, and other methods. surface 488 plasmon resonance (spr) is a technique that measures inter-489 ference with incident light at a solid boundary due to local 490 disturbances such as the adsorption of antibody or antigen. 491 an spr-based biosensor was developed for the diagnosis of 492 sars using coronaviral surface antigen (scvme) anchored 493 onto a gold substrate. 53 the spr chip had a lower limit of detec-494 tion of 200 ng/ml for anti-scvme antibodies within 10 min. 495 most recently, pathsensors inc. announced a canary bio-496 sensor to detect the novel sars coronavirus. this platform 497 utilizes a cell-based immunosensor that couples capture of the 498 virus with signal amplification to provide a result in 3−5 min. 499 the biosensor is slated to be available for research purposes in 500 may 2020. 54 501 3.6. rapid antigen test. complementary to molecular 502 genetic assays are the rapid antigen tests that allow detection of 503 viral antigens. 55, 56 as shown in figure 5b , these tests rely on 504 specific monoclonal antibodies to provide a mechanism for the 505 capture of viral antigens from an analytical sample. these assays 506 are not restricted to a particular format. examples include a 507 colorimetric enzyme immunoassay for sars-cov in 2004, 57 an 508 enhanced chemiluminescent immunoassay for sars-cov in 509 2005, 58 and more recently a fluorescence lateral flow assay 59 for 510 the detection of sars-cov-2 nucleocapsid protein. table 2 513 provides a collection of current available serological and immuno-514 logical assays for covid-19 diagnosis, and a complete list of simi-515 lar assays is provided in supporting information table s2. 564 while the past few months have witnessed rapid progress in 565 diagnostic kit development for covid-19, the race continues 566 to develop even more efficient laboratory techniques and cost-567 effective, point-of-care test kits that can be deployed in mass 568 quantities. this report provides a broad survey of molecular 569 genetic assays, and serological and immunological tests for 570 identification of covid-19 infection. while rt-pcr has been 571 the dominant technique for detection of viral rna, other 572 nucleic acid assays including isothermal amplification assays, 573 hybridization microarray assays, amplicon-based metagenomics 574 sequencing, and the cutting-edge crispr-related technologies 575 are also under development or have resulted in approved 576 tests. 60 the efficiency of such testing has also been significantly 577 improved. this report also provides trend analysis of journal 578 articles related to covid-19 diagnostic techniques. the 579 number of fda eua-approved tests available for covid-19 580 diagnosis keeps growing, but the many new tests are still in 581 various stages of development. ultrarapid test kits and point-582 of-care tests are a major focus of development in order to speed 583 up the response time for treatment and eliminate the need for 584 elaborate laboratory equipment and waiting time involved with 585 testing in approved laboratories. 586 the urgent need for accurate and rapid diagnosis of sars-t4 587 cov-2 infection remains critical as global healthcare systems 588 continue to operate during the course of the covid-19 pan-589 demic. in particular, serological and immunological testing of 590 infected asymptomatic and symptomatic individuals, and their 591 close contacts, is expected to be in high demand. in addition to 592 its role complementary to molecular genetic testing to confirm 593 suspected cases, this type of testing would provide valuable 594 information about the course and degree of immune response 595 as well as the durability of immunity in both infected indi-596 viduals and participants in vaccine clinical trials. the results 597 from these tests may assist epidemiological assessment and can 598 be used to manage the return to normal activities. however, 599 many questions regarding serological tests remain to be addressed, 600 including their degree of sensitivity and specificity. finally, it 601 remains to be confirmed that the presence of antibodies against 602 sars-cov-2 indeed correlates with immunity to the virus. 603 in summary, significant progress has been made in the devel- the availability of pathogen-specific treatment options for respiratory tract infections (rtis) increased the need for rapid diagnostic tests. besides, retrospective studies, improved lab-based detection methods and the intensified search for new viruses since the beginning of the twenty-first century led to the discovery of several novel respiratory viruses. among them are human bocavirus (hbov), human coronaviruses (hcov-hku1, -nl63), human metapneumovirus (hmpv), rhinovirus type c (rv-c), and human polyomaviruses (kipyv, wupyv). additionally, new viruses like sars coronavirus (sars-cov), mers coronavirus (mers-cov), novel strains of influenza virus a and b, and (most recently) sars coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) have emerged. although clinical presentation may be similar among different viruses, associated symptoms may range from a mild cold to a severe respiratory illness, and thus require a fast and reliable diagnosis. the increasing number of commercially available rapid point-of-care tests (pocts) for respiratory viruses illustrates both the need for this kind of tests but also the problem, i.e., that the majority of such assays has significant limitations. in this review, we summarize recently published characteristics of pocts and discuss their implications for the treatment of rtis. the second key aspect of this work is a description of new and innovative diagnostic techniques, ranging from biosensors to novel portable and current lab-based nucleic acid amplification methods with the potential future use in point-of-care settings. while prototypes for some methods already exist, other ideas are still experimental, but all of them give an outlook of what can be expected as the next generation of pocts.keywords: virus diagnostics, innovative approaches, biosensors, bedside testing, poct, commercial point-ofcare tests introduction respiratory viruses such as influenza a viruses (iav) or human respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) are well-known, circulate worldwide, and are associated with significant morbidity and mortality (iuliano et al., 2018; shi et al., 2019) . on the other hand, there are emerging infectious diseases which were, according to the definition by the who, hitherto unknown or rare but are now rapidly spreading either in number of cases or geographically (who, 2014a) . in the last 20 years, in addition to the emergence of novel influenza and coronaviruses, advances in molecular detection methods have led to the discovery of new respiratory viruses already circulating worldwide (jartti et al., 2012) .in 2001 human metapneumovirus (hmpv) was discovered (van den hoogen et al., 2001) . the outbreaks of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) in 2003, middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) since april 2012, and sars-cov-2 since december 2019 highlight the danger of emerging (zoonotic) and highly pathogenic respiratory viruses (fouchier et al., 2003; zaki et al., 2012; who, 2020c) . two other coronaviruses, human coronaviruses (hcov) nl63 and hku1 were discovered in 2004 and 2005, respectively van der hoek et al., 2004; woo et al., 2005) . in 2005, allander et al. described a new member of the family parvoviridae, human bocavirus (hbov) (allander et al., 2005) . the two new human polyomaviruses ki and wu (kipyv, wupyv) were first discovered in 2007 (allander et al., 2007; gaynor et al., 2007) and although often detected in samples, their role in causality of respiratory illness is still under discussion (reviewed in jartti et al., 2012) . in 2007, the human rhinovirus group c (rv-c) was introduced when newly sequenced strains differed significantly from the existing groups a and b (lee et al., 2007) . finally, avian influenza viruses (aiv) such as iav h5n1, h7n7, or h9n2 crossed the species barrier to infect humans several times in the last years (reviewed in kim et al., 2016) .lab-based techniques still dominate the field of virus diagnostics. classical methods such as virus cultures, electron microscopy, and serology have been complemented by nucleic acid amplification tests (naats), sequencing (including next generation sequencing), and different antigen detection methods. today, in most clinical settings, naats have replaced virus cultures as the gold standard, due to their high specificity, faster turnaround times, and absence of limitations posed by the need for susceptible cell lines (fox, 2007) .in contrast to lab-based tests, point-of-care tests (pocts) are performed at the site of sample collection (e.g., bedside, physician's office, or emergency department) and provide results usually in <2 h (basile et al., 2018; vos et al., 2019) . furthermore, they require only little hands-on time and no specific laboratory training as most critical steps are automated in a single device. the latter may range from handheld to benchtop size and is not designed for high-throughput sample processing. pocts and other fast diagnostic tests performed in laboratories but provide results within 1-2 h may be called near-pocts. prompt identification of the causative pathogen may help the responsible healthcare professional choosing the appropriate treatment or take the right decisions in outbreak situations, regarding hospitalization and quarantine (brendish et al., 2015) .in this review, we provide a brief overview of currently available pocts for the diagnosis of emerging and new respiratory viruses along with their advantages and limitations and discuss recently published approaches and techniques with a potential use in future pocts.for the diagnosis of commonly encountered respiratory viruses such as iav, influenza b virus (ibv), and rsv many commercially available pocts and near-pocts with different sensitivities and specificities for each virus are available (supplementary table 1 ). however, a recent meta-analysis has demonstrated that three newer generation rapid multiplex polymerase chain reaction systems (mpcrs) (biomérieuxbiofire r filmarray r rp, nanosphere verigene r rv+ test, and hologic gen-probe prodesse assays) are highly accurate, though usually more expensive, and may provide important diagnostic information for early identification of iav, ibv, and rsv (huang h. s. et al., 2018; rabold and waggoner, 2019) .diagnosis of emerging and novel viruses, including hbov, rv-c, coronaviruses (e.g., hcov-hku1, hcov-nl63, sars-cov-2) as well as specific subtypes of aiv (h5n1, h7n9, h10n8) and reassortant iav strains remains challenging (schuster and williams, 2018; who, 2020a) . the diagnosis of most of these viruses is based on molecular techniques that can only be performed at specialized referral centers. recently, there has been increased interest in using pocts in other settings, such as emergency departments, although implementation might be hampered by the need for specific training (bouzid et al., 2020) . naats have higher sensitivity than immunochromatographic assays, but generally, they require a higher degree of technical skills and training (drancourt et al., 2016) . polymerase chain reaction (pcr) remains the gold standard technique for the diagnosis of aiv subtypes while who recommends against the utilization of rapid tests in avian flu diagnosis (who, 2005; monne et al., 2008; schuster and williams, 2018) . rv-c, is typically detected from nasopharyngeal specimens using reverse transcriptase pcr (rt-pcr) and specific species and serotypes can be further identified by semi-nested pcrs or sequencing (bochkov et al., 2011; jartti et al., 2012; schuster and williams, 2018) .diagnosis of hbov was based on the detection of the specific igm antibody along with a 4-fold increase of the igg titer or low igg avidity indicative of seroconversion, but adaptive immune response requires several hours or even days to develop, thus the utility of such tests in acute settings is limited (soderlund-venermo et al., 2009) . as hbov dna persists in airway secretions for months after an acute infection, quantitative pcr along with serology are currently the preferred diagnostic methods (christensen et al., 2019) . viral dnaemia, mrna detection via rt-pcr, and antigen immunodetection assays have shown some promising results but further studies to define their sensitivity, specificity, and applicability in clinical practice are needed (soderlund-venermo et al., 2009; christensen et al., 2010 christensen et al., , 2013 christensen et al., , 2019 proenca-modena et al., 2011; xu et al., 2017) .the detection of kipyv and wupyv, found in secretion from both symptomatic and asymptomatic patients, is based on pcr and serology testing (neske et al., 2010; touze et al., 2010; jartti et al., 2012) .sars-cov-2, hcov-nl63, and -hku1 as well as hmpv diagnosis is based primarily on rt-pcr methods (van den hoogen et al., 2004; nichols et al., 2008; jartti et al., 2012; who, 2020a) . no data is available for fluorescent antibody, rapid cultures and enzyme immunoassay (eia) diagnostic tests for coronaviruses nl63 and hku1, whereas fluorescent antibody assays may be of some utility for hmpv (nichols et al., 2008; jartti et al., 2012) . for hmpv specifically, multiplex ligationdependent probe amplification (mlpa) on a nasopharyngeal swab has high sensitivity and specificity rates (100 and 96%, respectively) (reijans et al., 2008; panda et al., 2014; hoppe et al., 2016) .available tests for the now extinct sars-cov include antibody testing using an eia and rt-pcr tests in respiratory, blood, and stool specimens (cdc, 2004) . for the detection of mers-cov, that has its epicenter in the arabian peninsula, the united states centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) and the who recommend sampling from the lower respiratory tract and real-time rt-pcr (rrt-pcr) testing with specific primers since this appears to be more sensitive than testing of upper respiratory tract specimens (who, 2014b,c; cdc, 2015) .naats have been proven to be highly accurate and easily scalable tests during large outbreaks of novel or emerging viruses, like the sars-cov-2 pandemic. rapid genome sequencing analysis accommodates the fast development of reliable in-house and commercially available naats reagents shortly after an outbreak onset (cdc, 2020; who, 2020b).biosensors can be a reliable and cost-effective way to detect specific pathogens in point-of-care settings. different types of sensors for rapid identification of respiratory viruses have been developed recently. by using a gold-coated array of carbon electrodes, the authors were able to detect mers-cov spike protein in the picogram range within 20 min (layqah and eissa, 2019) . this electrochemical assay is based on the competitive binding of a mers-cov antibody either to the virus in the sample or to the immobilized antigen on the electrode, which can be measured by a reduced peak current through the chip. in theory, this technique can be easily expanded to simultaneously detect multiple viruses, however, its diagnostic performance needs to be validated with the use of patient samples.different types of biosensors for aiv detection use nanobio hybrid materials (reviewed in lee et al., 2018) . in one of those approaches, a dna probe coupled to a field-effect transistor enabled detection of target dna down to 1 fm (lin et al., 2009) . another sensitive technique is based on surface plasmon resonance (spr), in which biomolecules bound to a metal surface lead to the reduction of the reflection of an incident light beam (tang et al., 2010; chang et al., 2018) . with a new antibody against a recombinant aiv h7n9, the authors were able to reach a detection limit of a few hundred copies per ml nasal fluid within 10 min of processing time. although still experimental, the characteristics of this approach render it a promising candidate for a future rapid poct.in a capillary convective pcr (ccpcr), the reagents circulate across a temperature gradient in a simple capillary tube, which allows run times shorter than 30 min (chou et al., 2011) . together with a self-made dipstick detection method, this principle was already used to test for non-respiratory viruses like hepatitis c virus (zhang et al., 2013 (zhang et al., , 2014 . zhou et al. integrated this method into a 1.5 kg device for the automation of the detection of different iav strains (zhuo et al., 2018) . although fast and sensitive, manual rna extraction limits the use as poct so far. hardick et al. presented another portable naat device not only for the detection of iav, but also for ibv, rsv, and mers-cov. it is based on a rt-pcr in microfluidic cards but likewise lacks automated nucleic acid extraction (hardick et al., 2018) .alternatively to nucleic acid-based techniques, giant magnetoresistive (gmr) biosensors function comparable to an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay but use magnetic labels instead of enzymes or fluorophores coupled to detection antibodies (hall et al., 2010) . with such a sensor, wu et al. constructed a handheld device which, in connection with a computer or smartphone, was able to detect iav h3n2 in purified and disrupted virus solutions (wu et al., 2017) . although h3n2 strains are circulating already since 1968 in the human population (smith et al., 2004) , this method is likely adaptable to emerging aivs with the use of appropriate capture antibodies.by designing a prototype for a lateral flow assay for approximately 5 us$, huang et al. proved that the simultaneous detection of iav and ibv in swab samples is possible at very low costs (huang et al., 2017) . however, the sensitivity of this prototype needs significant improvements before it can be used under clinical conditions. instead of constructing a completely new apparatus, cui et al. used commercially available glucose test strips together with specifically designed glucose-bearing substrates to test for the cleavage activity of iav neuraminidase in spiked samples (cui et al., 2017) .although the majority of the presented approaches and prototypes focuses on the detection of influenza viruses, most of them can theoretically be applied to emerging or new viruses with only minor changes.in comparison to pcrs, isothermal naats do not require complex devices when working with extracted nucleic acids. reverse transcription strand invasion-based amplification (rt-siba) and reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (rt-lamp) are two examples which have been used to detect e.g., hmpv (song et al., 2014) , iav (eboigbodin et al., 2016) , and mers-cov (huang p. et al., 2018) . wang et al. went on to integrate seven rt-lamp assays into a microfluidic chip for the multiplex detection of different respiratory viruses in a device weighing <3 kg . another chipbased system, named iroad, uses reverse transcription-based recombinase polymerase amplification (rt-rpa) and was able to rapidly identify iav, different hcovs, and other respiratory viruses in extracted nucleic acids (koo et al., 2017) .the development of new laboratory and point-of-care diagnostic tests for influenza, rsv, and emerging respiratory viruses has taken up pace in recent years. healthcare professionals, hospital managers, and laboratory directors will need to update and re-evaluate best practices regularly.the advancement of diagnostic capabilities may change the way we identify, document, and communicate respiratory viral infections in the future. along with these developments, the expectations of patients and healthcare professionals may change as well, i.e., patients will want to know the responsible pathogen and their clinical prognosis. with the development of specific antiviral therapies and vaccines, new diagnostic algorithms will be needed to ensure the highest quality of care while containing costs.from a viewpoint of quality of care and clinical management, timely infection control, and the ability to act upon results, the future will likely belong to portable, clia-waived rapid diagnostic tests that take 10-20 min.a key criterion for the evaluation of diagnostic tests will be their clinical utility, i.e., their ability to identify the current culprit for the patient's symptoms, and to distinguish relevant pathogen(s) from bystander pathogens. more research is needed to correlate clinical outcomes and laboratory data.a second concern will be the correct timing of diagnostic testing with regards to a patient's course of illness. the sensitivity and positive predictive value of a diagnostic test depend on specimen quality and virus load (which is usually higher in children and early in the course of illness), duration of viral shedding, and patient's immune status. future diagnostic algorithms will need to consider these factors in addition to the epidemiology of viruses in the respective season or region.the initial criticism of pocts was directed toward a lack of sensitivity and a high degree of variability in test results. early studies during the 2009/10 flu pandemic reported sensitivities for influenza pocts ranging from 20 to 70% for the same test kit (rath et al., 2012) . in published evaluation studies, it was not entirely clear whether pocts were performed at the bedside or whether samples were sent to the laboratory, which would constitute a near-poct. these methodological inconsistencies also impaired the value of meta-analyses comparing the point-ofcare performance of different commercial tests (chartrand et al., 2015) . the reported performance differences also hint to the fact that the training and experience of the staff performing the test have an impact. procedural concerns were most pronounced with early-stage lateral flow ("strip") tests, where the result was read manually. second-generation antigen pocts and modern molecular pocts achieve significantly higher reproducibility and sensitivity through automation of key steps in the process. in 2018, the fda implemented new performance regulations setting new sensitivity thresholds required for pocts to maintain approval (fda, 2017) . as a result, only several influenza pocts were taken off the market. the role of regulators in setting quality standards for pocts cannot be underestimated (zhang et al., 2016; azar and landry, 2018) .in addition to the reliability of the poct result itself, the hands-on time and the time-to-result are still critical for useracceptance at the bedside. it is expected that future pocts will be more robust and easier to use.as the majority of acute respiratory infections (ari) is of viral origin, these infections are common reasons for inappropriate antibiotic use (harris et al., 2016; tief et al., 2016) . studies have raised the expectation that expanded use of virus diagnostics at the point-of-care may help to limit the use of antibiotics (bonner et al., 2003) . the european health action plan on amr (european parliament, 2018) and the o'neill report on "tackling drug-resistant infections globally" (o'neill, 2016) both point to rapid diagnostics as a key instrument in tackling amr. including pocts in antimicrobial stewardship programs might increase their acceptance by physicians.the ability to direct "the right treatment to the right patient at the right time" facilitates precision medicine. in the future, advanced virus diagnostics may be combined with biomarker pocts for the prediction of individual-level host responses to further target treatment to those who are most likely to benefit from it.a major obstacle to expanding the use of pocts is cost. in fact, pocts would be most impactful in settings where the majority of early treatment decisions are made. the current pricing schemes, however, seem too high for broadscale testing in the community and emergency departments. in addition to pricing, reimbursement strategies need to be reconsidered. even in hospital emergency rooms, percapita standard reimbursements disincentivize the use of virus diagnostics in patients with ari. up-to-date economic models are needed to clarify the cost-effectiveness of different types of pocts.the steepest increase in antimicrobial resistance is being observed in low-middle income countries (lmic) (who-paho, 2018). for lmic, portable pocts with multi-modality for known and emerging pathogens, or simple lab-based instrumentation with no/minimal need for cold chain or refrigeration of reagents, may be the most likely to succeed.none of the currently commercially available pocts covers all viruses discussed here (tables 1, 2, supplementary table 1 ). to date, the same holds true for new technologies as well. however, it is conceivable that these techniques may be adapted to other respiratory viruses after having shown their usefulness in practice. especially biosensors have the potential for a wider spectrum of applications. they also do not encounter the major limitation of naats as pocts: the extraction of nucleic acids (ali et al., 2017) . for these tests, even less obvious complications, like the stability of the plastic materials against required chemicals, have to be overcome for future highly specific nucleic acidbased pocts. any ideal poct should fulfill the assured criteria of the world health organization to be applicable in resource-limited settings (mabey et al., 2004) . currently, this is most likely true for tests based on lateral flow immunochromatography but coming improvements e.g., in miniaturization and battery capacity may facilitate the use of other test principles (basile et al., 2018) .while economic benefits of pocts and better outcomes for the patients are still discussed, it is likely that these tests will gain further importance with decreasing processing costs and improved robustness.cs and pn planned, structured, and edited the manuscript. pn searched the literature and integrated all contributions. pn, br, pf, ea, and st participated in the writing of the first draft of the manuscript and subsequent revisions. br and pf contributed equally to this work. all authors critically read, reviewed, and approved the submitted final version of the manuscript. authors would like to thank the escmid study group on respiratory viruses (esgrev) for providing a platform for interaction between authors.the supplementary material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcimb. 2020.00181/full#supplementary-materialcovid-19 is the infectious disease caused by the most recently discovered novel coronavirus. this new virus and the caused disease were unknown before the outbreak began in wuhan, china, in december 2019. covid-19 is now a pandemic (who announced at march 12) affecting many countries globally [1] . covid-19 can appear with many symptoms such as fever, fatigue, dry cough, anorexia, myalgia (muscle ache), dyspnea(shortness of breath), expectoration (the coughing up and spitting out of material from the lungs, bronchi, and trachea, sputum), pharyngalgia, diarrhea (loose, watery stools),nausea, dizziness, headache, vomiting and abdominal pain. respiratory system symptoms are more common, and onset of disease pneumonia appears to be the most frequent serious manifestation of infection, characterized primarily by fever, cough, dyspnea, and bilateral infiltrates on chest imaging [2] [16] . for the diagnosis, researchers define gold standard and lateral methods to overwhelm the pandemic via early diagnosis, but they have disadvantages such as high duration for rt-pcr (reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction), low sensitivity for antigen/antibody tests, high radiation exposure for computer tomography (ct). since these methods have many disadvantages, a rapid diagnosis pre-screening test is crucial to keep the population well-being. physicians' labor is the most important factor to fight with the novel coronavirus. in addition, decision support systems (dss) which are improved with the artificial intelligence (ai) and machine learning methods are timesaving activities for the physicians. a rapid analysis for the chest x-ray (cxr) scans, ct, infection rate or mortality rate with the machine learning methods are some of the helpful tools and researchers are trying to build such tools for pre-screening covid-19. this study defines a deployed environment 1 for rapid evaluation of the mortality rate and cxr scans via machine learning tools. the analysis explained in this study is the submitted work for the #euvsvirus hackathon 2 . the article goes as follows: sec. 2 discusses about the diagnosis methods and their disadvantages. sec. 3 reveals the algorithms in detail. sec. 4 is the evaluation of each algorithm deployed over the platform and sec. 5 concludes the work.rt-pcr is the gold standard to diagnose the covid-19 [3] but it is necessary to keep in mind that there are not enough studies to evaluate the accuracy and predictive values of the tests. sensitivity of testing depends on the precise of rt-pcr assay, type of specimen, duration of illness at testing. in a study at china, 1070 samples collected from 205 patients. bronchoalveolar lavage fluid had the most positive results 14 of 15 patients (93 percent). specimens from upper respiratory tract had fewer positive results. from 326 pharyngeal swabs there were 136 positive results (32 percent) and from 8 nasal swabs there were 5 positive results (63 percent). researchers in this study suggest that testing specimens from multiple sides may improve the sensitivity [4] . according to the statement and the study before it is necessary to do studies for evaluating rt-pcr tests.the second diagnostic tool defined in the literature is ct. according to a study in wuhan, china with 1014 patient's chest ct has 97 percent sensitivity based on positive rt-pcr results. researchers suggest that chest ct could be a primary tool to diagnose covid-19. unfortunately, specificity was 25 percent in other words 75 of 100 patients were false positive [5] . ct scan on pediatric patients should also be avoided due to radiation [6] . besides that, the problem is that resources to diagnose are not sufficient. in the literature, machine learning methods are also applied for the diagnosis through ct images [18] [19] and they are used for supporting the clinician's decisions. however, they can not be applied in large number of samples to exploit the speed of ai interpretation. therefore, lateral and rapid diagnostic tools are required for pre-elimination steps.according to the statement before pneumonia is the most common clinical manifestation and has fatal outcomes. that is the inspiration of solution. in order to diagnose the pneumonia, cxr appears to be a useful tool and to diagnose the community acquired pneumonia. in fact, it is a gold standard with clinical evaluation and microbiologic test results [7] . unfortunately, for covid-19 cxr has some limitations. in a study on 64 patients some patients had no abnormality in their cxr even they had positive initial rt-pcr. cxr may be normal in early or mild disease [8] , but this test can be used more frequently due to low radiation exposure. the health systems of the governments also have enough x-ray scan devices to satisfy the population. in spite of that cxr is a low-cost diagnostic tool and in healthcare chest x-rays are used frequently and we should keep in mind that that study has limitations as researchers stated. that inspires second part of our solution. some researchers also publish their ai architectures according to the detection of covid-19 patients [20] [21] . by evaluating the fact that cxr is not enough to speak about certain diagnosis, a supporting parameter can be provided to the physician for the conditions where ai can not catch the condition. in this study, this parameter is defined as mortality rate that shows the risk of mortality for the person who is infected with covid-19 disease.there are people who are at higher risk for severe illness. those at high-risk from covid-19 are people 65 years and older, people who live in nursing home or long-term care facility. also people of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including, people with chronic lung disease or moderate to severe asthma, serious heart conditions, immunocompromised (many conditions can cause a person to be immunocompromised, including cancer treatment, smoking, bone marrow or organ transplantation, immune deficiencies, poorly controlled hiv or aids, and prolonged use of corticosteroids and other immune weakening medications), people with severe obesity (body mass index [bmi] of 40 or higher), diabetes ,chronic kidney disease undergoing dialysis, liver disease [9] . there should be a risk evaluation parameter to direct these patients to other diagnostic services and identify these patients who are at the risk.3 proposed solution for pre-screening covid-19 3 mantiscovid is the hybrid platform proposed via this study. the evaluation platform has two outputs after screening the group of patients as the prediction about the risk in covid-19 via cxr and the mortality rate. two parameters can be used as a decision support system to direct the patient for the other highly sensitive tests. in the case where 1 mantiscovid : https://scan.mantiscope.com/?lang=en 2 https://euvsvirus.org/ 2 . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.04.20090779 doi: medrxiv preprint mantiscovid cannot catch covid-19 patient via ai elimination from cxr, the physician can change approaching style to the patient via evaluating the mortality rate. if the patient has no symptoms and negative test results but have a higher mortality rate in that population, it is advised that follow up the patient closely but that advise should be evaluated by clinicians. although forecasting of mortality rate is not easy due to dependence over many conditions, we have tried to estimate the mathematical model as linear regression in terms of 7 parameters via using the open datasets over the patients [10] . the system works over the cloud as a web page and each physician can access to the system for the available computations. the system is designed to be scattered over millions of people to provide scalability via cloud. flow diagram of the platform is seen from fig. 1 . the system has two types of forecasting such as the mortality rate and cxr posteroanterior (pa) chest view via ai elimination. these methods used to implement the processing flow of forecasting the mortality rate is given in the following details. during the development, open source datasets are used and the python code for data synthesis and grouping from these sets is given 3 .the dataset used to compute the mortality rate is from open source covid-19 survival calculator. the mortality rate from dataset were modeled as a linear regression method by connecting it to 7 parameters [10] . the chosen mortality rate factors were age, sex, height, weight, health conditions (asthma, carcinoma, chronic kidney disease compromised immune system, coronary heart disease chronic obstructive lung disease, diabetes, hiv positive, hypertension (high blood pressure), other chronic illness), blood type and smoking type. we have discarded some of mortality rate adjustment parameters to obtain a minimum dataset. the methods used to obtain the linear regression model for the mortality rate are the open source libraries associated with the python scikit-learn [15] .in the presentation of the cxr pa patient elimination ai platform, three types of ai algorithms are available to check whether the person is risky or not. the flow diagram can be seen from the fig. 2 . the sequence has a direct role to detect the risk from x-ray scans. as an aim, this hybrid module is not used for certain diagnosis due to low sensitivity occurring via pa chest view. it is only used as a decision support system for the clinician.the first model is generated to classify whether the input image is x-ray image or not. the model is trained via a dataset containing cxr pa scans with 211 images and images with 210 images [12] [13] . dataset is divided into training (70 percent) and test (30 percent) sets. if an image is detected as besides of x-ray image, the other algorithms are not processed, and it warns the user to check the uploaded image.keras library is used to generate the convolutional neural network (cnn) architecture for the starting point of the classifier [17] . in the input layer, 32 convolutional filters with size 3x3 are inserted with rectified linear unit (relu) activation function. inputs are accepted as 200x200 with red-green-blue (rgb) colors which makes input shape 200x200x3. max pooling layers and 2 hidden layers are inserted with 3x3 filter after convolution. each hidden layer contains 32 convolutional filters with size 3x3 relu activation functions with the addition of max-pooling layer with 2x2 filters. then, flatten operation is applied. fully connected layer is added with 64 units with relu activation function. later, dropout technique is applied with the rate of 0.5 to avoid overfitting. finally, fully connected layer is used with a unit with sigmoid function (1, if the image is x-ray image; 0, otherwise). the classifier ai in the middle revealing whether the patient is risky (covid-19 / pneumonia) or not is the trained model (modified version of alexnet [11] ) according to the open datasets strengthened with the currently obtained covid-19 patients' day by day [12] . the dataset is split into train (0.7), test (0.2) and validation (0.1) to enable the platform for the evaluation. it totally contains 8851 normal, 121 covid-19 and 9579 pneumonia patient data [13] . the ai architecture of the object classifier and training batch sizes are given in fig. 3 . the last part defined as the object detection case is the detection of the lung opacity parts associated with the bacteria type pneumonia. the ai neural network is the trained tiny version of you only look once (yolo) [14] to mark the single objects in cxr pa images. the anomaly is named as lung opacity. the dataset used in this part is the annotated cxr pa obtained through the open source datasets [13] .the system presented in this paper contains 4 different machine learning techniques to provide a rapid analysis of cxr pa view and the mortality rate evaluation. these algorithms are evaluated one by one with the allocated data. each evaluation results can be seen within the following details.1) linear regression model to forecast the mortality rate: this evaluation contains allocated 10000 patient data gathered from the open source dataset. the mean squared error and the standard deviation between the actual and predicted values are computed as 2.87 and 1.69 respectively. fig. 4 shows the details about the actual and predicted values via testing with 150 conditions.2) binary classifier to check whether uploaded image is x-ray scan or not: this evaluation contains additional 1000 x-ray and 1030 random images to be used in the evaluation of the binary classifier algorithm. the correctly predicted values for the x-ray scans and random samples are given as 971 and 943 separately. it is observed that the averaged accuracy is about 96 percent.3) classifier to separate covid-19/pneumonia/normal patients: this part contains randomly selected 150 patient data to be separated via the ai algorithm. the sensitivity of the risky patient detection (covid-19/pneumonia) is 84 percent. the sensitivity for the detection of normal patients is 67 percent. the confusion matrix can be seen in the following fig. 4 . as the main objective is the detection of risky patients in high accuracy, the system conditions can be improved via gathering more patient data which is known as covid-19 certainly.lesion detection over the bacteria type x-ray scans: this part contains randomly selected 30 patient data to be analyzed via the ai algorithm. the evaluation criterion is comparing the number of lesions between the real annotated and predicted x-ray scans. the allocated dataset is divided into three groups as 2 lesions (10 image), 1 lesion (10 image) and no lesion (10 image). the detected and the actual number of lesions over the groups are given as in the 4 . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. mantiscovid is a cloud-based pre-screening platform that would be useful for the elimination of non-risky patients in the coronavirus pandemic. since the algorithms are developed and evaluated using the open source data and platforms, this system needs to be evaluated via the clinical perspective by the legal authorities. this platform is an internet-based pre-diagnosis tool to be verified via the universities during the covid-19 diagnosis. however, a physician would also use this tool as an assistant to scan and diagnose the patients due to the rapid diagnosis requirement to prevent spreading of the coronavirus. in fact, the gold standards used to diagnose the covid-19 patients also have high false alarm rates because of the epidemiology of the disease is not fully known.as a future work, the clinical validation of the internet-based platform will start with the known legal authorities and other state of the art ai architectures will be used to increase the sensitivity and specificity of the platform. the integration over the platform will continue with the chest anteroposterior (ap) views, chest ct and ultrasound images by providing novel ai architectures. infection rate for the novel coronavirus would also be evaluated with the usage of tracking the patient's locations. after the coronavirus pandemic, this platform would also be used for scanning the society in terms of the mortality rate and x-ray scans in any other illnesses and symptoms. there should be more studies to identify case fatality rate and infection rate in the case where proper data will be collected to train ai.. cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.04.20090779 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.04.20090779 doi: medrxiv preprintacute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) was named by the world health organization in 2019, causing covid-19 [1] . by march 6, 2020, 80,714 cases were laboratory confirmed and 3045 were death in china based on ccdc reported. sars-cov-2 is an enveloped rna virus widely distributed in humans, other mammals and birds that cause respiratory, intestinal, liver and neurological diseases [2, 3] . six coronaviruses are known to cause disease in humans. sars-cov-2 is a novel all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.07.20032524 doi: medrxiv preprint coronavirus that has never been found in humans. common symptoms in people infected with sars-cov-2 virus include respiratory symptoms, fever, cough, and in more severe cases, infection can lead to pneumonia and severe acute respiratory syndrome [4, 5] . the known routes of corona virus disease-19 transmission are respiratory droplets and contact transmission, while aerosol and fecal-oral transmission require further clarification [6] .for sars-cov-2 infection, early diagnosis is particularly important, not only to prolong the survival of patients, but also to ensure the safety of the population [7] . in clinical practice, the detection methods have been rapidly updated due to the deepening understanding of covid-19. nucleic acid testing, chest ct, confirmation of epidemiological history and clinical manifestations are important bases for the diagnosis of novel coronavirus pneumonia [7] [8] [9] [10] . however, nucleic acid testing has operator restrictions, time-consuming, easy to pollution and the high cost. in comparison, the coronavirus antigen detection method has the advantages of rapid, convenient and the sars-cov antigen can be detected up to 1 day before appearance of clinical symptoms [11] .in clinical practice, nucleic acid test and antibody assay have been employed in the diagnostic for suspected acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2)infections, but the use of sars-cov-2 antigen for diagnosis has not been successfully developed. theoretically, viral antigen is the specific marker of the virus and precedes antibody appearance within the infected people. therefore, detection of viral antigen can play a rapid screening effect and achieve the purpose of early diagnosis. here, we report a fluorescence immunochromatographic assay for detecting nucleocapsid protein of sars-cov-2 in nasopharyngeal swab sample and urine within 10 minutes, and evaluated it's significance in diagnosis of covid-19.study design a total of 239 participants with suspected sars-cov-2 infection from 7 centers, including general hospital of central theater command, wuhan n0.7 people's hospital, wuhan pulmonary hospital，hubei maternal and child all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is participants medical records of 239 participants in wuhan and 20 participants in chongqing were collected and retrospectively analyzed.nucleic acid test of sars-cov-2 specimen collected from nasopharyngeal swab were collected from all participants. extraction of nucleic acids from those samples performed with a high pure viral nucleic acid kit, as described by the manufacturer (da an gene co., ltd). extracted nucleic acid samples were tested for viruses and bacteria by polymerase chain reaction (pcr), using the abi prism 7500 and the light cycler 480 real-time pcr system, in accordance with manufacturer instructions. a real-time reverse transcription pcr (rtpcr) assay was used to detect viral rna by targeting sars-cov-2 orf1ab and n gene region of sars-cov-2.the test device, which is developed based on the principle of fluorescence immunochromatographic assay, is composed of a sample pad, a conjugate pad, a nitrocellulose membrane, an absorbent pad, and a supporting plastic cassette (fig. 1a) .the goat anti-rabbit igg antibodies (2mg/ml) and mouse anti-nucleocapsid protein of sars-cov-2 monoclonal antibody (m1,1mg/ml) were dotted on the nitrocellulose membrane at a volume of 0.4 μl to form the control line and test line, respectively. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.07.20032524 doi: medrxiv preprintthe conjugates of carboxylate-modified polystyrene europium (iii) chelate micro particles with anti-nucleocapsid protein of sars-cov-2 monoclonal antibody m4 or rabbit igg (100 μg/ml) were spotted on the conjugation pad at a volume of 1.2 μl.the fully assembled immunochromatographic strip was then sealed into the plastic cassette ( fig. 1b) with a sample well and this test device was stored in a dry environment at room temperature and ready for further experiment. with the help of the capillarity of the absorbent pad, sample buffer containing sars-cov-2 nucleocapsid protein could be combined by iii-conjugated m4 antibody and captured by m1 antibody at the test line, while iii-conjugated rabbit igg could be captured on the control line, resulting in a fluorescent band on the test and control lines, respectively. the fluorescent results will then be read by the immunofluorescence analyzer. cut-off value was determined by testing 100 nasal swab samples of healthy people and calculated as the mean value of the fluorescence signal plus 5 sd.nucleocapsid protein detection procedure nasopharyngeal swab samples or urine were diluted and mixed well with 500μl saline solution, 100μl of which was then added to the sample well of the test card. after a ten-minute reaction, immediately inserted the card into the immunofluorescence analyzer (fig. 1d) the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.07.20032524 doi: medrxiv preprintour study enrolled 239 participants based on diagnostic criteria for suspected sars-cov-2 infection. all participants underwent 3 nucleic acid tests, and the results of each nucleic acid test were verified by 2 covid-19 nucleic acid test kits. as shown in fig 2a, we performed nucleocapsid protein (n antigen) detection of sars-cov-2 in nasopharyngeal swab samples in parallel with nucleic acid test in multiple centers.as shown in figure 2 , among the 239 patients with covid-19 nucleic acid positive results, 141 were sars-cov-2 n antigen positive, the positive rate was 68%.meanwhile, among the 31 patients with covid-19 nucleic acid negative results, 31 were n antigen negative, with a positive rate of 100%. in order to investigate the sensitivity and specificity of antigen detection methods from a clinical perspective, our study selected ct value ≤40 and ≤30 (higher virus titer) as the nucleic acid positive group while ct value > 40 was used as the nucleic acid negative group. the results showed the positive coincidence rate (sensitivity) was 68%, the negative coincidence rate (specificity) was 100%, the total coincidence rate (accuracy) was 72% when ct value≤40 as nucleic acid positive group while ct value > 40 as nucleic acid negative group (fig3a). in addition, positive coincidence rate (sensitivity) was 98%, the negative coincidence rate (specificity) was 100%, the total coincidence rate, and (accuracy) was 99% when ct value≤ 30 as nucleic acid positive group while ct value > 40 as nucleic acid negative group (fig3b). it is of noteworthy that in this study cohort the earliest patient with fever in 3 days were identified by n antigen detection.we performed n antigen detection of sars-cov-2 in urine in one in parallel with all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.07.20032524 doi: medrxiv preprint nucleic acid test of nasopharyngeal swab samples in same day. it is interesting that 14 of 19 (73.6%) participants with diagnosed covid-19 were detected n antigen in urine (table 1 ).the current epidemic situation of covid-19 still remains severe and it quickly spread all over china and to more than 20 other countries. early diagnosis is critical to prevent its spreading and clinical treatment.in practice, nucleic acid test and antibody assay have been employed in the diagnostic for suspected sars-cov-2 infections, but the use of novel coronavirus antigen for diagnosis has not been successfully developed. now, the virus (sars-cov-2) nucleic acid rt-pcr test has become the standard method for diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infection due to its high detection rate [12] . however, nucleic acid test results are sometimes unstable and take too long, or can appear false negative and false positive.moreover, igm and igg antibody detection method have been used in diagnosing with a relative higher positive rate [13] . however, virus-specific antibody usually produced in 2-4 weeks after infection.theoretically, viral antigen is the specific marker of the virus and precedes antibody appearance within the infected people. in our previous study in patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), test of the n antigen of sars-cov achieved a sensitivity of 94% and 78% for the first 5 days and 6-10 days after onset, respectively. this pointed out that antigen detection has a high true positive rate and false negative rate, which can be used as an early diagnostic marker for sars before 1 day clinical onset [11] . other authors also indicate n antigen of sars-cov has a high sensitivity rate in early stage of sars, which could be useful for early diagnosis of sars [14] , indicate antigen detection can play an important role in the early diagnosis. therefore, detection of viral antigen can play a rapid screening effect and achieve the purpose of early diagnosis.here, we report a fluorescence immunochromatographic assay for detecting nucleocapsid protein of sars-cov-2 in nasopharyngeal swab sample and urine within 10 minutes, and evaluated it's significance in diagnosis. in the double blind all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.07.20032524 doi: medrxiv preprint evaluation clinical trial with the nucleic acid test as the golden standard, we found that the nucleic acid detection rate was 87%, and the detection rate of n antigen of sars-cov-2 was 68 % and 98% separately, depending on the ct value. 100% of nucleocapsid protein positive and negative participants accord with nucleic acid test.more importantly, the earliest patient after 3 days of fever can be identified by the method. those findings indicate that our n antigen assay is an accurate, rapid, early and simple diagnosis method of covid-19. it implies that this n antigen detection method not only guarantee early diagnosis in hospitals, and can also be used large-scale screening in community.in an additional preliminary study, it is revealed that 73.6% of diagnosed patients with nucleic acid assay in nasopharyngeal swab detected nucleocapsid antigen in urine in same day. this coincides our finding of the sars-cov-2 invading kidney and test of n antigen in urine might be of diagnostic value [15] . the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.07.20032524 doi: medrxiv preprint among participants with nucleic acid detection ct value ≤30. table 1 nucleocapsid antigen in urine compared by nucleic acid assay in nasopharyngeal swab table 1 : examination of nucleocapsid antigen in urine compared by nucleic acid assay in nasopharyngeal swab. 14 0f 19(73.6%) the nucleic acid assay in nasopharyngeal swab positive patients exhibits nucleocapsid antigen positive in urine in same day. 1 nucleic acid assay positive patient exhibited nucleocapsid antigen positive in urine.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.07.20032524 doi: medrxiv preprintcoronavirus disease 2019 is an infectious illness caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) (chen l. et al., 2020; hu et al., 2020) . on 20 january 2020, world health organization (who) declared the outbreak of covid-19 a global public health emergency of international concern (zheng et al., 2020) . the incidence of covid-19 has increased drastically, with more than three million cases reported worldwide, causing more than 200,000 deaths (baud et al., 2020) . the clinical manifestation of covid-19 ranges from mild illnesses such as fever, cough and dyspnea to life-threatening syndromes, including pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, or even death (bedford et al., 2020; bernheim et al., 2020) . covid-19 has high transmission capability, making the prevention and control difficult (chen s. et al., 2020) . as there is no specific antiviral treatment or vaccine for covid-19, early and prompt diagnosis is important to reduce the risk of life-threatening complications and mortality through appropriate health care (lee et al., 2020; xiao and torok, 2020) .with the advances in poc testing, chip-based [e.g., polydimethylsiloxane (pdms) biosensors] and paper-based biosensors [e.g., lateral flow test strips or three-dimensional (3d) paper-based microfluidic biosensors] have been developed for rapid diagnosis of infectious diseases yew et al., 2018; zhang et al., 2019) . they are widely used to detect antibodies, antigens or nucleic acids in crude samples such as saliva, sputum, and blood based upon colorimetric, fluorescent, or electrochemical detection approaches (choi et al., 2015; tang et al., 2017a; yee et al., 2018) . they offer many advantages such as being affordable, sensitive, specific, user-friendly, rapid and robust, equipment-free, and deliverable to end users (assured) tomás et al., 2019) . the result can be obtained in a fast and simple manner, which allows rapid decision-making, hence minimizes the risk of human-to-human transmission.in view of the escalating demand for rapid diagnosis of covid-19, a mini review that summarizes the recent progress in developing poc biosensors for covid-19 is highly desirable. in this review article, the most recent advances in poc biosensors, including both chip-based or paper-based biosensors for the detection of covid-19 infection are reviewed. the advantages of each biosensors along with the commercially available covid-19 biosensors are summarized. finally, the existing challenges and future perspectives of developing robust and fully integrated poc biosensors for covid-19 are briefly discussed.in general, there are two types of rapid poc tests that can detect covid-19 infections, which are nucleic acid and antibody (ab) tests (sheridan, 2020) . the nucleic acid test is usually performed by detecting the presence of virus in patient's sputum (or saliva) or nasal secretions (snot) (zhifeng et al., 2020) . such test is good at detecting the virus at early stage of infection or even before the symptoms appear. on the other hand, the antibody test strip (igg/igm test) is performed by collecting patient blood samples that contain antibodies against the virus . in general, about 5 days after initial infection, the virus triggers the immune response which stimulates the production of both igm and igg in blood that fight against the virus (thevarajan et al., 2020) . these antibodies can be detected in patient plasma, serum or whole blood. the existing poc biosensors and commercial products for covid-19 are summarized in table 1 . in fact, compared to the existing poc biosensors, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qrt-pcr), the gold standard for covid-19, shows a higher clinical sensitivity and specificity, which are 79-96.7 and 100%, respectively (he et al., 2020) . the clinical sensitivity and specificity of commercial poc biosensor (i.e., igg/igm lateral flow test strip) are 86.43-93.75 and 90.63-100%, respectively. the poc biosensors which are potentially used for covid-19 are sample-to-answer chipbased biosensors, paper-based biosensors or other materialbased biosensors (figure 1 ) which are briefly discussed in the following sections.chip-based biosensors have been broadly used for point-ofcare diagnosis of infectious diseases. they are mainly made of pdms or poly(methyl methacrylate) (pmma) (zarei, 2017a; zhang et al., 2017) . these biosensors allow automated, precise manipulation of fluid flow with small volume of samples. they are able to minimize reagent consumption which enables high throughput analysis (dincer et al., 2017; nasseri et al., 2018) . pdms chip-based biosensors, in particular, have attracted scientific interest due to its biocompatibility, high transparency and cost-effectiveness (nayak et al., 2017) . they have been explored in both antibodies and nucleic acid detection for monitoring infectious diseases darwish et al., 2018) . recent studies have focused on the development of sample-to-answer platform for nucleic acid testing as they are more sensitive and specific than antibody assays. for example, a study has developed a sample-to-answer "lab-on-adisc" biosensor (loo et al., 2017) . this pdms-based biosensor consists of multiple channels that allows automated nucleic acid extraction, isothermal amplification [loop-mediated isothermal amplification (lamp)] and real time signal detection. syto-9 dye is used for detection, which binds to the double-stranded dna from lamp reaction and emits green fluorescence. the intensity of fluorescence signal indicates the amount of target detected. the biosensor is self-contained for performing sample heating and chemical lysis for both extraction and amplification processes. the entire sample-to-answer processes take ∼2 h. while the platform is portable, the size of biosensor is relatively large, which requires further improvement. the biosensor can be readily customized to detect covid-19 viruses in the near future.more recently, one group has integrated digital amplification process into a sample-to-answer chip-based biosensor to quantify nucleic acids which further simplifies the entire process of nucleic acid testing (yin et al., 2020) . the biosensor integrates nucleic acid extraction, multiplex digital recombinase polymerase amplification (rpa) and fluorescence detection into a single biosensor. it is mainly made of pdms layers with a glass slide as a supporting substrate. the specific primer mixture and all of the reaction solution for rpa except magnesium acetate are added onto three different detection areas and lyophilized. once the sample is added, the cell is lysed and the nucleic acids bind to the magnetic beads. following the washing and elution steps, the reagents are passively driven into the digital rpa area using vacuum-based self-priming approaches for isothermal amplification, followed by fluorescent imaging. as the fluorescence probe is labeled with carboxyfluorescein (fam) which is detectable by the uv light, the fluorescence signal intensity is proportional to the concentration of amplicons. the biosensor could achieve three main steps of nucleic acid testing within 45 min without requiring complex instrument and control systems. this integrated biosensor shows immense potential to rapidly and accurately detect covid-19 in patient samples.besides fluorescence signal detection, colorimetric detection approach has also been used in chip-based biosensors. the output of isothermal amplification (e.g., lamp) has been visualized by colorimetric indicators [e.g., calcein or hydroxynaphthol blue (hnb)] that interact with amplicons or byproducts (i.e., pyrophosphate; seok et al., 2017; quyen et al., 2019; wang et al., 2019) . calcein binds manganese ions that quench fluorescence and the complex interacts with pyrophosphate to express fluorescent signal (dou et al., 2019) . hnb changes color from violet to sky blue upon reacting with pyrophosphate . to improve the portability and functionality of chip-based biosensors, one has developed an automated, portable sample-to-answer biosensor coupled with a smartphone for colorimetric detection of pathogens . it consists of a microfluidic structure layer, a hydrophilic layer, a pdms hydrophobic layer and a glass substrate. the biosensor is able to (i) purify pathogens with specific affinity reagent pre-conjugated to magnetic beads, (ii) conduct lysis at low temperatures, (iii) perform lamp, and (iv) quantify the results based on colorimetric signals. hnb is used as an indicator or visual dye for amplicons. as mentioned, the lamp reaction changes the color of lamp products from violet to sky blue. the entire process is about 40 min which is automatically performed and being monitored using a smartphone. future work should include storing the reagents on chip to make it more applicable at remote settings.paper-based biosensors have attracted more significant attention for use in poc testing as compared to chip-based biosensors owing to their cost-effectiveness, biodegradability as well as easeof-fabrication, functionalization and modification böhm et al., 2018; choi et al., 2019) . with these characteristics, they are able to achieve rapid, onsite poc testing in remote settings (tang et al., 2017b) . lateral flow test strips, in particular, have been widely used for the detection of covid-19. they are designed to detect igg and igm in patient whole blood, serum and plasma samples sheridan, 2020) . each test strip generally consists of (i) a sample pad to add patient samples, (ii) a conjugate pad containing covid-19 antigen conjugated with gold nanoparticles (gold-covid-19) and gold-rabbit igg, (iii) a nitrocellulose membrane that consists of a control line coated with goat anti-rabbit igg, an igg test line coated with anti-human igg, an igm test line coated with anti-human igm as well as (iv) an absorbent pad that absorbs waste sheridan, 2020) . in the presence of igm and/or igg in patient samples, the antibodies react with gold-covid-19 antigen to form a complex, which moves across the nitrocellulose membrane and interact with the anti-igm and/or igg at their respective test line. the gold-rabbit igg in turn reacts with anti-rabbit igg coated at the control line to produce a visible red color. a positive igm and a negative igg or positive at both lines indicate a primary or acute infection, while a positive igg with a negative igm shows a secondary or later stage of infection (du et al., 2020; li et al., 2020) . apart from antibody testing, some lateral flow test strips with sample-to-answer capability have been used for nucleic acid testing which could potentially detect covid-19 nucleic acids in respiratory samples. for instance, a group has introduced a fully integrated paper-based biosensor that involves three main steps of nucleic acid testing (i.e., nucleic acid extraction, lamp, and detection), producing colorimetric signal detected by lateral flow test strip (rodriguez et al., 2016) . however, this integrated biosensor requires an external heat block for amplification. to simplify the platform for poc applications, a small and portable heater has been developed in combination with four-layered paper-based sample-to-answer biosensor (choi et al., 2016a) . this biosensor consists of fast technology analysis (fta) card and glass fiber for nucleic acid extraction (choi et al., 2018a) , graphene-based biosensors (kampeera et al., 2019) , and black phosphorus-based biosensors (kumar et al., 2016) offer tremendous potential for identifying and managing the spread of covid-19. rapid onsite analysis can be performed using a smartphone for appropriate health management. and lamp, along with an integrated lateral flow test strip for visual detection. each functional layer is separated by hydrophobic polyvinyl chloride substrates that control the fluid flow from one layer to another. to further simplify the processes, a semi-automated, fully disposable and integrated paper-based biosensor has been developed (tang et al., 2017c) . this integrated biosensor consists of a paper-based valve and a sponge-based reservoir to extract nucleic acids from crude samples, a portable battery and a heater integrated into the platform for isothermal amplification (i.e., helicase dependent amplification, hda) as well as a lateral flow test strip for colorimetric detection. the proposed biosensor allows on board reagent storage with the use of sponges and equipment-free isothermal amplification which significantly simplifies user steps. more recently, lateral flow test strip has been combined with paper folding technologies for sample preparation, lamp and lateral flow detection (reboud et al., 2019) . the integrated test strip consists of buffer chambers that regulate fluid flow, acetate films which prevent sample evaporation, filter paper-based valves that prevent lamp reagent from mixing with other reagents, and a lateral flow test strip. this integrated technology is suitable for use in resource-limited settings to test crude samples (e.g., sputum), offering great potential to rapidly detect nucleic acids of covid-19 (<50 min).besides lateral flow test strips, several 3d paper-based microfluidic biosensors have been developed to detect proteins or nucleic acids at the poc (xia et al., 2016; lam et al., 2017) . these biosensors usually detect targets based on fluorescence or colorimetric detection approaches. metal ions (e.g., magnesium, calcium, or silver) have been used in 3d paper-based microfluidic biosensors to react with base (purine or pyrimidine) from double stranded dna to form a stable complex that show fluorescent signal upon uv irradiation. for example, a fully integrated and foldable biosensor encapsulated with agarose have been developed for long-term reagent storage and multiplex fluorescence detection . the biosensor consists of a reaction zone and a detection zone. agarose that carries lamp reagents and silver nitrate (reaction indicator) is deposited and stored in reaction and detection zones for at least 45 days. the sample is added into reaction zones which are then closed with an adhesive sealing film to avoid sample evaporation before being placed on a portable heater for amplification. following the amplification process, the sealing film is removed and the detection zone is folded and soaked into the reaction zone. uv light is used to visualize the reaction between amplicons and silver ions. the brown color intensity of the test zone increased along with the increased concentration of amplicons. the biosensor is simple and user friendly, which is expected to detect covid-19 nucleic acids in patient samples.more recently, as a new alternative, fuchsin has been explored for the detection of dna amplicons based upon colorimetric detection approach using a 3d paper-based microfluidic biosensor . in the absence of dna amplicons, addition of sodium sulfite molecule and fushsin produces fushsin leucosulfonic acid or leucofushsin which is colorless. in the presence of dna amplicons, aldehyde groups of the dna bind to sulfonate groups and the bond between hydrogen sulfite and the central c atom is broken, producing the fuchsin with chromophoric structure, which appears to be purple signals (mello and de campos vidal, 2017) . the proposed biosensor is composed of a sample zone, a reaction zone and a detection zone. the detection zone consists of paper strips with fuchsin stained lines. briefly, sample is injected into the sample zone which is sealed with an adhesive sealing film to prevent sample evaporation. the reaction zone is folded to bind to the sample zone and the biosensor is turned upside down to enable the flow of sample from sample zone to reaction zone. the biosensor is heated on a hot plate at 65 • c for 30 min for lamp. after lamp, the sealing film is peeled off and the hydrochloric acid is injected into the reaction zone. sodium sulfite is subsequently added and the changes of fuchsin-stained line color is observed. unlike the above-mentioned biosensors, this biosensor produces simple colorimetric signals detectable by the naked eyes without requiring any external readers, which shows promising for rapid diagnosis of covid-19 infections at the poc.apart from developing chip-based and paper-based biosensors, other material-based biosensors such as textile-based, filmbased or carbon-based biosensors have also been introduced for potential use for covid-19 (parrilla et al., 2016; afsahi et al., 2018; mogha et al., 2018) . they are developed to improve the functionality and detection sensitivity of the existing biosensors, providing more promising choices for practical use. textile-based biosensors such as thread-based, fabric-based or cloth-based biosensors have been developed with simple fabrication processes and improved assay performance. one study has incorporated polysiloxanes with tunable hydrophobicity into threadbased biosensors to delay fluid flow in lateral flow assay and improve detection sensitivity (choi et al., 2018a) . similar to conventional lateral flow test strip, the fluidic delay in thread increases interactions between gold nanoparticles-antibodies (aunp-ab) and targets. with the optimum conditions, the increase in interactions produces more aunp-abtarget complexes, showing 10-fold more sensitive than the unmodified biosensors. this biosensor is simple-to-fabricate and highly sensitive, which shows immense potential in detecting igg and igm in covid-19 patients for appropriate health monitoring.in addition to textile-based biosensors, film-based biosensors have been developed to detect infectious microorganism from crude samples. for instance, a film-based biosensor has been introduced which consists of a transparent polyester film substrate, a sample chamber, a cover, a reaction chamber and a waste chamber (kukhtin et al., 2019) . microarray 2-(hydroxyethyl)methacrylamide gel elements are synthesized with the incorporation of oligonucleotides into gels and polymerization under uv irradiation. the gel elements are covalently attached to the substrate. briefly, both sample and master mix are first introduced into chambers. the capillary action promotes uniform filling of the chamber and amplification is subsequently performed. wash buffer is then introduced and the pressure leads the waste to the waste chambers. lastly, fluorescent imaging and analysis are performed. the flexible film substrate used in the study offers several advantages for poc testing: (i) allows covalent attachment of gel without pretreatment processes, (ii) has low background fluorescence, (iii) has transparent properties that allows optical inspection, (iv) able to withstand thermal cycling and compatible to amplification processes. this flexible film allows easy fabrication and is userfriendly, which costs ∼500 times less than other substrates (i.e., glass), demonstrating its potential for detecting covid-19 virus in patient samples.apart from these, 2d materials such as graphene or black phosphorus have also been integrated into biosensors for poc diagnosis which could potentially be used for covid-19 testing (jin et al., 2017; choi et al., 2018b; liu et al., 2018) . for example, a recent study has introduced a portable graphene-based electrochemical biosensor for highly sensitive poc testing (kampeera et al., 2019) . graphene-based electrodes are constructed by screen-printing mainly due to low cost, ease of fabrication and high production rate. the screenprinted graphene electrodes (spge) are synthesized by either substituting carbon with graphene or incorporating graphene into carbon paste. spge have been reported to show superior electrochemical properties than commonly used screen-printed carbon electrodes (spce) by having a higher electron transfer rate and a larger electrochemical surface area. after nucleic acid extraction, lamp is performed using a simple heating block. the interaction between spge and amplicons results in a shift in cathodic current which stems from the intercalation of redox probe to double-stranded dna. this phenomenon enables quantification of lamp product. a portable mini potentiostat is used in combination with spge for on-site detection. the next step should be the integration of extraction platform into the proposed biosensor to make it more portable and user-friendly.besides graphene, black phosphorus (bp) or phosphorenebased biosensors have also been extensively explored for medical diagnosis (qian et al., 2017; ge et al., 2019; luo et al., 2019) . bp displays excellent electrochemical properties which enhances assay sensitivity and selectivity owing to its inherent redox properties. for example, a recent study has reported the development of a label-free electrochemical biosensor with an aptamer-functionalized bp nanostructured electrode (kumar et al., 2016) . the bp nanosheets are coated with poly-l-lysine (pll) that allows functionalization of bp with antiab-aptamers. the aptamers are immobilized onto the nanosheets via the coulomb interaction between aptamers and pll. the presence of target antigens causes the direct oxidization of iron (ii) to iron (iii) at the electrode surface through the mechanism of electron transfer. as compared to reduced graphene oxide (rgo), bp-based biosensors show a higher detection sensitivity and specificity, achieving the detection limit down to pg level compared to ng level achieved by rgo biosensors. the proposed biosensor would allow highly sensitive detection of igg or igm against coronavirus in patient blood samples.in summary, this review article discusses the poc biosensors that made of pdms, paper and other flexible materials such as textile, film, and carbon nanosheets for rapid diagnosis of covid-19. the cost-effectiveness, simplicity, rapidity and portability of these biosensors play a crucial role in poc applications. antibody tests are suitable to detect the late stage of infections while nucleic acid tests detect the presence of nucleic acids (viruses) at the early stage of infection, showing a higher sensitivity and specificity than antibody tests. however, current nucleic acid tests require three key steps (i.e., nucleic acid extraction, amplification, and detection), involving more complicated processes than that of antibody tests. in fact, most of the commercial poc biosensors for covid-19 are paper-based biosensors or lateral flow test strips for antibody detection (igg and igm) that produce colorimetric signal. while these antibody tests display lower specificity compared to nucleic acid tests, they have helped shortening the turnaround time for rapid diagnosis, allowing fast decision making. future work should include specificity improvement or combination with other tests such as rapid nucleic acid tests to further confirm the test result.recent studies have integrated sample-to-answer processes into a single biosensor to detect nucleic acids of pathogens and human antibodies against the pathogens, which could be further explored to detect covid-19 infections. in addition, current works have also attempted to improve detection sensitivity, simplicity and performance of biosensors. assay sensitivity can be enhanced through enzyme-based signal enhancement (he et al., 2011) , sample concentration (moghadam et al., 2015) or much simpler fluidic-control strategies (choi et al., 2016b) . further, nucleic acid tests, in particular, that involves three key steps should be simplified and integrated into a single biosensor for poc use. the biosensors discussed in this review show immense potential to be developed into a self-contained platform for the detection of covid-19 infections outside the laboratory, particularly in the remote settings or developing areas.in the future, more studies should focus on simplifying user steps and incorporating all key steps into a single biosensor at minimal cost (loo et al., 2019) . the capability of storing all reagents on chip is vital to eliminate the requirement for large storage equipment (deng and jiang, 2019) whereas, the multiplexing capability of biosensors would increase throughput (dincer et al., 2017) . as compared to other detection approaches such as fluorescence and electrochemical detection approaches, colorimetric detection represents the most common approach mainly due to its simplicity and the ability to observe signal with the naked eyes. the biosensors that produce colorimetric signals enable visual detection without requiring extra tools such as uv lamp, which would be helpful for rapid on-site diagnosis (chan et al., 2016; yang et al., 2019) . quantification, which provides more accurate readout has been achieved using smartphone apps which could be performed by untrained users at poc settings. future studies should further improve the function of smartphone and specific smartphone apps that enable on-site data analysis while allowing data storage to track patient health status (roda et al., 2016; wang et al., 2017; liang et al., 2019; xu et al., 2020) . additionally, incorporating portable power sources such as batteries into biosensors would significantly advance their functionality especially in rural areas where electricity supply is limited (zarei, 2017b) . in short, emerging poc biosensors with the aforementioned capabilities could rapidly identify the spread of covid-19 and guide appropriate health care, playing a key role in managing the outbreak.the author confirms being the sole contributor of this work and has approved it for publication. coronaviruses (cov) are a large family of viruses that are common in people and many animal species, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats. animal coronaviruses rarely infect humans and then spread between people with the exceptions of the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers-cov), the severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus (sars-cov), and now the sars-cov-2, the cause of the ongoing covid-19 pandemic. sars-cov-2 virus is a novel coronavirus characterized by a linear, positive-sense single-stranded rna genome of about 30kb with a 86% similarity with the sars-cov genome [1] [2] [3] . moreover, it has a high level of homology with sars-like coronavirus isolated in bats and pangolins suggesting that it first originated in bats, being pangolins the intermediate hosts for humans [3] . the strong similarity of sars-cov-2 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.20071563 doi: medrxiv preprint sequences of european and chinese patients suggests a recent, single emergence of the virus from an animal reservoir (www.gisaid.org).with more than two million reported cases and 130.000 confirmed deaths (at the time of this writing see https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/), covid-19 is currently the main challenge for human beings worldwide. in italy, positive cases are 162.000 (15 th april 2020) rated as the second worldwide country with the highest number of deaths (more than 21.000), mainly in the "75-90" age group. thus, it is possible that a contributing factor influencing this mortality rate could be the overall population age (i.e. being the oldest european country with around 23% of elderly residents) and related co-morbidity however, the high rate of infection in specific italian geographical areas (e.g. lombardy region) might not be exclusively related to age. at the moment, there is no vaccine and no approved specialized treatment but only drugs under investigation in clinical trials such as existing repurposed drugs (i.e. remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine or alphainterferon (ifn)), and several novel agents targeting key virus-host interactions [4] .despite the most common symptoms at onset of covid-19 disease are fever, cough, and tiredness, there is a high clinical heterogeneity. in fact, the covid-19 infection shows different clinical manifestation based on patient age, health conditions (i.e. status of the patient's immune system), and gender. in addition, the variable mortality rates and responses to treatment are likely associated with a not yet elucidated host genetic contribution.although no country knows the real number of covid-19 infected people, we are totally aware of the infection status of tested people. anyway, it seems established that the overall number of people positive to the molecular testing (i.e. confirmed cases) is not the total number of infected people, which is expected to be much higher. as consequence, lack of data on predicting covid-19's spread and rate of infection results in a global impact of public health concern. the world health organization classifies as confirmed case, "a person with laboratory confirmation of covid-19 infection" (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situationreports/20200331-sitrep-71-covid-19.pdf?sfvrsn=4360e92b_4). reliable test data is therefore necessary to better assess the validity of the information related to the pandemic spread, positive cases, deaths and immune individuals. moreover, the apparent lack of systematic testing and protocol in most countries represents the main source of discrepancies in mortality rates. testing for covid-19 can be performed as follows: a) viral test (i.e. to establish whether an individual is currently infected), and b) serology (i.e. to prove host immune antibodies response to the virus). as known, serological test is not only an effective tool to target immune population but also to date viral spread through a population [5] . so far, in europe, comprehensive, detailed and regularly updated data are available only for some selected countries such as iceland or estonia all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.20071563 doi: medrxiv preprint (https://ourworldindata.org/covid-testing). however, for many nations, including italy, accurate epidemiological data on serological testing is at the present under evaluation. to contribute in filling this gap and increasing our knowledge of covid-19 pandemic in italy, we have decided to carry out a survey of the employees of one national research hospital, the irccs-"burlo garofolo", located in trieste (north-eastern italy). an overall number of 727 employees have been recruited and tested for both viral and antibody tests in a very short timeframe (one week) in order to minimize possible biases in the study design. multivariate analysis including covid-19 personal and work risk exposures as well healthy status including covid-19 related symptoms have been performed. the extremely interesting results obtained from this study are here detailed, suggesting, for the first time, the efficacy of combined testing strategy to monitor covid-19 spread highlighting that immune specific reactive people represent a quite high number in our geographic area.the survey has been carried out as part of a mandatory covid-19 integrated health/medical -high exposure risk (hr) occupation: frontline healthcare professionals (e.g. intensive care unit, emergency department) or nurses performing daily procedures to patients, healthcare operators providing medical transport of patients or transport of biological material -medium exposure risk (mr) occupation: non-frontline healthcare professionals or laboratory personnel collecting or handling specimens from patients.-low exposure risk (lr) occupation: administrative staff of the hospital all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. the presence of sars-cov-2 has been tested using the 'neoplextm covid-19 detection kit' assay according to manufacturer's instruction. this qualitative in vitro assay allows the simultaneous detection of the n and rdrp genes of 2019-novel coronavirus genome, from respiratory specimens using a real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) (genematrix inc, republic of korea).as regards the evaluation of the immune response against covid-19, a comparison to choose the best rapid kit has been carried out comparing three commercially available ones: the wantai sars- presence of a band should be considered as positive (p). any signal detectable slightly after the 15 minutes recommended by the test, was considered, for this study, as borderline (b). the kit performance declared a sensitivity of 95.6% and a specificity of 95.2%. for all tests, the recommended serum volume was added to the specimen well on the individual test cassettes followed by the addition of the supplied buffer, in accordance with manufacturers instructions. in addition, a simple quantification of the amount of the signal of antibodies in test has been performed using the image j quantification tool (https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/docs/tools.html).all the statistical analyses were performed in r v3.5.0 (https://www.r-project.org/). quantitative variables were described through median and interquartile range (iqr), while categorical variables were expressed as numbers of employees and percentages. wilcoxon test was used to compare continuous variables between antibody groups. regarding categorical variables, chi-squared test or all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. fisher's exact test were used as appropriate.in the investigation of healthcare professional categories, a logistic regression model (adjusted for sex, age, and exposure risk) was used to assess the possibility of a risk increase for antibody presence in the category of medical doctors. all performed tests were two-tailed. statistical significance was set as p-value < 0.05.overall, 727 volunteer employees have been recruited and enrolled in the study. after filling in a dedicated questionnaire they underwent nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs plus a venipuncture for the antibody test (supplementary table 2 ). the age range was 22-77 years old and the sex distribution was 78,7% women and 21,3% males (supplementary table 3 ).after dividing the employees according to their risk exposure, 335 individuals were included in the hr group while 277 and 115 in the mr and lr ones, respectively. strongly positive antibodies (p) results were obtained in 43 females and nine males (7,2%) while 60 females and 13 males gave borderline data (b) (10%). overall the positive-borderline (p/b) category represents the 17,2% of the whole sample being the negative (n) ones the 82,8% of the cohort. as reported in table 1 , the median age is significantly lower in individuals with p/b antibody compared to individuals with n antibody (i.e. wilcoxon test, p-value=0.03). apart from one individual, all p/b subjects were negative for the presence of the virus in nasopharingeal/oropharingeal tests. moreover, they did not show any sign or symptom at the sampling time and a proportion of 21.7% of them referred the absence of any sign and symptom (16 questions answered in the medical questionnaire) in the last three months (i.e. true asymptomatic). finally, among p/b subjects referring the presence of at least one sign/symptom in the medical history questionnaire, a statistical significant association was detected for cold and conjunctivitis (chi-squared test, p-value =0.016 and p-value =0.042 respectively). as a matter of fact, in the last three months, 56,8% and 14,4% of p/b subjects were suffered from cold and conjunctivitis, respectively (table 1) . moreover, a suggestive association in the p/b category with muscular pain was also observed (chi-squared test, p-value=0.073). no other association with the antibody test has been detected, including no relationship with the presence or absence of a flu vaccination in season 2019/2020.looking at the distribution of p/b and n subjects in the three risk categories (hr, mr and lr), a statistically significant association was found. in particular, as expected, p/b individuals mainly belong to the hr group (65 out of 335 = 19.4%) and mr group (49 out of 277 = 17.6%) while a proportion of 9.5% characterizes the lr group (11 out of 15). this difference is statistically all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.20071563 doi: medrxiv preprint significant (chi-squared test, p-value=0.026) (see table 1 ). we also further investigated the health care occupation category. logistic regression data suggest that being medical doctor is a statistically significant risk factor for a p/b antibody test (or=1.82, p-value=0.0127, model adjusted for sex, age and exposure risk) (table 1) . moreover, despite females are more frequent among healthcare professionals, males are more represented within medical doctor group (36.32% vs 9.88 %, chi-squared test, p-value <0.001). thus, we searched for the presence of any possible association between sex and results of antibody test without finding any significant evidence.negative results were also obtained looking at the correlation between presence/absence of antibodies and the reported performance of invasive manoeuvres such as aerosol, bronchoalveolar lavage, intubation, swabs on patients suggesting a proper and accurate use of individual protection devices-dpi and other protective measurements by hr trained personnel.finally, twelve hr employees (two males and ten females, age range 27-58 years old) underwent antibody test for a second time (from three to ten days later, median value=six), because of a previously reported contact with a covid-19 case. the intensity of antibody band in the first assessment showed a median value of 3.5% (interquartile range -iqr: 1.36-5.95), with one individual with an intensity of 100%. in the second assessment, the same subject showed an antibody intensity of 54%, while for the remaining 11 subjects was 1%. this decrease in intensity between two assessments repeated in a quite short time is statistically significant (wilcoxon test for paired data p-value=0.009). considering the intrinsic limitation of the chromatography rapid test, a rapid decay of detectable antibodies is documented in these subjects as regards to the swab test, only one individual out of 727 resulted positive. this subject (female, 29 years old), belonging to the hr occupation, resulted positive either for the presence of the virus as well as the antibodies. three days before the sampling, she presented mild covid-19 clinical features such as cold, nose stuffiness, dysgeusia and anosmia. during the last three months she did not report any other sign or symptom.the covid-19 outbreak, which initially began in china, has spread to many countries, with a very rapid diffusion in italy with the number of confirmed cases increasing every day. to complicate the situation further, is the evidence that median incubation period for covid-19 is of approximately five days and generally people will develop symptoms after 14 days. extensive measures to reduce person-to-person transmission of covid-19 are required to control the current outbreak, but testing is our window onto the pandemic spread and without it there is no way of understanding the all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. another interesting finding of our work is that medical doctors represent the healthcare category more frequently associated to the presence of antibodies against sars-cov-2 (or=1.82) all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org /10.1101 /10. /2020 probably due to the peculiar medical methodological approaches with pediatric patients including parents, prone to amplifying person to person contact.moreover, the presence of a similar proportion of p/b subjects among doctors performing or not invasive manoeuvres might suggest not only a proper and accurate use of dpi and other protective measurements by hr trained personnel.in conclusion, this survey study provides, for the first time, an insight into the extent of infection and the immune status in italian health care workers population (i.e. a mother-child research hospital) strengthening the hypothesis that a quite large proportion of "asymptomatic or mild symptomatic people" have developed a specific immune response against covid-19. as consequence a critical issue has aroused wide concern: will these immune subjects be reinfected?cohort studies of convalescent sars-cov patients revealed that the specific igg antibodies and neutralizing antibodies peaked at month four after the onset of disease and decreased gradually throughout two years follow-up with 8%-11% of samples turned to be negative [6] . in this light, preliminary findings from our study, despite obtained in a small series of subjects (n 12), indicate the possible presence of a rapid decay in antibodies' amount, further strengthening the urgent need for introduction of an antibodies quantitative test to perform in conjunction with naso-oral pharyngeal swab.in this way, apart from pre-existing health conditions potentially predisposing to sars-cov-2 (e.g. obesity, hypertension, chronic respiratory disease, compromised immune status), we believe that there might be some protecting or predisposing genetic variants in genes such as ace2, tmprss2 and dpp4, recently described as potentially modulating covid-19 illness [7] [8] [9] [10] .these answers have huge implications for the diffusion of the infection, since experts believe it will continue to spread across the world in waves, hitting the same population/country several times. for this reason, present data demonstrated the necessity to start future epidemiological activities aimed at increasing the number of subjects to be tested by both molecular and serological assays following universal monitoring protocol. moreover, the introduction of more accurate and precise methods for measuring antibodies (i.e. elisa assay) against the sars-cov-2 will help in better classifying p/b individuals and understanding the pandemic spread.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.20071563 doi: medrxiv preprintthe dataset completely anonymized will be made available by the chief medical officer team.the testing of employees of mother-child research hospital irccs-burlo garofolo was conducted within the surveillance program established by the italian prime minister decree and did not require ethical approval. a consent form, prepared by the chief medical officer team has been signed by all participants.the authors declare no competing interests and quality, amongst other factors, can influence diagnostic test performance. in this review, we outline the performance outcomes of key tests used to diagnose covid-19 and considerations that modulate performance. safety of health-care workers collecting the samples, laboratory safety aspects and experimental approaches such as detection of volatile organic compounds in exhaled breath, mass spectrometry studies of different sample types, methods of signal amplification, and utility of other novel approaches are not discussed here.country-specific indications and criteria for testing have evolved rapidly and are being updated as information emerges and as the epidemic progresses. these recommendations have been guided by the phase of the epidemic and available resources. generally speaking, testing for covid-19 currently should be considered in anyone with symptoms of an acute respiratory tract infection (upper or lower) and with or without systemic symptoms such as fever, fatigue and myalgia.(2-5) in mild disease, testing directs the need for self-isolation, and identification of new cases through contact tracing and testing of contacts. as the epidemic progresses and with forecasted limited testing capacity, testing may be directed to specific subgroups or those with enhanced risk of a poor outcome.in the clinical setting, covid-19 will form part of the differential diagnosis of any acute respiratory presentation, including infectious causes of pneumonia (e.g. bacterial, influenza, other viral pneumonia, pneumocystis pneumonia, tuberculosis [tb] ), acute exacerbations of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), acute pulmonary embolism, cardiac failure and other conditions. relevant investigations will depend on the clinical context and will likely include pulmonary imaging, relevant laboratory investigations, blood cultures and interrogation of urine and/ or lower respiratory tract specimens to rule in a viral, mycobacterial, fungal and/ or a bacterial cause. clinical and laboratory parameters that may suggest viral infection may include pyrexia, acute malaise and myalgia, and lymphopenia. c reactive protein (crp) is unhelpful in distinguishing covid-19 from other infections. procalcitonin is elevated in severe covid-19 and when there is secondary bacterial infection. (6, 7) in early disease, procalcitonin may distinguish covid-19 from bacterial infections but not from other viral diseases (data are awaited to confirm this supposition). in those with underlying asthma or copd, the presence of pulmonary infiltrates may favour a respiratory infection-related cause though a cardiac cause must also be considered in the differential.the most common sample types sent for testing, usually by means of reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), are nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal samples obtained with a swab placed in viral transport medium. there is already considerable shortage of reagents (and swabs) meaning that dry swabs are being sent to the laboratory in some centres. dry swabs are less costly and more conducive to community-based testing, but data are urgently required to determine the comparative sensitivity of dry swabs compared to using viral transport medium (taking into account the time from sample acquisition to sample processing). samples from the lower respiratory tract, including sputum, tracheal aspirate, bronchial washings and bronchoalveolar lavage, may also be sent. in patients with covid-19 disease, samples from the lower respiratory tract are more likely to test positive (discussed below). viral rna can also be detected in stool in ~30% of cases and in blood in ~1% of cases (8) but rarely in urine.recent data from infections in special contexts such as cruise liners (9) and in close contacts of covid-19 patients (10) have demonstrated that sars-cov-2-specific rt-pcr may be positive in the early phase of the disease, and that viral shedding in the asymptomatic phase and in the early prodromal phase can be considerable. (11, 12) at present screening of asymptomatic individuals by rt-pcr has been constrained by limited testing capacity, and the need to focus on public health efforts and resources on symptomatic persons.in symptomatic individuals, 80-90% of patients have mild symptoms not requiring hospitalisation. depending on age and the presence of risk factors, ~10-20% of symptomatic persons may require admission to hospital because of respiratory or other complications. individuals in this enhanced risk category may have one or more risk factors, including age greater than 50 years, comorbidities, history of significant tobacco smoking and underlying immunocompromising illnesses. (10, 13) in mild disease, especially in the early stages, the rt-pcr false negative rate is ~30-40%. (8, 14, 15) a meta-analysis reported that a single test ~10 days post symptom development had a ~33% false negative rate using a nasopharyngeal swab (52.89% for a throat swab).(16) ai et al. reported a false negative rate of 41% in a cohort of 1014 hospitalised patients; the estimated median interval between the initial negative test and subsequent positive rt-pcr result was 5.1 ± 1.5 days. (17) a selection of other studies reported false negative rates of between 3 and 29%. (18) (19) (20) notably, some patients required up to five repeat tests before a positive result was ascertained. (19) this false negativity phenomenon may be due to several factors, including a low viral load below the detection limit of the assay, low sample volume or cellular mass during acquisition, sampling location (upper versus lower respiratory tract), sample degradation during transport or storage, sample processing methodology and the timing of sampling in relation to the stage of the disease (rt-pcr positivity may progressively increase during the course of the disease). (14) test accuracy will depend on the quality of the specimen collected. (20) it has since been shown that specimens from the lower respiratory tract have a higher viral load and hence more likely to test positive than specimens from the upper respiratory tract. (8, 21) nasopharyngeal specimens have better yield compared to oropharyngeal samples. (8, 15) in hospitalised patients with severe disease, wang et al. found a sensitivity of 93% in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, 72% in sputum and 63% in nasal swabs; sensitivity ranged from 0 to 32% in pharyngeal swabs, faeces, blood and urine. (8) given these considerations, a negative test from an upper respiratory tract specimen should be repeated after 1-3 days (the optimal timing is unclear) or a lower respiratory tract specimen obtained to exclude a false negative result, if clinical suspicion is high. (22) viral shedding in asymptomatic, early prodromal, minimally symptomatic individuals and after resolution of symptoms, all help us to explain the rapid and extensive spread of covid-19. in patients with more severe diseases, including those with lower respiratory tract infection, but also in individuals with mild disease, high viral loads can be detected often for several days after the resolution of symptoms. (23) the significance of this remains unclear though recent data from a limited number of patients suggest that rt-pcr positivity does not necessarily mean shedding of infectious virus after symptom resolution. (11) (17) it is unclear whether patients whose symptoms have resolved but who continue to have detectable viral rna in respiratory samples can transmit infection. furthermore, when symptoms have resolved, and especially given limited testing capacity, it remains unclear when patients may be discharged from icu into the general ward setting or from hospital into the community setting, especially if there are other individuals with high-risk profiles living in the same household. thus, there are no clearly defined guidelines about when it is safe for social mixing to occur after symptoms have resolved. health-care workers' safety must be taken into account when collecting sputum and should ideally be performed in an infection-controlled environment, or in the open air in ambulant patients.currently, rt-pcr is the (imperfect) 'gold standard' for the diagnosis of covid-19. the development of molecular detection assays has been facilitated by the sequencing of sars-cov-2. (25) the assay consists of two principal steps: (i) viral rna extraction from patient specimens performed manually or using automated platforms, and (ii) reverse transcription and pcr amplification using specific primers and specific probes for real-time detection (see figure 1 for an overview). the use of robotic systems allows for increased throughput for rna extraction and pcr set-up. because of current resource constraints (trained personnel and reagents) and the necessity to rapidly deliver test outcomes, most diagnostic laboratories are skipping the post-extraction rna quality and quantification check, which is costly and labour-intensive.several sars-cov-2 targets are being used and these include the envelope (e), nucleocapsid (n), rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) genes and two large open reading frames orf1a/orf1b, and rnase p. (4) generally, at least two target genes need to be identified for sars-cov-2 confirmation. however, interpretation algorithms differ with respect to the number of genes that need to be detected for the test to be considered positive. for some protocols, results are interpreted as indeterminate or negative if one of the genes is not detected, whereas for others, identification of one gene is used as screening test, while that of the subsequent gene(s) serves as a confirmatory test.(4) from a laboratory perspective, multiplexing of targets allows for better efficiency, shorter turn-around times and more optimal management of laboratory consumables. (26) vogel et al. evaluated nine primer-probe sets. (27) they confirmed that each pair had a detection efficiency of >90%, but there were differences in the ability to differentiate true negatives from positives in patients with a low viral load. some sets led to inconclusive results due to non-specific background amplification (including the initial sets issued by the usa cdc but with subsequent rectification). with viral evolution, nucleotide substitutions may emerge that could affect primer/probe binding regions that could alter the sensitivity of pcr. indeed, a potentially problematic mismatch in the rdrp-sarsr reverse primer has already been confirmed. threshold cycle (ct) value of the target gene remains the quantitative end point to ascertain viral load and depending on the kit used, this value generally lies in the 30-40 range.(4,27) to control for non-specific pcr inhibition, an internal positive amplification control (e.g. sars-cov-2 e-gene rna, sars-cov frankfurt 1 rna) is included in the assay, whilst a negative control interrogates for contamination during sample preparation.digital pcr (dpcr) was used to perform a quality assurance verification of rt-pcr.(28) dpcr involves partitioning a sample into many individual parallel pcr reactions allowing even a single molecule to be amplified more than a million-fold. using this technique sensitivity was significantly improved from 28.2% by rt-pcr to 87.4% by rt-dpcr.(28) moreover, 15/16 close contacts that were inconclusive with conventional rt-pcr (likely because not all the targets of interest were detected) were dpcr positive. the overall sensitivity, specificity and diagnostic accuracy of rt-dpcr was 90%, 100% and 93%, respectively. moreover, the higher sensitivity of rt-dpcr translated into detection of viral rna for longer periods compared to conventional rt-pcr in convalescing patients. while rt-dpcr is more sensitive and suitable for detecting low viral loads, its accessibility is limited by the complexity of the system, cost implications and the inability to multiplex target genes of interest. (29) several automated rapid nucleic acid amplification tests have recently received fda approval for emergency use. cepheid's xpert xpress sars-cov-2, run on the gene xpert platform, detects multiple gene targets and can provide a result within 45 min.(30) abbott's rapid covid-19 test, run on the abbott id now device, can provide results within 13 min. (31) the former may be convenient in some countries like south africa that have an extensive gene xpert infrastructure, and the technology lends itself to onsite point-of-care testing using portable xpert platforms like xpert edge.while rt-pcr currently remains the imperfect gold standard for the rapid confirmation of sars-cov-2 infection, ongoing genetic evolution of the virus highlights the need to closely monitor and review the methodology based on emerging data. it is possible that a better stage-specific reference standard may emerge incorporating immunoassay results.limited testing capacity remains a challenge to widespread surveillance and testing in south africa. expanding testing services to research-based laboratories is fraught with challenges, including the need for accreditation of laboratories (sanas in south africa) and personnel (hpcsa in south africa). capacity shortfalls are further compounded by an international and country-wide shortage of kits and reagents and severe reduction in international freight shipping capacity. however, the implementation of rapid automated molecular testing (xpert xpress sars-cov-2) will be helpful if enough cartridges can be procured.several antigen-based immunoassays have been developed that detect antibodies in serum or plasma.(32) one such assay was recently fda approved and the foundation for innovative new diagnostics website lists over 200 companies that are either making or have made such assays. (33) some are rapid lateral flow assay (lfa) based, while others are enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa)like tests. both formats have antigen impregnated on a test line or on a plastic-plate surface and detect human igg or igm, and sometimes also iga antibodies. in the meanwhile, rapid capture assays that detect viral antigens in nasopharyngeal aspirates have also been developed and are being evaluated in tandem.despite the proliferation of different testing devices and kits that are emerging, there are hardly any independent validation data on which specific assays work optimally. therefore, the sensitivity, specificity and predictive values of individual tests in different contexts remain unknown. a web-based resource has been developed that lists assays that have now been approved for use in specific countries.(34) some tests purchased by specific countries have already been found not to meet expectations. (35) in spain, one of worst hit european nations, health authorities purchased thousands of rapid serological tests from a biotech company in china, but these were later found to have a sensitivity of ~30%.(36) south african companies have already produced iterations of lfa platforms, and they are currently being evaluated.one concern is test specificity as there are four common human coronaviruses that cause up to a third of common cold episodes. poorly designed antibody tests may crossreact with pre-existing anti-coronavirus antibodies. high   fig 1: overview of sars-cov-2 rt-pcr based detection. viral rna extraction is performed from nasopharyngeal/ oropharyngeal specimens using a manual or automated platform. rt-pcr is performed in a two-step assay. extracted rna is first reverse transcribed to make complementary dna (cdna). the cdna is then amplified in the second step and fluorescence results from 5′ to 3′ exonuclease cleavage of a fluorescently labelled target-specific probe enabling dna amplification at each pcr cycle manual automated false positivity rates may erroneously indicate disease in those without covid-19 resulting in wasted public health contact tracing efforts, unnecessary anxiety and even worse unintended exposure of individuals to covid-19 in testing centres and wards if they are hospitalised. suboptimal sensitivity with lfa formats without a signal amplification step is a potential concern as often lfa, depending on the context, may have suboptimal sensitivity compared to elisa-based assays. however, to what extent this applies to covid-19 remains to be seen. several recent papers describe longitudinal antibody responses in patients with covid19. (37) (38) (39) (40) broadly speaking, igm responses tend to become detectable 3-7 days after the onset of symptoms. (39, 41) robust responses generally develop during the second week of illness. (37, 38) given these considerations, antibody-based tests are not recommended to be used for first line diagnosis within the first few days of symptoms. there is some evidence that combining antibody and rt-pcr data during the early phase of disease may be useful and may have some incremental benefit though further studies are required. however, the south african health product regulatory agency, and other agencies, have recently indicated, based on guidance from the south african national institute of communicable diseases and the who, that serological testing is not suitable for diagnosis of acute sars-cov-2 infection and should be limited to epidemiological surveys (at least until more data becomes available).indeed, there is an undisputed role for immunoassays in surveillance studies, which may guide public health planning and to define the trajectory of the epidemic. their potential role for targeting vaccination in certain subgroups is being investigated. some have suggested that immunoassays could identify previously infected and recovered health-care workers, and other essential workers, who could potentially return to work with the assumption that they are immune to reinfection. whether this is the case and for how long immunity lasts with covid-19 remains unclear. thus, the validity of the concept of 'immunity passports' remains unclear.(42)there are currently no data on how diagnostic, management and prognostic considerations may be different in hiv-infected versus uninfected persons. in hiv-infected patients presenting with a respiratory tract infection, the general possibilities outlined above have to be considered, including considering pcp and tb in the differential diagnosis. although well documented, it is not widely appreciated that between 10 and 20% of communityacquired pneumonia or acute lower respiratory tract infection, in sub-saharan africa and parts of asia, is due to mycobacterium tuberculosis, (43) (44) (45) and this proportion is even higher in hiv-infected persons. (43, 45) it is also possible that covid-19 infection may unmask subclinical tb in both hiv-infected or uninfected persons. on the other hand, and particularly in hiv-infected persons, covid-19 pneumonia, like in the case of influenza, (45) may be associated with a poorer prognosis in hospitalised patients with tb. whether sars-cov-2 viral load will be higher in hiv-infected persons and therefore rt-pcr sensitivity better remains unclear. in hiv-uninfected persons co-infection with more than one pathogen has already been documented, e.g. co-infection with covid-19 and influenza and/or bacterial organisms. (46) it is possible that co-infection with more than one pathogen may be more frequent in hiv-infected persons or those with advanced immunosuppression. these unanswered questions will only be resolved once more data become available.the rapidly spreading covid-19 pandemic has exposed capacity weaknesses in health-care and laboratory testing systems. although the mainstay of testing remains rt-pcr, there are several drawbacks, including a significant false negative rate in the early course of the disease, assay cost and lack of assay simplicity, and the requirement for complex laboratory infrastructure. there is an emerging shortage of reagents, including rna extraction kits, that is likely to worsen; already many centres are using dry nasopharyngeal swabs because of the shortage of viral transport medium. antibody-based immunoassays have been developed although they have a limited role in the early diagnosis of symptomatic patients. their incremental benefit over rt-pcr assays and their role in other applications, including surveillance and targeting individuals for vaccination and redeployment into the workforce, are under investigation.viral diseases continue to pose a serious threat to public health. the world has witnessed several viral epidemics in past twenty years that include severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus recently, an outbreak of pneumonia of unknown etiology was detected in wuhan city, hubei province of china and reported to china country office of the world health organization (who) on december 31, 2019. the national health commission of china reported that the outbreak is associated with exposures in one seafood market in wuhan city. the etiological agent of the atypical pneumonia was isolated on january 7, 2020 by the chinese authorities as novel coronavirus (2019-ncov). the genetic sequence of the novel coronavirus identified was shared to other countries to develop specific diagnostic kits on january 12, 2020. subsequently, the ministry of public health thailand, the ministry of health, labour and welfare, japan and republic of korea reported their first imported case of lab-confirmed 2019-ncov on 13 january 13, january 15 and january 20, 2020 respectively. subsequently, international committee on taxonomy of viruses termed it sars-cov-2, due to similarity of its symptoms to those induced by the sars. on february 11, 2020, the who announced that the disease caused by this new virus as a "covid-19," which is the acronym of "coronavirus disease 2019". on march 11, 2020 , who declared this disease as pandemic. as of march 30, 2020, who has reported 693,224 case and 33,104 death, that has occurred worldwide [1].coronavirus (cov) belongs to coronaviridae family of order nidovirale. cov are single-stranded rna viruses (þssrna) having a spike glycoprotein on the envelope, giving it a crown-like appearance, when seen on electron microscope. the subfamily orthocoronavirinae has four genera of covs: alpha-coronavirus, betacoronavirus, delta-coronavirus and gamma-coronavirus. furthermore, the genus beta-coronavirus divides into five sub-genera or lineages. while bats and rodents are considered to be the genetic sources of alpha and beta-coronavirus, avian species represents the genetic sources of delta and gamma-coronavirus [2] .to date, seven human coronaviruses (hcov) have been identified. the a lineage of beta-coronavirus (such as hcov-oc43 and hcov-hku1) as well as alpha-coronavirus (such as hcov-229e and hcov-nl63), causes common colds and self-limiting respiratory infections. in contrast, b lineage of beta-corona virus causes sars-cov-1, sars-cov-2 (covid- 19) , while c lineage of beta-corona virus causes mers-cov; both responsible for recent epidemics with a variable clinical severity of pulmonary and extra-pulmonary involvement and associated significant increase in mortality [3] .covid-19 is a single-stranded, positive sense rna virus, having a diameter of 60e140 nm with a round or elliptic shape, however, it often exists in pleomorphic form. its rna genome contains 29891 nucleotides, encoding for 9860 amino acids and shares 99.9% sequence identity, suggesting a very recent host shift into humans [4, 5] . like other covs, it is sensitive to ultraviolet rays and heat. besides, these viruses can be effectively inactivated by lipid solvents including chloroform, ether (75%), ethanol, peroxyacetic acid and chlorine-containing disinfectant. chlorhexidine does not inactivate this virus [4, 5] .coronaviruses are naturally hosted by bats and it is believed that most human coronaviruses are derived from the bat reservoir [5, 6] . genomic sequence studies of covid-19 have identified nearly 50%, 79% and 96% similarity to mers-cov, sars-cov-1 and bat sarsrelated coronavirus, respectively [7e9]. the specific route of transmission to human from natural reservoirs is still yet to be known, however, some of the studies suggests pangolin could be the intermediate mammalian hosts. since spike protein of sar-cov-2 are nearly identical to one virus isolated from pangolin, it is believed that pangolins could have provided a partial spike gene to sars-cov-2, to infect mammals [10, 11] . a recent study has also shown a development of new variations at the functional sites in the receptor-binding domain of the spike of sars-cov-2 and viruses from pangolin, likely caused due to either a natural selection or mutations or recombination or both [12] .nevertheless, once human is infected, virus could also be transmitted from human-to-human through the respiratory droplets and aerosols from coughing and sneezing, like other respiratory pathogens, including sars-cov-2. sars-cov-2 also uses the angiotensin converting enzyme ii (ace2) receptors like the sars-cov [13] .the incubation period of covid-19 could vary from 3 days to 14 days, based on the data from chinese cdc. the longest time from infection to symptoms was 12.5 days (95% ci, 9.2e18 days). the chinese epidemic also doubled about every seven days and on average, each patient transmits the infection to an additional 2.2 individuals, suggesting the basic reproduction number (r0 or r naught) to be 2.2, which is a bit lesser compared to r0 of the sars-cov-1 epidemic of nearly 3.0, in 2002e2003 [14, 15] . an epidemiological and transmission difference in characteristics between sars-cov1, mers and covid-19 has been summarized in table 1. a recent study from a genetic analysis of sars-cov-2 genomes (n ¼ 103) found this virus to be evolving into two major types (designated as l and s) with two different snps. while the l type is more prevalent (~70%), aggressive and spread more quickly, as seen in the early stages of the outbreak in wuhan, the s type (~30%) is an ancestral version, evolutionarily older, and less aggressive. it appears that the frequency of the l type has decreased after early january 2020, and it is hypothesized that the change in selective pressure might change the behavior of this virus. it is thought that coercive human interventions may have placed a more severe selective pressure on the l type to mutate to s type. conversely, the s type might have been increased also due to a relatively weaker selective pressure [13] .these ultra-rapid development in viral epidemics strongly suggest an urgent need of understanding about these viral dynamics to cope up with this public health emergency of covid-19.there may be a variety of symptoms that a patient with covid-19 may present with. the usual triad to suspect is fever, dry cough and dyspnea. it may be classified as asymptomatic or symptomatic, carrier or infective state, from mild prodrome to profusely symptomatic; depending upon immunity status of patients. there are reports of conjunctivitis, gastrointestinal symptoms like diarrhea, vomiting, nausea, abdominal pain. some critically ill may present without fever but with abdominal pain, anorexia and dyspnea. less common symptoms were gastrointestinal, anosmia, dysgeusia [13] . overall, the case fatality rate was varied between 2.3% and 5% with an average of 3%. poor prognostic epidemiological risk factors include older age, male sex, smokers and associated comorbidities including obesity, hypertension, diabetes, chronic pulmonary diseases, cardiovascular disease and chronic kidney disease. more the number of risk factors, more is the severity at presentation [18] .depending on the clinical features of covid-19, patients are generally divided as mild, moderate, severe and critical [18] .a. mild covid-19: low grade fever, cough, malaise, rhinorrhea, sore throat with or without hemoptysis, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, but without any radiological features of pneumonia and absence of mental changes. b. moderate covid-19: fever, respiratory symptoms including dry cough and shortness of breath that may emerge along with the radiological features [15] . c. severe covid-19: dyspnea, respiratory frequency 30/minute, blood oxygen saturation 93%, pao2/fio2 ratio <300, and/or lung infiltrates >50% of the lung field within 24e48 h. d. critical covid-19: usually develops after 7 days in patients with mild/moderate/severe covid-19 with features of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) requiring mechanical ventilation along with presence of multiorgan dysfunction failure, metabolic acidosis and coagulation dysfunction.the differences in clinical features of sars-cov-2, sars-co-v1, mers-cov have been summarized in table 2 [16e23].hemogram: leukopenia especially lymphopenia (in 80% of cases), mild thrombocytopenia. however, leukocytosis has also been reported [13, 17] . some researchers suggested neutrophil-tolymphocyte ratio (nlr) as an independent risk factor for severe illness and nlr 3.13 was considered as threshold for progression to severe illness in covid-19 patients.inflammatory markers: serum procalcitonin is normal initially, may increase with severity. increase in c-reactive protein (crp), lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), sgot, troponin (rule out non coronary false positive; refer table 3) , d-dimer, ferritin, creatine kinase and esr [24] . crp may be used to track the severity of disease. severe and critically ill patients may have very high levels of other inflammatory markers, interleukin (il)-6, il-4, il-10, and tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-a. poor laboratory prognostic factors include high d-dimer, lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia, crp [13] . however, these findings may not always concur with the contact/travel history/clinical symptoms. table 3 summarizes the important investigations and prognostic factors [16, 24] .serology: blood sampling is much easier than swab sampling from oropharynx or nasopharynx. two kinds of serological test can detect covid-19 -a. enzyme linked immune-sorbent assay (elisa) and b. immunochromatography (card test). elisa is considered better compared to card test due to higher sensitivity. while elisa has sensitivity of 87.3%, card test has a sensitivity of 82.4%, and both have specificity of 100%. however, card test is convenient, cheaper and offers a rapid turnover [25] . elisa is based on rp3 nucleoprotein to detect igm and igg against sars-cov-2. although elisa has quick turn over time, however it may have a false positive results due to n (nucleocapsid) proteins of sars-cov-2 [16, 26] . cross reactivity is expected with sars-cov-1 infection since there is 90% homology in genetic sequence with sars-cov-2. hence, s protein (transmembrane glycoprotein spike) elisa should be developed specific to sars-cov-2.reverse-transcriptase polymerase-chain-reaction (rt-pcr): rt-pcr, and genomic sequencing (wherever available) is the gold standard and confirmatory test for covid-19. overall, the sensitivity of rt-pcr is nearly 70% with a 30% false negative rate, and its sensitivity decreases from >90% on day 1-to 3 postsymptoms, to nearly 80% on day 6 and < 50% by day 14 [27] . for rt-pcr, specimen collection from the upper/lower respiratory tract or sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage samples to be performed under strict precautions, and should be taken as early as symptom onset, to obtain high virus concentrations [28] . it should be noted that rt-pcr may take few hours to 2 days for reporting and second sample with different viral gene may be needed if initial test is negative. moreover, rt-pcr may be false negative at a times e.g. low viral load in very early phase or in late phase of disease, mutation of covid-19 virus or other technical difficulties in collection of samples. similarly, result may be false-positive in influenza or other respiratory pathogens. in either case it is important to remain vigilant. other issues with rt-pcr is incorrect sample collection and processing, potential risk to health care workers due to aerosol transmission, beside delayed report delivery, requirement of expertise, setup of laboratory and the cost [27] .although both serology and rt-pcr are complimentary to each other, however since antibodies can appear as early as 1-day postsymptoms, it is estimated that igm-elisa can detect more cases than rt-pcr on day 5.5 of illness [27] . while another study reported a higher sensitivity (66.7%) of rt-pcr in first week, compared to the serological test (38.0%). however, during second week, the serological test had higher sensitivity than rt-pcr. collectively, this suggest ideally to combine both the modalities of test to increase the sensitivity for early detection and diagnosis of covid-19 [27, 28] . indeed, the combined igm-elisa plus rt-pcr has been shown to detect 98.6% of cases versus 51.9% with a single rt-pcr [26e28].from the available evidence [16,25e28] and to put the things in to perspective, it is logical as well as advisable (but not superseding any recommendation, if any) that e a. for the rapid screening of table 1 differences in epidemiological characteristics between sars-cov-2, sars-cov-1 and mers-cov [15, 18, 23, 24, 31] summary of important investigations and prognostic factors [17, 25] . sars-cov-2 carriers (symptomatic or asymptomatic), combined igm-igg-elisa may offer a better utility and sensitivity, compared to a either a igm-or igg-elisa test alone. b. all symptomatic subjects or contacts should be assessed with rapid antibody testing first, if positive then rt-pcr should be done as the confirmatory test. c. all highly suspicious cases should undergo rt-pcr first, even if the rapid antibody tests are negative. d. if antibody test is negative initially, it should be re-tested after 7e10 days. bronchoscopy: bronchoalveolar lavage (bal) may be done when sputum sample cannot be obtained to rule out alternative diagnosis such as tuberculosis and other bacterial or fungal pneumonias and to remove bronchial mucous plugs. strict precautions are to be taken while doing bal to avoid aerosol infections. the sensitivity (positivity rates) of rt-pcr in patients with sars-cov-2 in different specimen in was lowest for urine 0% and highest for bal 93%, as summarized in table 4 [29] .radiological examination includes chest x-ray (cxr), computed tomography (ct) and point-of-care lung sonography, done on a case to case basis. avoid pulmonary function test as chances of droplet infection may be high. cxr findings are non-specific, normal in initial phases to patchy unilateral or bilateral involvement to lobar/multi-lobar/bilateral consolidation [30] .the ct changes are of four stages: a. early stage of ground glass opacities (ggo) in sub-pleural distribution involving mainly lower lobes. b. progressive stage of multi-lobe distribution with ggo, bilateral consolidation of airspaces (fig. 1) . c. peak stage of dense consolidation in almost all cases (fig. 2) . d. absorption stage denotes ggo without crazy paving pattern.sonography of the lungs may be helpful as it can be done at bedside to reduces the movement of patient to different department. there can be irregular pleural lines, consolidation of subpleural areas, areas of white lung and thick b lines [31] . table 5 shows summarizes the differences in radiological findings of sars-cov-2, sars-cov-1, mers-cov [16, 22, 23, 31] .isolation is the main stay of prevention. vaccine for covid-19 is currently under phase 1 trial. recently a mrna-1273 vaccine that targets the spike (s) protein of the coronavirus has been manufactured by vaccine research center, moderna (a unit of the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases) in usa. the trial began on 16 march at the kaiser permanente washington health research institute in seattle, washington in total of 45 males and females aged between 18 and 45 where the participants will be divided into three cohorts and will be administered 25 mg (mcg), 100mcg or 250mcg dose 28 days apart.presently, treatment of covid-19 is only supportive, and prevention is the only way to reduce the community transmission. convalescent sera from covid-19 positive patients has been approved by fda in severe and critical patients only [27] . although no anti-viral therapy or other drugs till the time of writing is proven to work substantially against the covid-19 in humans, few smallscale studies have claimed some benefit with chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine in less severely ill patients. other drugs which are also being tried include lopinavir/ritonavir, remdesivir, favipiravir, oseltamivir, ribavirin, interferon beta, tocilizumab and abidol [32] . multiple rcts are currently undergoing with these agents and results are eagerly awaited. table 4 specimen positivity for sars-cov-2 in descending order [29] . sars-cov-2 is more infectious than sars-cov-1 and mers-cov. most infections with covid-19 are generally mild and self-limiting. however, even asymptomatic carriers may spread infection. newer possibilities of feco-oral transmission are also speculated. rapid diagnostic tests will be helpful for screening and diagnosing covid-19 patients. trials for specific anti-viral drugs and vaccine are currently underway to curb the pandemic, meanwhile isolation and containment is only way of prevention from contracting covid-19.we hereby declare that we have no conflict of interest related to this article.the world is experiencing the expansive spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) in a global pandemic that was first reported on december 31, 2019, in wuhan, china. what began as cases of pneumonia with unknown etiology was identified as a novel coronavirus on january 7, 2020. coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), the illness that comes from sars-cov-2, was named a pandemic by the world health organization (who) on march 11, 2020 [1]. by that time, it had ravaged much of china. the epidemic is accelerating; the time from the first reported case to the first 100,000 cases was 67 days. it took 11 days for the next 100,000 cases, 4 days for the following 100,000 cases, and 3 days for the subsequent 100,000 cases. as of march 31, 2020, there are 858,669 cases and 42,151 deaths in the world attributed directly to covid-19 (188,530 cases and 3,889 deaths in the united states, a 50.3% and 68.5% increase, respectively, in 2 days). we should remember that 1 month ago, on march 1, there were only 30 cases in the united states [2]. every region of the globe is currently impacted by covid-19 [3].the enormous strain this pandemic is placing on health care systems across the world is palpable, from testing capacity to supply chains for personal protective equipment (ppe); specimen collection swabs; and supplies and equipment, including ventilators, for those requiring hospital care. new approaches are needed to scale up testing for covid-19, to reduce the needs for ppe and specimen collection swabs and to allow testing for sars-cov2 outside of health care facilities.new cases of covid-19 infection and casualties continue to multiply and mixed messages abound. as the public health world has urgently recommended covid-19 prevention measures, they are being questioned as being too vast, hard to follow, invasive to our lifestyle, and damaging to the economy. public health experts have either been sidelined in the covid-19 response decisions or have found themselves at odds with much of the information being presented by political leadership. in the united states, the country currently with the largest number of covid-19 cases, president trump extended the initial 15-day national slow down and called for social distancing until april 30, 2020, in an attempt to reduce the spread of the virus [4,5]. states like california, illinois, and new york have implemented state-wide “stay-at-home” ordinances, while other states have implemented less restrictive measures or no statewide measures at all [6-8]. determining the proper scale and timing of these measures is critical to controlling the spread of covid-19 and the numbers of lives lost. we believe that the best public health evidence must inform activities in three priority areas to stop this pandemic: (1) coordinated and consistent stay-at-home orders across multiple jurisdictions, including potential nationwide mandates; (2) rapid scale-up of sars-cov-2 testing; and (3) improved health care capacity to respond.there is public health consensus that limiting the number of contacts between persons can slow covid-19 transmission in a community and give time for health care systems to respond. the most substantial of these approaches is a government order to stay at home except for food and medical needs. although there are now multiple theoretical and practical models about how stay-at-home orders and travel restrictions could slow covid-19 transmission, it is clear from all of them that consistency in implementation and communication is key. these policies will only be effective if they are implemented in a coordinated manner across large geographic regions where people commonly move, but there remain multiple examples of these public health interventions not being uniformly implemented. for instance, our city (atlanta, georgia) quickly implemented several local variations of stay-at-home recommendations from multiple city and county levels that comprise our metropolitan area, yet the state-wide recommendation was only implemented several weeks later. this meant that people who are told not to come to work in one atlanta county had no such order where they lived and continued to congregate in public places. this patchwork response is not unique to the united states and illustrates an underlying lack of understanding about how to use these public health measures to slow the transmission of infectious diseases.this inconsistency in implementing public health measures has also created substantial amounts of public confusion and fodder for social media conspiracy theories, hyperpartisanship, and distrust of experts. covid-19 is the first true global pandemic of the social media era, offering new opportunities for rapid distribution of accurate public health information to millions of people. unfortunately, these critical public health communications about actions to take to protect oneself from covid-19 are not easy to differentiate from inaccurate or even dangerously wrong information. having correct information that is well reasoned and delivered through consistent messaging are all pillars of behavior change, including changing people’s transmission-related behaviors in response to covid-19 [9]. social media is now one of the most predominant ways that people get information, and public health must find better ways to communicate about mitigation plans through these forums.decisions about covid-19 mitigation policies must be informed by the best epidemiologic information, which requires rapid scale-up of covid-19 testing. this will require rapid development of new diagnostic tests, laboratory capacity, testing supply chains, and health care personnel to collect the specimens. novel testing strategies under development, including the use of rapid diagnostic tests, serological tests, and self-collected specimens, will improve our ability to screen a large number of people quickly and give us a new understanding of the extent of exposure, disease, and recovery. this information will be vital to epidemiologic modeling to support information-driven decision making on the appropriate timing and scope of the response. there are also a rapidly growing number of examples of innovative approaches to implementing covid-19 testing, including some examples of successful large-scale screening programs like drive-up testing in south korea where thousands of tests were delivered each day [10].changing the course of covid-19 disease in heavily impacted countries such as the united states, will require a massive scale-up of testing compared to what has been conducted to date. for instance, in the united states, the rate of total covid-19 testing up to this point is just under 3000 tests per 1 million people, or 964,865 overall since january 10, 2020 [11]. that has been an admittedly dismal response to testing, with a focus mainly on those who are most severely ill. this rate of testing does not meet the needs of the health care sector response, much less the needs to better understand covid-19 epidemiology in a way that will make control measures most effective. we should be testing at least 1 million us residents every week (0.3% of the population) during this phase of the pandemic. additionally, there is a need for shorter time from test to results, to better guide care and isolation decisions, and we must find new ways of reaching more people with testing without overburdening our already taxed health care systems.the control of movement and scale-up of covid-19 testing will only be successful in truncating the covid-19 pandemic and reducing lives lost if there is an immediate commitment of resources to improve the capacity of the health care sector to respond. reports from multiple countries already impacted by covid-19 predict that health care capacity will be rapidly exceeded as transmission grows under the current predictions of covid-19 transmission. the ability of the health care sector to respond will certainly require coordination of efforts to increase the capacity of hospital beds, ventilators, protective equipment, and the clinicians who use them.protecting the health and safety of health care workers is vital to the health of each of us and to the workings of our health care system. there needs to be a high level of commitment to the safety of health care professionals by providing them with the tools to prevent nosocomial covid-19 infections. although this implicitly means making sure all health care workers have appropriate ppes, this can also come in the form of telemedicine and other virtual care trends such has chatbots that capitalize on advances in technology to provide care for patients outside of a hospital setting until the time hospitalization is needed. this form of care protects our health care workforce and maximizes the scope of care that can be provided with less impact on the hospital setting.our global public health response to covid-19 will only be successful if we rapidly generate the best data to inform decisions from our political leaders regarding resources and policies to slow transmission and improve our response. this is an unprecedented global public health crisis that will require not only strong political commitment and courage, but also innovation on a capacity and timing scale that was inconceivable 3 months ago. what we do right now and how quickly we do it will directly change how long covid-19 is with us and how many people will die. it is critical that science-based information guide our public health strategies and that leaders listen to our best information.much of public health is about making changes to improve human life but without much announcement. it is impossible to determine the number of lives saved due to epidemiologic research, yet it is unquestionable that our discipline has saved millions of lives, through the implementation of interventions and preventative programs. our training to understand and use data to protect our communities has not been needed more. it is also our responsibility to use our skills wisely and in a steadfast way that does not bend to the whim of politics, but instead, affirms what we know, loudly, if needed, and highlights what we still need to determine as quickly and accurately as possible to protect our world.in december 2019, an increasing number of pneumonia cases appeared in wuhan, hubei state in china. thorough analytical studies, accomplished by epidemiologists, demonstrated that the spread of the disease might be related to wuhan south china seafood market [1] . dedicated in-depth studies, using highthroughput sequencing, revealed a new beta-coronavirus that was called 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) [2] . in january 2020, the world health organization (who) renamed the virus as sars-cov-2 and the disease as covid-19 [3] .despite the attempts to limit the spread of the virus within the city, it rapidly disseminated to other states in china, which may be due to the movement preceding lunar chinese new year [4] . within weeks, the infection had spread to many other countries worldwide.by january 20th, many countries, including japan, south korea and thailand had reported their first cases. the next day the first case was confirmed in the usa. the virus continued to spread until its first case was recorded in the philippines (february 2nd), france (february 14th), iran (february 21 st). by february 23th, the first case appeared in italy, then many countries through europe reported their first cases [5] .considering the largely increasing cases throughout the world, world health organization (who) has announced a global pandemic on march 12th, 2020 [6] . as of may 23th at 15:00 eastern european summer time, covid-19 has affected 209 countries, with more than (5 105 881) confirmed cases and (333 446) deaths [7] .coronaviruses (covs) comprise a heterogeneous group of enveloped, positive sense and single-stranded rna viruses owned their names due to 9-12 nm long surface spikes that look like a corona (equal to crown in latin). they can cause many diseases, including respiratory, gastrointestinal, heart and neurological pathologies with variable severity among animals and humans [8] .depending on the available data, bats may be the initial hosts of covid-19. it may be transmitted to humans through pangolin [9] or other wild animals [2] confronted at the huanan seafood market then disseminated through human to human transmission. current data showed an incubation period of 3 days (with a range of 0-24 days) with a high probability of asymptomatic transmission [10] .the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) was considered the first pandemic infection related to coronavirus. it started in china between 2002 and 2003, due to a new sars-cov coronavirus. it disseminated to 29 countries in 2003 due to the travel movement throughout the world, affecting 8098 patients with a case-fatality rate of 9.6%, and then sars disappeared. nosocomial transmission of sars-cov was common. bats were considered as the primary reservoir, although unproven as the actual source while the intermediary source was considered civet cats in the wet markets in guangdong [11] .the second coronavirus-related outbreak was the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers), which was caused by mers-cov. mers appeared in april 2012 and was first identified in humans in the kingdom of saudi arabia (ksa). the contact with camels or camel products is considered to be the cause of human infection. mers continued to emerge and reemerge. between 2012 and december 2019, a total of 2465 laboratory-confirmed cases of mers-cov infection, including 850 deaths (34.4% mortality), were reported from 27 countries [12] .covid-19 outbreak brings back memories of the spanish flu pandemic in 1918-1920, which was caused by h1n1 strain of the influenza virus. this pandemic had caused over fifty million deaths worldwide (the mortality rate ranged between 10% and 20%) [13] .the death toll associated with covid-19 highly surpasses the other two coronaviruses sars-cov and mers-cov, and the outbreak is still ongoing, which represents a considerable threat to global public health and economies [14] .as for many respiratory viruses, diagnosis relies on two main compartments: clinical manifestations as fever, fatigue, dry cough, dyspnea, and gastrointestinal symptoms, while the paraclinical diagnostic tools vary between the polymerase chain reaction (pcr) and computed tomography (ct) [15] . rapid and accurate diagnosis is vital in such a pandemic. from one side, rapidity may enhance management effectiveness and accelerate the application of more suitable isolation measures, leading to less contiguity. while, on the other hand, coupling rapidity with less costly procedures may permit, especially to low-income countries, more examinations to be applied, thus, faster and more effective community-scale management.in this review, we will shed light on the established diagnostic methods which were applied to help manage the outbreak. furthermore, we intend to include some under-development techniques that may be potentially useful in this context. the practical intent of our work is to provide a realistic perspective on the diagnosis of covid-19, through reviewing different biological, radiological, and pathological aspects of this disease diagnosis.to this end we searched for research articles, reviews, letters and other types of publications when needed. research included major data bases and search engines, trying to include as much as possible of novel and high value information.most patients with confirmed covid-19 have developed fever and symptoms of acute lower respiratory tract illness (dry cough, dyspnea).the rapid global spread of the virus and the limited testing capacity may preclude testing all patients with suspected covid-19. therefore, it is crucial to set priorities and criteria for conducting confirmation laboratory tests.high-priority individuals include hospitalized patients (especially critically ill patients with unexplained respiratory failure), symptomatic health care workers with features of respiratory illness, and symptomatic individuals who have underlying chronic health conditions or risk factors for severe disease [16] .under-treatment or soon-to-be-treated cancer and autoimmune disorders patients may be at high risk for covid-19 when receiving chemotherapy or immune-comprising treatments.this group of high risk individuals may also include patients tobe-transplanted, both of organ and hematopoietic stem cell.these patients must be screened using pcr before applying aforementioned treatments.in case of test impossibility they should be put under quarantine for 14 days prior to treatment initiation [17] [18] [19] .at least, patients who meet the testing criteria should undergo testing for sars-cov-2.during such an outbreak, it is likely that preferences for specific activities will change with the outbreak. it seems that these changes will create a global economic burden.in 2003, the sars-cov virus bought the world output down by $50 billion. initial estimates indicate that the economic impact of the covid-19 outbreak might be much more significant, maybe around $360 billion [20] .a year of lockdown will take down the globe's economy by approximately 22%, with a cost of $4.2 trillion. furthermore, the high death toll of this pandemic is considered to be firstly a humanitarian disaster, but also an economic burden, as some estimate the value of the lost lives as 9.5$ million per life [21] .in many low and middle-income countries, covid-19 test cost exceeds government per head health spending. this may impose restrictions on the applicability of the test to all. for example, in some countries, each test costs around $75, whereas the health per head expenditure is around (34 $) [22] .even for some high-income european countries, with a testing cost around 135 euros and a limited capacity per laboratory, only the individual suspected to have the infection with specific criteria may be accepted to conduct the test, of where the necessity to find simpler and more affordable diagnostic tools [23] .due to the high infection rate, rapid and accurate diagnostic methods are urgently needed to identify, isolate and treat patients as soon as possible, which reduces mortality and spread the risk of infection in the population.laboratory-confirmed sars-cov-2 infection requires the detection of viral nucleic acid in respiratory tract samples by the use of real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr) assay. whereas clinical/radiological diagnosis is based on symptoms, exposures, and chest imaging [24] .the significance of rrt-pcr assay is demonstrated by the fact that it is currently considered the most determining factor for hospitalization decisions and isolation for individual patients [25] .however, it has not yet been determined whether it can be considered as the gold standard for early diagnosis. but most guidelines, such as nhs guidance for covid 19 testing, preferred this molecular assay for screening/testing technique [26] .highly conserved and abundantly expressed genes are considered as attractive targets of sarscov-2 rt-pcr assays, such as, the structural spike (s) and nucleocapsid (n) genes, and the nonstructural rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) gene, and the open reading frame orf1ab which encodes a replicase polyprotein 1ab required for viral rna replication and transcription [27] .a study conducted by chu et al. described two rt-pcr assays to detect orf1b and n regions of the viral genome separately. results reported that these assays are sensitive and specific to only sarbecoviruses. furthermore, the n gene rt-pcr assay was found to be more sensitive in detecting 2019-ncov rna in different respiratory samples (sputum and throat swab) [28] .it is recommended to use specific primers and probes in the orf1ab and n gene regions. when both targets test positive, the case would be considered a confirmed infection with covid-19 [29, 30] .the cycle threshold values (ct-value) of rrt-pcr determine the copy number of sars-cov-2 rna in a specimen. a ct-value of less than 37 is defined as a positive test, and a ct-value of 40 or more is defined as a negative test. a medium viral load is defined when ctvalue of 37 to less than 40, and may require confirmation by repeating the test [30] .in a study conducted by chan et al., three novel rt-pcr assays targeting the rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp)/helicase (hel), spike (s), and nucleocapsid (n) genes of sars-cov-2 were developed. then, these assays were compared to each other and to that of the reported rdrp-p2 assay, which is used in many laboratories in europe.among these three novel assays, the covid -19 -rdrp/hel assay had the lowest limit of detection and the highest analytical sensitivity at 95% detection probability. furthermore, the covid-19 rdrp/hel assay was significantly more sensitive than the established rdrp-p2 assay for the detection of viral rna in both respiratory tract specimens (nasopharyngeal aspirate/swab or throat swab) and non-respiratory tract specimens (saliva, and plasma), as it detected viral rna in 15.4% additional specimens that were tested negative by the rdrp -p2 assay. in contrast, there was no significant difference in the sensitivity of the two assays for sputum and feces/rectal swabs.exclusivity testing showed that covid-19 -rdrp/hel assay did not cross-react with other human sars-cov, whereas the rdrp-p2 assay showed cross-reactivity with sars-cov in cell culture. this is because the probes of rdrp/hel assay were developed to contain 7-9 nucleotide differences with those of human sars-cov, whereas the probe of the rdrp-p2 assay contained only three nucleotide differences [31] .the charité algorithm (berlin, germany) uses a two-step assay to confirm covid-19 infection. the first step is a line-screening assay that detects the envelope (e) gene of subgenus sarbecovirus. the second step is a confirmatory assay, a sars-cov-2 specific rt-pcr assay that targets rdrp. cross-reactivity with alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses was not detected [32] .another method established by the university of hong kong to detect subgenus sarbecovirusu uses n-gene screening assay followed by a confirmatory orf1b assay. positive patients should be considered as sars-cov2 confirmed cases, as none of the sarbecoviruses have been previously detected in humans, and sars was eliminated in humans as the last reported human sars case was detected in 2004 [33] .a retrospective study was conducted by chen et al., with a total of 249 patients diagnosed with covid-19. results showed that the clinical progression of covid-19 in patients presented two phases. the first phase was represented by fever, cough, fatigue and other systemic symptoms. in the course of this phase, upper respiratory specimens were tested by rt-pcr for viral rna and the majority of the patients showed positive results for sars-cov-2. in the second week of the disease progression, symptoms began to relieve in most of the patients. in parallel, half of the patients showed pcr negative results with their upper respiratory tract samples. the estimated median duration to negative reverse-transcriptase pcr tests of upper respiratory tract samples was 11 days.a proportion of 2.8% of patients had a story of direct contact with confirmed covid-19 cases. these patients were asymptomatic, with positive rt-pcr results in their throat-swab samples. in these asymptomatic patients, pcr turned out to be negative two days [1] [2] [3] after admission [34] .it is strongly thought that involving various specimens from multiple sites could lower false negatives and improve sensitivity. an important issue is how and where to collect samples for testing. actual guidelines (as the current public health england guidance) [35] suggest samples from the upper respiratory tract. the question remains whether there is a significant difference in sensitivity between nasopharyngeal (np, nasal) or oropharyngeal (op, throat). throat swabs may appear to be uncomfortable for patients and could induce coughing, while lingual swabs are more comfortable, and some consider that they can achieve comparable results.the total positive rate of rrt-pcr for throat swab samples has been reported to be about 30%-60% at initial presentation [25, 36] .a cohort study conducted by ye et al. showed that the positive rate of throat swabs (44.0%) is higher than that of lingual swabs (36.3%) for the detection of covid-19. this difference was only seen when the samples were taken by a single experienced nurse. these results indicate that standardized sampling by the same nurse could improve the detection rate [37] .another cohort by yang et al. examined 205 throat swabs and 490 nasal swabs in 213 hospitalized covid-19 patients. it was reported positive test rates in favor of the nasopharyngeal specimen or nasal swabs, in both mild and severe cases, and at different time points of illness onset (day 0-7, 8-15 and >15). unfortunately, no significance calculation was performed. these results contrast with another german smaller study by wolfel et al., conducted on 9 covid-19 patients, with no discernible difference in viral loads or detection rates when comparing nasal and throat swabs [38] .in the 72 urine specimens all tested negative [39] .notably, this raises concerns about "ruling out" covid-19 based on combined pharyngeal and nasal swabs obtained at a single time point. based on these limited available data and its quality, it's not possible to assess the sensitivity of each test and there is no enough data for performing both nasal and throat swabs. on the other hand, it may be recommended, when it's possible, to collect a lower respiratory tract specimen in the form of sputum, which appears to be the highly sensitive of all specimens (as a noninvasive exam) [40] . sensitivity will also depend on technical issues related to testing performance, delay after illness onset and methods of sampling [39] .in most symptomatic covid-19 patients, viral rna may be detected in the nasopharyngeal swab as early as 1 day of symptoms initiation. this positivity starts to decline by week 3 and subsequently becomes undetectable [41] , as shown in fig. 1 .live coronavirus sheds at high concentrations from the nasal cavity even in asymptomatic infected individuals, thus, it can be detected by pcr before symptoms initiation [42] .gastrointestinal symptoms, such as diarrhea, nausea and vomiting have been frequently reported in patients infected with sars-cov-2, sometimes alone or alongside other general or respiratory manifestations.many studies had confirmed the presence of the live virus in stool samples, thus, stool samples can also be diagnostic. furthermore, it worth studying whether stool specimen collection may eventually reduce medical staff infections compared to respiratory swabs specimens.a study conducted by xiao [43] .regarding the collection of samples, it worth mentioning that pcr samples, in general, can be obtained by dacron or polyester flocked swabs and should reach the laboratory as soon as possible after collection [44] .a study conducted by zhang et al. revealed that 35.7% of confirmed covid-19 patients had a positive stool sample of viral nucleic acid. it was shown that the accuracy of fecal specimen detection may be equivalent to oropharyngeal swabs results [45] .another publication by zhang et al. enrolled three pediatric patients with mild covid-19 infection. results suggested the long existence of viruses in feces. all patients recovered soon with negative sars-cov-2 nucleic acid in throat swab specimens, while the three remained positive in the fecal specimens within 10 days after recovery and discharge [46] .chen et al. found that 66.67% of laboratory-confirmed covid-19 patients were tested positive for sars-cov-2 rna in stool specimens. furthermore, it was in consistency with zhang et al. that the positivity of stool samples is not associated with the presence of gastrointestinal symptoms and the severity of illness. a proportion of 64.29% of patients remained positive for viral rna in the feces after the pharyngeal swabs turned negative. concerning the duration of viral shedding from the feces, it was found that it is 7 days [6-10] after negative conversion in pharyngeal swabs [47] .the long existence of viral rna in feces indicate that the fecaloral route may serve as an alternative infection route, and this suggested that the replication of virus in the gastrointestinal tract may not be consistent with that in the respiratory tract [47] [48] [49] .these finding raise concerns about whether patients with negative respiratory swabs are truly virus-free, or sampling of additional body sites is needed. therefore, it may be important to routinely detect viral rna in stool specimens of covid-19 patients during the hospitalization and recovery stage, and to perform transmission-based precautions for patients until the negative conversion of viral rna in feces. according to reports to date, no patients showed positive results for viral rna in pharyngeal swabs reversibly after the anal swabs turned negative [47] . rapid detection of sars-cov-2 is considered to be an urgent priority to contain this pandemic. the rrt-pcr is now used as the standard method to confirm the infection, but it may be considered as a time-consuming procedure. samples testing must be carried out in central laboratories with advanced equipment. this leads to more time being consumed. consequently, the time needed to get the results may take from some hours up to 2 or 3 days, depending on the country [20] .loop-mediated isothermal amplification (lamp) assay is an isothermal nucleic acid amplification technique with high specificity, efficiency, and rapidity.lamp showed advantages over rrt-pcr, with simplified sample preparation and one single protocol. hence, results can be obtained in less than an hour. furthermore, the diagnostic sensitivity of tests based on lamp-reaction assays was higher (>95%), compared to that in rrt-pcr.during the avian influenza pandemic, the lamp assay showed success in the rapid detection of the h5n1 virus, as this assay was used in a point of care devices [20] .this may suggest that the lamp assay could be a candidate for the point-of-care device application in the rapid detection of covid-19.it is strongly thought that serological testing can be an approach in the surveillance of covid-19. as it takes 1-2 weeks for positivity after the onset of infection. serum samples were tested using the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa).a study conducted by zhao et al. enrolled a total of 173 confirmed cases of covid-19 by the use of rrt-pcr on samples from the respiratory track reported that the seroconversion sequentially appeared for the total antibody (ab), igm and then igg, with a median time of 11, 12 and 14 days, respectively. besides, the presence of antibodies was < 40% among patients in the first week of illness, and then rapidly increased to 100.0%, 94.3% and 79.8%, respectively since day 15 after onset. this may conclude that the total antibody is more sensitive than igm and igg for detecting sars-cov-2 infection.in contrast, the positive rate of rna decreased from 66.7% (58/ 87) in samples collected before day 7 to 45.5% (25/55) during days 15 to 39. thus, antibody detection can be an essential supplement to rna detection during the illness course. probably, combining rna and antibody detections may significantly improve the sensitivity of pathogenic diagnosis for covid-19 patients (p < 0.001), even in the early phase of 1-week since onset (p = 0.007).moreover, results revealed a correlation between clinical severity and antibody titer up from 2-week after illness onset, as higher titer of ab was independently associated with a worse clinical outcome (p = 0.006) [50] .in cases where nucleic acid amplification test (naat) assay is negative and there is a strong doubt or epidemiological link to covid-19 infection (travel to highly infected areas . . . etc.), paired serum samples (acute and convalescent-phase) could support the diagnosis. cross-reactivity to other coronaviruses can be very challenging, but commercial and noncommercial serological tests are currently under development and evaluation [51] .a simple point-of-care device was developed to detect igm and igg antibodies against the sars-cov-2 virus in blood samples within 15-20 min. this provides the possibility to identify a more significant number of infected patients, mainly, asymptomatic carriers to prevent virus spread.depending on clinical studies to validate the clinical efficacy uses, the overall testing sensitivity was 88.66% and specificity was 90.63%. this test is commercially available with 87% accuracy.furthermore, the igm-igg combined assay showed advantages over a single igm or igg test with better utility and sensitivity. it can be used for the rapid screening of sars-cov-2 carriers, symptomatic or asymptomatic, in hospitals, clinics, and test laboratories [52] .this antibodies test could also have an impact, since it can be available for the massive population, on the lockdown strategy. so it can be used for massive immune confirmation, especially with asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic patients who no longer represent threats for others in case of seroconversion.because of the impact attributed to the point of care (poc) devices in terms of management of infections epidemics, several manufactures have made efforts to build devices for poc testing. the samples are ordinarily nasal or throat swab. many poc devices use molecular testing (rapid pcr testing using nucleic acid fluorescent probes):1) a cartridge in genexpert 1 machine (cepheid 1 ), results could be obtained within 45 min (as claimed); 2) a cartridge in m2000 1 machine (abbott 1 ): time to obtain results is approximately 13 min (as claimed); 3) a cartridge in vivalytic 1 machine (bosch 1 ), time to obtain results is 150 min (as claimed).while on the respi-strip 1 (coris bioconcept 1 ) is an immunebased test, using monoclonal antibodies to nucleocapsid protein. this test's results can be obtained within 15 min (as claimed) [53] [54] [55] [56] [57] [58] .apparently, abnormally high values of procalcitonin (pct) are associated with a 5-fold higher risk of more severe sars-cov-2 infection (or, 4.76; 95% ci, 2.74-8.29). furthermore, it seems that serial procalcitonin measurements may play a key role in predicting evolution towards a more severe form of the disease.a possible explanation is that the production, sustainability and release of procalcitonin from extrathyroidal source is reinforced by (il)-1β, tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-α and il-6. at the same time, its synthesis is inhibited by interferon (inf)-g, which is usually high in viral infection.as a result, it has not to be surprising that procalcitonin concentration seems to be normal in non-complicated covid-19 patients, while they tend to climb higher in more severe forms [59] .in a recent publication sars-cov-2-specific cd4 + and cd8 + t cells responses were measured in covid-19 cases. using flow cytometry, among other approaches, sars-cov-2-specific cd4 + t cell were seen in all covid-19 cases, and cd8 + t cell responses were seen in most, thus, flow cytometry could present a potential for covid-19 diagnosis, alongside other potential laboratory indicators like pct . . . etc.it is worth noting the pre-existing sars-cov-2-crossreactive t cell responses in healthy donors, indicating some potential for preexisting immunity in the human population [60, 61] .while the rrt-pcr test plays a crucial role in the diagnosis of covid-19, false-negative results have been recorded in the initial diagnosis, which highlights the importance of recruiting additional techniques in the diagnosis and management criteria. the national health commission of china has published the 6th version of the diagnosis and treatment program, which recommends the use of radiologic techniques in the diagnosis and management of sars-cov-2 infection [25, 62] .in a study of ai et al. results, shown in table 1 , demonstrated the high sensitivity of ct scan as a conventional, rapid and practical diagnostic method in screening and managing critical cases in epidemic areas. also, 42% of cases eventually improved in followup scans before the turning of rrt-pcr results in negative, which recommends the use of a ct scan in the follow-up. however, the study revealed many limitations, including the low specificity due to the false-positive cases with the common imaging characteristics with other viral pneumonia [25] .in a recent retrospective study by li et al. including 51 patients with covid-19 and two other patients with adenovirus, all of them were diagnosed by rrt-pcr, a low rate (3,9%) of covid-19 misdiagnosis was detected (missed cases). however, some ct features on the initial examination overlapped with ct features of sars and mers, including consolidation and septal thickening [63] . another study on 51 patients by fang et al. revealed 98% sensitivity of ct compared to 71% sensitivity of rt-pcr [64] .the most common ct features, according to multiple reported cases, were bilateral ground-glass opacities, patchy consolidation mainly located along with the bronchial bundle with reactive thickened adjacent pleura and mild bronchiectasis. no lymphadenopathy or pleural effusion was detected in these reports [65] [66] [67] [68] .the study by chung et al. revealed 21% with normal findings, 57% with ground-glass opacity, 29% with ground-glass opacity and consolidation. while 71% had two or more lobes involved, and 76% had bilateral disease [69] .besides, a comprehensive review by the european society of radiology had defined ct features of covid-19. the most common findings were ground-glass opacity ggo (98%), multifocal patchy consolidation (up to 64%, considered as an indicator for disease progression), reticular pattern or thickened interstitial septa, crazy paving pattern which ends up from acute interstitial inflammatory and alveolar edema, bronchiolectasis which is defined as gelatinous mucous-filled bronchi on a background of the airless lung, pleural thickening, and fewer commonly pleural effusion, subpleural curvilinear lines, fibrosis, small bubble-like air-containing space or the bubble sign. less common features were small multifocal nodules, halo sign, which refers to nodules surrounded by ground glass, and atoll sign or reversed halo sign, which is a focal ground glass opacity (ggo) surrounded by ring-shaped consolidation [70, 71] .similar findings were described in another study on 99 patients with patchy bilateral ggo in 75% and unilateral involvement in 25% [72] .furthermore, according to a retrospective study comparing ct features in deceased and recovered patients: air bronchogram and extensive multifocal consolidations were more common in the mortality group, which suggests a worse prognosis for these abnormalities [73] .in one of the retrospective cohort studies including 81 patients from wuhan, the most common abnormal pattern on ct scan was ggo (65%), mainly involving the right lower lobe, with ill-defined margins (81%), air bronchograms (47%) and interlobular septal thickening (35%). most of cases demonstrated bilateral involvement (79%), and peripheral distribution (54%) slightly predominating in the right lower lobe.less common features were bronchiectasis (11%), cystic changes (10%). although previous cases didn't demonstrate features of lymphadenopathy or pleural effusion, this study included five patients with lymphadenopathy (6%) and four patients with pleural effusion (5%).the study revealed that asymptomatic patients could also present with abnormalities on ct scan and that abnormalities showed a rapid increase within two weeks after symptom onset, followed by a gradual decrease in the third week.these results highly suggested that the clinical course of the disease correlates with radiological evolution. however, these features were not specific for covid-19, and they also present in pneumonia caused by other viruses and bacteria [74] .in a multi-center recent retrospective study on a total of 424 patients from china and the united states, radiologists compared ct abnormalities between covid-19 and non-covid-19 pneumonia.their results revealed that non-covid-19 pneumonia was more likely to manifest with air bronchogram (23% compared to 14% for covid-19), pleural thickening (33 vs. 15%), pleural effusion (39 vs. 4%), central with peripheral distribution (35 vs. 14%), and lymphadenopathy (10,2 vs. 2,7%). while covid-19 pneumonia was more likely to manifest with ggo (91% vs 68% for non-covid- 19) , fine reticular opacity (56% vs 22%), reverse halo sign (11% vs 1%), vascular thickening (59% vs 22%), and bilateral peripheral distribution (80% vs 57%) [75] .another study by dai et al. conducted another comparison of ct manifestations between covid-19 pneumonia, other viral types of pneumonia and common bacterial pneumonia.according to their findings, common bacterial pneumonia manifested with multiple consolidations involving lung parenchyma, with bronchial wall thickening and centrilobular nodules. covid-19 pneumonia was characterized by bilateral ggos progressing massively during the clinical course, crazy paving pattern, diffuse consolidations and even white-lung appearance in the advanced stage, while other viral pneumonias had highattenuation reticular patterns, interstitial inflammation, atelectasis and localized pulmonary edema [76] . however, further studies are required in order to evaluate the accuracy of ct scan and to define its diagnostic role in covid-19 patients, in complement to clinical and laboratory results.in such a pandemic, rapid and accurate diagnosis plays a vital role.coupling rapid detection with high sensitivity of viral infection may allow better control of viral spread and provides faster and more effective community-scale management.according to results from recent studies, chest ct abnormalities have been identified in patients prior to the detection of viral rna from upper respiratory specimens in endemic areas [15, 25, 64] .in a study of 1014 patients in wuhan who underwent both rrt-pcr testing and chest ct for evaluation of covid-19, investigators found that chest ct achieved higher sensitivity for the diagnosis of covid-19 as compared with initial rrt-pcr from pharyngeal swab samples. results, showed indicated that 59% of patients had positive rrt-pcr results, and 88% had positive chest ct scans.in patients with negative rrt-pcr results, 75% (n = 308) had positive chest ct findings. besides, analysis of serial rrt-pcr assays and ct scans was performed; the mean interval between the initial negative to positive rrt-pcr results was determined to be 5.1 ae1.5 days, and the initial positive to the subsequent negative rrt-pcr result was 6.9 ae 2.3 days. using rrt-pcr results as the reference standard, the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of chest ct in diagnosing covid-19 were 97%, 25%, and 68%, respectively [25] . the low specificity may be related to other etiologies causing similar ct findings.in consistency with the previous study, fang et al. reported that the sensitivity of chest ct was higher than that of rrt-pcr (98% vs. 71%, respectively) [64] .in addition, a retrospective analysis conducted by chunqin long et al. showed that the sensitivity of ct examinations was 97.2% (35/ 36 patients were positive) at presentation, whereas the sensitivity of initial rrt-pcr was 84.6% (30/36 patients were positive). in the second rrt-pcr round, three patients had a positive result, and the other three were positive in the third round of rrt-pcr [15] . these findings indicate, among others, that rrt-pcr should be repeated to avoid misdiagnosis.the results of rrt-pcr tests must be cautiously interpreted, as it may be affected by various external factors, including sampling operations, specimens source, sampling timing (different periods of the disease development), and performance of detection kits. a number of factors could lead to a negative result in an infected individual, including poor quality of the specimen, containing insufficient patient material, the specimen was collected late or very early during the infection timeline, the specimen was not handled and shipped appropriately or because of technical reasons inherent in the test (e.g., virus mutation or pcr inhibition). in case of strong clinical or geographical doubt with a negative test, especially from upper respiratory tract sampling, a second test can be conducted, preferably from the lower respiratory tract [51] .although ct has been well-recognized as the first-line radiologic investigation for covid-19, recent studies by the american college of radiology suggest using cxr as a first-line tool to decrease the risk of cross-contamination caused by ct suites as well as to minimize the economic burden in radiology departments and increase the availability of its service [77] .in a retrospective cohort study by wong et al. on 64 patients with covid-19 infection confirmed by rrt-pcr, cxr had a sensitivity of 69% compared to 91% for rrt-pcr and 97% for ct. the most common findings were bilateral peripheral consolidation with lower zone dominance, which showed its highest peak 10-12 days after symptom onset. ground glass opacities were less common features. interestingly, six patients in the study revealed chest x-ray abnormalities before confirming positivity on rrt-pcr. however, due to the low sensitivity of cxr compared to ct, further evidence is needed to support its use in the initial screening [78, 79] .pathological aspects of covid-19: some essential issues few studies have recently revealed pathological characteristics of covid-19 demonstrating the importance of histological diagnosis. however, to the best of our knowledge, no complete autopsy pathological report has been recorded yet. xu et al. first autopsied the lung and extra-pulmonary organs of a deceased 50year-old male who was diagnosed with covid-19 infection associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). their findings demonstrated end-stage diffuse injury [80] .tian et al. reported early-stage changes when studying samples of biopsies from two patients who underwent surgical resection for lung adenocarcinoma while accidentally diagnosed with an early phase covid-19 pneumonia [81] .early pathological manifestations included proteinaceous exudate, pulmonary edema, inflammatory clusters with multinucleated giant cells, vascular congestion, reactive epithelial hyperplasia, and suspected viral inclusions while end-stage pathological changes included fibromyxoid exudate, diffuse alveolar damage, and hyaline membrane formation. in addition to the presence of atypical pneumocytes characterized by amphophilic granular cytoplasm, large nuclei and prominent nucleoli with no identified viral inclusions.both studies with a literature review of pathological features of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), middle east respiratory syndrome (mers), and covid-19, found that they share multiple pathological characteristics. however, subsequent systematic autopsy might better explain the clinic-pathological features of covid-19 [80] [81] [82] .recently, an interesting approved animal study was performed on golden syrian hamsters that were inoculated with sars-cov2 isolated from a laboratory-confirmed covid-19 patient in hong kong. several tissue organs were dissected and underwent histological examination. tracheal tissue examination revealed epithelial desquamation with focal cilia loss and mononuclear infiltration, while microscopic examination of the infected lungs revealed the formation of hyaline membranes with mononuclear cell infiltration, large multinucleated syncytial bodies and alveolar lumens filled with cellular debris, hemorrhage. also, the proliferation marker ki67 was extensively expressed in bronchiolar cells demonstrating marked cellular proliferation.furthermore, multiple extra-pulmonary organ tissues were studied. reduction in the spleen size was markedly observed with red and white pulp depletion and a decrease in the size and number of follicles. pale eosinophilic lymph with sinus ectasia was observed in the mesenteric and bronchial lymph nodes. interestingly, the intestinal mucosa was highly affected; demonstrating increased mononuclear cell infiltration in the lamina propria with massive necrosis in the epithelial cells. these pathological changes revealed a possible explanation of the extra-pulmonary symptoms of the disease [83] .the covid-19 is a relatively new disease; thus, all opportunities must be explored in order to find the most effective mean of diagnosis, prevention and treatment.these efforts may also benefit from new technologies, including molecular biology and radiology techniques, but maybe also from artificial intelligence medical applications [84] .rapidity and accessibility may also represent important objectives for new researches.meanwhile, strict and well-applied measures of prevention and detection could help enhancing virus detectability [85] .most importantly, the combination of well-conducted clinical examination with adequate laboratory tests and adapted radiological exams are still the most potent arsenal against this disease.ta has received honorarium from biotest france sas. rs, si, ms and aa declare no conflict of interests for this manuscript.the recent outbreak of novel coronavirus (covid-19) has generated global concern given its rapid spread in multiple countries and possible fatal progression of the infection. initially, many patients reported exposure at a large seafood and animal market in wuhan, china, suggesting animal-to-person transmission of the virus. however, since then many patients have reported no exposure to animal markets, indicating that person-to-person transmission is occurring. there is currently no vaccine or targeted therapeutic for covid-19.covid-19 is difficult to diagnose early in infection as patients can remain asymptomatic or present with non-specific flu-like clinical symptoms including fever, cough, or shortness of breath.symptoms may appear in as few as 2 days or up to 2 weeks after exposure. 1 quantitative reverse transcription pcr (qrt-pcr) for covid-19 in serum or respiratory samples is currently the standard for diagnostic molecular testing. however, this requires expensive equipment and trained personnel.reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (rt-lamp) is a one-step nucleic acid amplification method based on pcr technology that has been used to diagnose infectious diseases. 2 rt-lamp has several advantages including that it has high specificity and sensitivity, can be done in less than an hour, can work at various ph and temperature ranges which is advantageous for clinical samples, 3 and that the reagents are relatively low cost and can be stable at room temperature. we have previously used this method to detect zika virus in clinical serum and urine samples as well as mosquitos. 4, 5 this study describes a rt-lamp methodology that can detect covid-19 in simulated patient samples in under 30 minutes. the test could be used at the point-of-care by field and local personnel for the rapid diagnosis of individuals for optimal treatment, isolation, and rapid contact tracking as well as the investigation of outbreaks of unknown respiratory diseases.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. sharing all influenza data (gisaid) epiflu database and the blast global alignment tool. 6, 7 rt-lamp primers were also compared to other coronaviruses using the blast global alignment tool to determine specificity and percent mismatch using the same method. percent mismatch was calculated using the following equation:all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.19. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.19.20025155 doi: medrxiv preprintto establish the optimal conditions for rt-lamp using a covid-19 pcr-standard designed from nucleotide 2941-3420 of the covid-19 wuhan-hu-1 complete genome (mn908947), several primer sets, ranges of temperatures (57-65°c), and incubation times (15-45 mins) were tested. the best amplification results were obtained at 63 ° c for 30 minutes as indicated by a banding pattern after electrophoresis on a gel (fig 1) . positive reactions containing sybr green i could be observed by naked eye by a color change from orange to yellow (fig 1-top 1) . in order to determine the lower detection limit of the rt-lamp reaction for covid-19, a dilution series ranging from 0.204 fg to 10 ng covid-19 was amplified (fig 2) . the limit of detection was approximately equivalent to 1.02 fg. this dilution series was run in parallel with qrt-pcr using primers that targeted this same region of covid-19 genome; the qrt-pcr ct values for the dilution series are reported in supplemental table 1 .to demonstrate the clinical utility of this system for covid-19 detection, we spiked various human specimens with covid-19, middle east respiratory syndrome (mers), betacoronavirus england-1 (btcov), or murine hepatitis virus (mhv). mers, btcov and mhv spiked samples were used to test the specificity of the rt-lamp assay. spiked specimens included serum, urine, saliva, oropharyngeal swabs, and nasopharyngeal swabs as we wanted to verify that substances present in these samples would not interfere with rt-lamp. samples were directly used for rt-lamp without performing nucleic acid all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.19.20025155 doi: medrxiv preprint isolation. only samples containing covid-19, but not mers, btcov, or mhv, had positive rt-lamp reactions indicating specificity of the reaction for covid-19 (fig 3) . furthermore, rt-lamp could be successfully completed using human serum, urine, saliva, oropharyngeal swabs, and nasopharyngeal swabs.the sequence of the rt-lamp primers were also compared to aligned sequences of various strains of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronaviruses (sars) or coronaviruses commonly associated with the common cold (human coronavirus strains 229e, nl63, hku1, or oc43). these other coronaviruses had 27-54% nucleotide mismatch with our rt-lamp primers, making it highly unlikely they would give a positive rt-lamp result, supporting the specificity of this assay for covid-19 ( table 2 ). given that viruses are prone to genetic mutation, we likewise examined if rt-lamp primers had any mismatch with 27 different isolated strains of covid-19 from various locations. there was 0% mismatch with all the strains examined, suggesting that these rt-lamp primers would identify all 27 strains of covid-19 examined (supplemental table 2 ).given the rapid emergence of covid-19 and the severe complications that can result including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and pneumonia, improved diagnostic options that are fast, reliable, easy, and affordable are required. this is critical since covid-19 infection can rapidly progress from hospital admission to ards in as few as 2 days, and covid-19 infection can be fatal. 1 conventional qrt-pcr, while specific and sensitive, must be done by trained personnel on specialized equipment at a qualified laboratory. since this disease is spreading rapidly, centralized labs may have trouble keeping up with testing demands or may need an alternative approach if qrt-pcr kits are not available. this feasibility study demonstrated that rt-lamp allows rapid detection of covid-19 in a variety of all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.19.20025155 doi: medrxiv preprint common human specimens collected for clinical testing, including serum, urine, saliva, oropharyngeal swabs, and nasopharyngeal swabs.currently, clinical testing for covid-19 is done by central testing laboratories, which may take one or more days. this study sought to improve upon this by developing a potential point-of-care test. point-ofcare testing has several advantages for emerging infectious diseases like covid-19 and must be easy to use, inexpensive, fast, and require little if any laboratory infrastructure while maintaining sensitivity and specificity. rt-lamp meets these requirements and therefore has large value for screening and testing for covid-19 in potentially exposed populations.we sought to determine if this rt-lamp assay worked in a range of different samples that might be collected in a clinical setting or as a possible non-invasive screening tool. this is important since it may not be feasible to collect serum from all patients, especially patients who are critically sick, dehydrated, the elderly, children, and neonates. personnel trained in collecting blood specimens may also not be available, furthermore, biological samples may contain chemicals that can inhibit nucleic acid assays if the sample is tested directly without first isolating the rna. rt-lamp worked in all the human sample types tested, and in samples from several individuals. we previously demonstrated that rt-lamp for zikv does not require prior rna isolation from the samples. 4, 5 thus, we used unprocessed urine or serum samples in this study, which saves considerable time and reduced costs. in this rt-lamp assay for covid-19, the urine samples gave stronger rt-lamp signals than the serum samples when spiked with identical amounts of covid-19; however the amount of virus present in an infected individual will likely vary between different biological specimens and over the time course of the infection. furthermore, we observed faint background banding by gel electrophoresis in oropharyngeal swabs, suggesting there may be some factor in this specimen that results in this. however, due to the specificity of the primers, we believe this does not interfere with correct interpretation of the rt-lamp reaction, especially since the covid-19 spiked sample can be correctly identified through color change and fluorescence . all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.19.20025155 doi: medrxiv preprint primers were designed for a conserved span of covid-19 sequence that was found in 22 isolated covid-19 strains but was a sequence that was also divergent from related coronavirus sars. given that all the isolated strains of covid-19 thus far have shown very little genetic differences, we anticipate that this rt-lamp will detect covid-19 with the same level of confidence as qrt-pcr. this covid-19 rt-lamp assay was highly specific as it did not give a positive result for mers, btcov, and mhv and had significant mismatch with numerous strains of sars and common cold associated human coronoavirus strains 229e, nl63, hku1, or oc43. we tested a range of temperatures from 57°c to 65°c; all the temperatures gave comparable results, indicating that this rt-lamp reaction has a large temperature range with an optimal temperate of 63 ° c . we also tested a range of incubation times from 15-45 minutes. the optimal time for detection of rt-lamp products was 30 minutes, however covid-19 rt-lamp products were detectable by uv light excitation or banding patterns on gels in as little as 15 minutes.this study has several limitations. first, covid-19 is biosafety level 3 so our laboratory was unable to work directly with the virus or with infected samples. as such, all the experiments presented here used a nucleotide oligo of covid-19 corresponding to the genbank mn908947 sequence. similarly, we were unable to directly test related coronaviruses and instead used nucleotide oligos from the same region of those viruses. however, these do represent a proof-of-feasibility for this assay, and the primers were further evaluated for specificity by blasting them to related coronavirus sequences. although rt-lamp reactions are highly specific, it is not a quantitative test. however other groups are working at improving the read outs of rt-lamp assays including the use of smartphone-integrated sensors to make interpretation of the assay even more user-friendly. 8 rt-lamp reactions can have a higher rate of false positives compared to qrt-pcr; we did not experience this in any of our no template negative control reactions, negative control samples, or other samples containing other coronaviruses. we also took the all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.19.20025155 doi: medrxiv preprint precautions of having a lateral work flow for experiments and we included a thermolabile uracil-dna glycosylase (udg) in all reactions to prevent possible carry-over contamination from previous reactions.this study was not powered to determine sensitivity in a clinical population. lastly, this is a rapidly developing area of study and all the information presented at the time of publication represent the authors' best knowledge at the time. as our understanding of covid-19 continues to develop, this information may change.here we describe a fast and robust assay for detection of covid-19 in under 30 minutes. this simple assay could be used outside of a central laboratory on various types of biological samples. this assay can be completed by individuals without specialty training or equipment and may provide a new diagnostic strategy for combatting the spread of covid-19 at the point-of-risk.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.19.20025155 doi: medrxiv preprint author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.19.20025155 doi: medrxiv preprintin early 2020, the world health organization declared a global health emergency due to the outbreak of a new coronavirus, initially called 2019-ncov and later called sars-cov-2, causing a severe acute respiratory syndrome, corona virus disease 2019 (covid- 19) .(1,2). it is a zoonotic coronavirus that causes, in its severe forms, an acute respiratory distress syndrome that in most cases can occur with mild symptoms. (3, 4) . as of may 12, an overall case fatality of 6.9% (283,153 deaths / 4,088,848 confirmed cases) is reported, in the americas 5.9% (104,549 deaths / 1,774,371 confirmed cases), and for ecuador 7.3% (2,145 deaths / 29509 confirmed cases) according to the official bulletins of the world health organization (5) the covid-19 serological tests for igg and igm have been developed with several methodologies: immunoenzymatic assay (elisa), chemiluminescence, electro chemiluminescence, fluorescent lateral flow immunoassays and immunochromatography. each one has a different and variable performance in relation to the clinical moment in which they are used, as well as whether they were developed to detect s (spike) or n (nucleocapsid) antigens, being the former apparently more sensitive.(6) none of these tests should be used for the diagnosis or population screening of the disease, considering that the antibodies appear only on the 8th -14th day of the disease onset. (7) .laboratory tests that detect antibodies to sars-cov-2, including rapid immunodiagnostic tests, need validation to determine their accuracy and reliability, since there is a double risk. the first one is to falsely label people who have been infected as sero-negative, and the second one is that people who have not been infected are falsely labeled as sero-positive; both errors have serious consequences. in addition to this, it is necessary to ensure that these tests distinguish between infections caused by sars-cov-2 and those caused by other human coronaviruses (cross reaction). (8) the rapid development associated with the market urgency has meant that these tests do not have a solid clinical validation, which makes them show divergences in sensitivity and specificity in their use. (6) in ecuador, 102 rapid tests of various brands and methodologies have been authorized by the health authorities so far. (9) the present study evaluates a sample of immunofluorescent and immunochromatographic rapid tests to show their agreement in relation to chemiluminescence.a diagnostic test evaluation assay was performed to establish the performance of five "rapid" tests (4 immunochromatographic and 1 immunofluorescent tests) for igg and igm serology for sars-cov-2.the evaluation was performed by comparing to a yhlo_iflash_1800 ™ chemiluminescent analyzer, in a medical laboratory with iso 9001: 2015 certification and with iso 15189: 2012 accreditation, in the city of quito. this device was previously verified according to clsi ep15 a3(10), with a cv of 3.3% for repeatability and 5.4% for intermediate precision, within manufacturer's recommendations (<10%) (11, 12) . additional performance characteristics are shown in table 1 .. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 3, 2020. . the results obtained from the rapid tests were compared against reports from the chemiluminescent analyzer, using a panel of 30 serum samples from patients received in the laboratory analysis routine. the samples were taken by venepuncture in the anterior side of the elbow, using a multiple-extraction device (vacuette®), with vacuette® 21g needle and bd vacuntainer® tube, with clot activator and gel separator, for serum collection. samples were mixed by gentle inversion (15) . the tubes were vertically placed on a rack for 30 minutes at room temperature and then were centrifuged at 2000g for 10 minutes. all samples were free of hemolysis, lipemia, and jaundice.the signals obtained by the automated analyzer for igg and igm were classified as positive where > 10 au / ml (13/30) for igg and (6/30) for igm. (11, 12) for the evaluation of clinical performance, the qualitative results of the "rapid" tests were compared against those obtained by chemiluminescence, dichotomized as positives (> 10 au / ml) or negative (<10 ua / ml). a total of 5 "rapid" tests were compared, 4 of them immunochromatographic and 1 fluorescent immunoassay.as there is no state-of-the-art "reference standard", this study does not state sensitivity or specificity, nor predictive values, but only the demonstration of agreement in defining the subjects with the dichotomous criterion (positive or negative), by calculating complex repeatability (global percentage of agreements), percentage of positive agreements and of negative agreements, together with their corresponding 95% confidence interval and complemented with cohen's kappa test as a measure of agreement that discriminates between agreements by chance. (16) .with the obtained data, a microsoft excel database was created for subsequent refining and analysis by means of the jasp® software. the luminescent chemo signals detected in the samples were expressed in means and standard deviations, while the concordance were provided in percentages, accompanied by their corresponding confidence interval and through the cohen's kappa index. (16) .the research committee of the faculty of medical science of the central university of ecuador review the study and conclude that ethical approval was not required, because the samples of patient are used in the context of clinical diagnoses, and do not exist intervention that affect at clinical decision over patients or their integrity.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.20114884 doi: medrxiv preprintthe characterization in au / ml for igg and igm (au / ml) for the positive and negative samples is shown in table 2 . table 3 summarizes the concordance findings of the diagnostic tests evaluated (n = 5) in reference to chemoluminescence.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 3, 2020. given the epidemiological urgency and the growing demand for tests that could contribute to the management of the sars-cov pandemic, there has been a high demand for diagnostic tests, including immunoassays, which have had rapid development and commercialization with limited validation. in clinical samples (17) given the important penetration of rapid tests, mostly immunochromatographic in ecuador and which have received marketing authorization by the ministry of public health (16) , the present study evaluated the concordance of these tests with a luminescent chemoimmunological analysis, using patients' samples received at the laboratory for seroprevalence evaluations.the best agreement (both positive and negative agreements) is seen in the immunofluorescent assay, for the igg contrast, with a particularly good kappa index (0.85), without positive disagreements and a negative disagreement of about 15%. this contrasts with immunochromatographic methods where the kappa index was 0.61 at best, with disagreements in negative findings of ≈35% and in positive cases of up to ≈70%.the igm concordance behavior, on the other hand, reflects a weak to moderate kappa concordance value (kappa 0.2 to 0.6), with negative disagreements reaching up to 55% and positives of up to 84%, without any evaluated test reaching kappa performance equal to or greater than 0.8.the variations found may be due to the type of antigens used for the development of the assay. apparently, according to several publications, if they are oriented to nucleocapsid antigens they would seem to be more sensitive, but if they are oriented to the host binding protein (rbd-s) they would be more specific (18) the great variation in agreement percentages found should draw attention to the problems of diagnostic certainty of serological tests associated with cross-reactions with other coronaviruses. added to this is the low proportion of negative agreements and their impact on an erroneous screening of a subject for epidemiological surveillance, which may overestimate the population rate considered as immune, when in fact it is not. (6) so far, most of these studies show that people who have recovered from an infection have antibodies to the virus. however, some of these persons have very low levels of neutralizing antibodies in their blood. therefore, until now, it has not been evaluated whether the presence of detectable antibodies against sars-cov-2 confers immunity to a subsequent infection. (8) serological studies should be used in the clinical and epidemiological context and of other diagnostic tests. (8, 19) . given the high demand and supply in the market of "rapid serological tests", its evaluation against panels of serologically positive or negative samples established by chemiluminescence or electro chemiluminescence is essential to authorize its extensive use in populations.if use is required, it is recommended that they be carried out by trained technical-operational personnel and under the supervision of professionals in laboratory medicine.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 3, 2020. .since the emergence of the novel respiratory virus sars-cov-2 during december 2019 in the region of wuhan (china), the virus has spread rapidly all over the world causing a pandemic coronavirus disease (covid-19) [1] .adequate diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infection is essential for prompt therapeutic management of patients, control of the epidemic and the establishment of infection control measures. even though rt-qpcr is considered the reference method for screening and diagnosis, the sensitivity of this method may vary depending on the quality and origin of the sample, the time of infection and the viral load [2, 3] .on 30 january 2020, the world health organization (who) declared the covid-19 outbreak to be a public health emergency of international concern, and shortly thereafter called for research on in-vitro diagnostics for use at the community level [4] . in response, several serological tests, including the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa), the chemiluminescence immunoassay (clia) and lateral flow rapid testing, are now under development or have already entered the market. the foundation for innovative new diagnostics (find) (https://www.finddx.org/) lists over 150 rapid covid-19 antibody tests that are "communauté européenne" (ce) marked [5] .the detection of igg, igm and iga antibodies against the sars-cov-2 can play a complementary role to the rt-qpcr test in the diagnosis of covid-19 and in assessing the immune status of individuals. moreover, serological data will enable the gathering of important epidemiological information, providing more realistic data on the spread of the epidemic, and on morbidity and mortality. in addition, the detection of antibodies against sars-cov-2 will play a key role in determining appropriate lockdown exit strategies and in vaccine development [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] .however data concerning the performance of these assays are scarce [8, 9] . the purpose of this study was therefore to assess the performance of ce marked assays available in belgium-three lateral flow rapid tests and two quantitative automated immunoassays-for the detection of sars-cov-2 igg, igm and iga antibodies.this retrospective study included 200 residual sera from patients and healthy volunteers from laboratoire hospitalier universitaire de bruxelles -universitair laboratorium brussel (lhub-ulb) and the microbiology statistical analysis was performed with spps software. a receiver operator characteristic (roc) curve was constructed and used for comparisons of the area under the curve (auc) of the roc curves. the cohen kappa index was calculated for agreement between all analysed assays. a p value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (ppv) and negative predictive value (npv) were calculated for each serological test.sensitivity and specificity obtained with quantitative (elisa and clia) serological assays are summarized in table 1. overall the elisa assay showed higher sensitivity than the clia (84% versus 64%, respectively). in j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f contrast, the specificity of clia igm (100%) was greater than that observed for elisa iga (86%). both tests showed similar specificities of igg at 99% for clia and 100% for elisa. as shown in table 2, during the first week after the onset of symptoms, the elisa iga analysis was significantly more sensitive than the clia igm (p < 0.001). although not-statistically significant, higher sensitivity was also observed for the elisa igg results for the lateral flow assays were easily interpretable with unambiguous coloured reading igg lines. the colour intensity in the line regions correlated with the concentration of sars-cov-2 antibodies. in some cases, igm line presented slight difficulty for reading in all commercial lateral flow tests. as predicted by the manufacturer, the results were obtained after ten minutes or less in all cases. all the tests performed in this study provided valid results. overall sensitivity was similar (around 70%) without any significant differences between the three tests (table 1) . however, the sensitivity for igm was significant lower (p < 0.001) with labon time as compared to the quickzen and avioq assays. the avioq lateral flow test showed three false positive results of concomitant igm and igg reactivity in three samples from a previous epidemic period without any known confounding factor. in contrast, no false positive results were observed among the pool of 31 sera containing antibodies with potential cross reactivity. globally, no significant differences were observed between the specificity values of the three tests with a positive predictive value of 100% for quickzen and labon time and 97.7% for the avioq assays. as shown in table 2 , similarly to the serological quantitative assays (elisa and j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f clia ), the sensitivity of the three lateral flow assays increased during the second week after the onset of symptoms and achieved similar values (91% to 94%) after 14 days. table 3 shows the percentage of agreement between the five immunoassays. overall, the best agreement was observed between the clia and labon time assays (91%; cohen kappa index of 0.819) and between the two lateral flow assays labon time and avioq (91.5 %; cohen kappa index of 0.829). the absence of agreement between the five serological assays observed during the first week following symptom onset lessened 14 days after symptom onset, with all assays achieving 97% to 100% agreement.serological testing is a complementary test in covid-19 diagnosis and a strategic vehicle in the second phase of the pandemic, necessary for epidemiological study and lockdown exit programmes. immunoassays could provide identification of non-contagious and potentially protected individuals to support progressive de-confinement strategies in the process of gradually restoring safe economic and social activity [10, 11] . different types of serological tests are available on the market and could be applied to the massive testing challenge the world is currently facing.fully automated clia and elisa assays allow the quantitative determination of antibodies against sars-cov-2 by clinical laboratories with increased screening capacity. in this study, the elisa igg/iga was tested on a fully automated microtiter plate analyser. the workflow for elisa tests depends on the analyser used: in our laboratory, the capacity was 90 tests per 3-4 hours. in contrast, the clia igg/igm assays are fully automated random-access tests. this technology allows up to 180 tests per hour, depending on the platform used, with the results delivered in about 40 minutes. the performance of maglumi igg/igm tests has been successfully evaluated by padoan et al., showing the reliability of these immunoassays for assessing the immunological response in the sera of covid-19 patients. these tests show that it takes at least 12 days to reach 100% sensitivity for igg and a 88% positive rate for igm [12] . in another study that compared the maglumi igg/igm and euroimmun igg/iga, 100% sensitivity was observed with maglumi igg 10 days following onset of symptoms. these authors reported a lower sensitivity for the maglumi igm (60%) compared to the euroimmun iga (100%) [13] . in the current study, the maglumi igg/igm tests also showed overall lower sensitivity than the euroimmun igg/iga test (64.3% vs 84.4%), but in contrast, their specificity increased to 100%. the mean days since symptom onset in the population tested for this study was 11.46 days (median of 10 days). this can explain the lower sensitivity of the maglumi igg/igm tests in our study as compared to those in the literature. obka et al. [8] also described higher sensitivity observed j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f in the euroimmun iga test than in the euroimmun igg test (83.6% vs 61.7%). this was particularly evident in the two first weeks after symptom onset, but with less specificity for the former test (86.1% vs 98.6%).recently, many commercial lateral flow assays have been developed and ce-labelled. in this study, three of these were also evaluated. the results showed that their global sensitivity, specificity, npv and ppv were equivalent to the elisa igg/iga or the clia igg/igm tests. in addition, excellent concordance between the five immunoassays tested in this study was observed 14 days after the onset of symptoms. similar results were reported by li et al., showing good sensitivity (88.6%) and specificity (90.6%) with a rapid test in a large cohort of patient samples in china. they observed similar performances with serum, plasma and fingerstick blood [14] . rapid serological tests can be performed in the laboratory or used as point-of-care tests (poct). the latter will provide accurate results within 10 to 15 minutes with equivalent sensitivity and specificity as the quantitative automated immunoassays, particularly two weeks after onset of symptoms. the opportunity to test outside of the clinical laboratory by lateral flow assay makes it possible to reach larger population groups without saturating the capacity of the laboratories.poct may play an important role in large-scale testing in order to evaluate herd immunity against sars-cov-2.however, mistakes in the interpretation of results in situations that are not under the control of trained staff must be taken into consideration. for this reason, the development of automated reader devices could help to reduce errors and increase sensitivity. in addition, such a device could support the transmission of the results to a public health institution to provide real-time information about seroprevalence at the population level.while still awaiting the results of large seroprevalence studies in the community, wu et al. report a detection rate of around 10% of sars-cov-2 igg in asymptomatic subjects from a single-centre investigation [15] . the causal relationship between humoral response and illness severity is still unclear. zhao et al. revealed a strong positive correlation between clinical severity and antibody titres two weeks after illness onset [16] . yongchen et al. highlight the complementary role of immunoassays to rt-qpcr in the diagnosis of covid-19, particularly in critical patients with a negative rt-qpcr. they observed seronegative asymptomatic patients four weeks after positive rt-qpcr results [17] . in the current study, two asymptomatic patients tested seronegative by all the immunoassays 20 days after a positive rt-qpcr result. further studies in asymptomatic patients are necessary to understand better the humoral responses in this population and to understand the role of the real herd immunity in determining lockdown exit strategies.this study has some limitations. first, this is a retrospective study performed with residual samples and the lack of fresh serum could impact the accuracy of the results. second, no reliable gold standard for serological tests is currently available for comparative studies, and little literature exists concerning a comparison of immunoassay j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f methods for sars-cov-2 detection. furthermore, the criteria for assessing the time of illness onset were recovered from medical records and may contain imprecisions due to subjectivity in the perception of symptoms and timing.in conclusion, this study shows the accurate and equivalent performance of five serological antibody assays tables   table 1 analytical objective:to describe the implementation of technological support important for optimizing clinical management of the covid-19 pandemic.our health system has confirmed prior and current cases of covid-19. an incident commandcenter was established early in the crisis and helped identify electronic health record (ehr) based tools to support clinical care.we outline the design and implementation of ehr based rapid screening processes, laboratory testing, clinical decision support, reporting tools, and patient-facing technology related to covid-19.the ehr is a useful tool to enable rapid deployment of standardized processes. uc san diego health built multiple covid-19-specific tools to support outbreak management, including scripted triaging, electronic check-in, standard ordering and documentation, secure messaging, real-time data analytics, and telemedicine capabilities. challenges included the need to frequently adjust build to meet rapidly evolving requirements, communication and adoption, and coordinating the needs of multiple stakeholders while maintaining high-quality, pre-pandemic medical care.the ehr is an essential tool in supporting the clinical needs of a health system managing the covid-19 pandemic.the novel coronavirus covid-19 was initially identified in december 2019 as a case of pneumonia in wuhan, china and has since become a global pandemic, affecting greater than 150 countries around the world.[1-6] the world health organization declared the outbreak a pandemic on march 11, 2020 and called for coordinated mechanisms to support preparedness and response to the infection across health sectors. [7] on march 13, the executive office of the united states proclaimed the pandemic a national emergency. [8] while the incidence of covid-19 continues to rise, healthcare systems are rapidly preparing and adapting to increasing clinical demands. [9] [10] inherent to the operational management of a pandemic in the era of modern medicine is leveraging the capabilities of the electronic health record (ehr), which can be useful for developing tools to support standard management of patients. [11] technologybased tools can effectively support institutions during a pandemic by facilitating the immediate widespread distribution of information, tracking transmission in real-time, creating virtual venues for meetings and day-to-day operations, and, perhaps most importantly, offering telemedicine visits for patients. [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] during the ebola outbreak in 2014, attention was brought to the use of the ehr as a potential public health tool. [17] unfortunately, despite the recent ebola epidemic, the infrastructure for outbreak management was not present in many united states health systems and their ehr applications. [18] as we are now facing a pandemic, many institutions are working to rapidly develop supportive and reliable informatics infrastructure in order to prepare for managing an exponential increase in covid-19-infected patients. however, the literature to describe the informatics tools required to successfully manage this novel infection is lacking.here we discuss the rapid development and implementation of the ehr configuration necessary for outbreak management within a large regional public academic health center in the setting of new and pending covid-19 cases. we detail the specific informatics tools we built to support the health system's efforts to prepare for the current pandemic and the challenges associated with this task.university of california, san diego health (ucsdh) is a large regional academic health system encompassing two acute care hospitals, outpatient primary and specialty medical and surgical care, and emergency patient care. ucsdh is also one of five academic medical centers within a broader 10-campus university of california system. ucsdh utilizes a commercially available, electronic health record (ehr), epic (verona, wi), and also hosts over 300 affiliate physicians across 10 medical groups on this ehr. san diego county served as a quarantine site for both chinese ex-patriots and cruise ship passengers, and also experienced community spread of covid earlier than much of the us. [19] an incident command center was established at ucsdh on february 5, 2020 for 24-hour monitoring and adaptation to rapidly evolving conditions and recommendations on a local, state, federal, and global scale. an assessment of the institutional current state revealed the need to develop a rapid screening process, hospital-based and ambulatory testing, new orders with clinical decision support, reporting/analytics tools, and the enhancement/expansion of current patient-facing technology.with the guidance of the incident command center, our clinical informatics team prioritized projects related to covid-19 to enable expedited build and implementation. in response to the pandemic, we configured our ehr with the technology-based tools listed in table 1 . awareness and training of novel resources for clinicians and staff were distributed via a variety of communication channels in concurrence with important epidemiologic, policy, and health safety information by the incident command center and health system leadership. one of the first needs for the health system was the development of a rapid and effective multimodal covid-19 screening process, including telephone calls, direct email, and ehr messaging, all before in-person encounters. a protocolized triage system was developed and embedded into multiple ehr templates, which could be rapidly updated as screening guidance evolved ( table 2) . these instructions can be easily accessed by call centers and triage nurses, allowing them to provide guidance to patients regarding requirements for home isolation, appropriate locations to obtain covid-19 testing, and when to visit the emergency department.in order to limit exposures and relieve the burden on physical healthcare locations, automated email notifications were sent to patients prior to their clinic appointments indicating that persons with fever and/or new cough call the health system for proper triage before presenting to the health care facility.travel and symptoms screening questions were added to the registration/check-in process ( figure 1) . the ehr was configured to require complete documentation by front desk staff, ensuring all patients being seen for acute and elective care across the institution receive screening. ehr templates were used by front-line staff to adhere to a standardized screening "script." positive screening questions in both acute and ambulatory care settings triggered a provider alert with clinical decision support offering appropriate guidance for subsequent clinical care, including any testing or isolation orders needed to facilitate next steps. again, this set of tools in the ehr can be rapidly adjusted based on evolving recommendations. we constructed order panels in the ehr for inpatient, emergency department, and ambulatory settings that included a defaulted, pre-populated covid-19 lab order, appropriate isolation orders and options for additional laboratory testing or imaging studies. ucsdh elected to use in-house covid-19 testing for patients in the hospital and emergency department, but to have covid-19 tests obtained in ambulatory and urgent care settings sent out to a reference laboratory due to initial existing limitations in testing capacity. as such, engineering the correct order to appear in the correct setting was essential to avoid confusion and process failures.additionally, modifications were made to our existing respiratory pathogen panel, as several tests for non-covid-19 coronaviruses were already present in the system. in order to avoid confusion for both clinicians and patients, these tests were clearly labeled to delineate between covid-19 and other coronaviruses unrelated to the current pandemic or "non-covid-19coronavirus."clinical decision support at the moment of ordering was provided by including screening criteria, information on specimen acquisition, requirements for personal protective equipment, and expectations on test result turnaround time for easy review. in addition, a series of questions were added to the covid-19 orders, requiring the ordering provider to document the testing criteria met by the patient. our build construct allowed for rapid editing to maintain alignment with operational needs as screening requirements and lab handling processes frequently changed following the initial implementation. similar covid-19 ordering workflows were instituted in our occupational health department to prepare for the potential of increased healthcare worker exposures.to better respond to the rapidly evolving care needs during this outbreak, ucsdh assembled a seven-person "ambulatory covid team (act)." team members included two infectious disease physicians, three primary care physicians (our community care physician lead, an epidemiology expert, and our ambulatory chief medical information officer), and two nurses. we used a secured messaging platform (smp) within the ehr to enable rapid having the ability to monitor the evolving current state of the health system was a key request from the incident command center. the enterprise reporting team constructed a series of easily accessible reports within the ehr for use by the incident command center, infectioncontrol, and other key organizational leaders. the reports were automatically distributed, accessible on mobile devices, and used to inform operational decisions on expanding testing capacity, patient isolation procedures, geographic cohorting of patients, and to monitor adherence to patient screening processes. we also created a covid-19 operational dashboard with real-time data on the number of patients tested, test results, bed availability in the intensive care unit, availability of ventilator units, and volume of ambulatory visits (figure 2 ). in addition, ucsdh had previously granted broad access to the ehr self-service analytics tool, with which key personnel can create ad hoc reports on items such as the use of isolation and testing frequency.ucsdh prioritized moving in-person clinic visits to telemedicine-based visits when appropriate in order to avoid unnecessary patient and staff exposure. prior to the advent of the covid-19 outbreak, ucsd had already developed and implemented a telemedicine infrastructure for use by multiple outpatient clinics. in response to the federal government loosening of telehealth requirements, and local desire to convert existing outpatient visits to video, we expanded access to all outpatient areas and created online self-guided learning videos on the conduct of virtual patient care (figure 3) . [20] [21] in addition, we re-purposed an existing ambulatory ehr optimization team to provide assistance to onboarding clinical areas or those enhancing their telemedicine capacity. within 72 hours of the executive proclamation of a national emergency, over 300 unique health employees were trained in telemedicine and ~1,000 video visits were scheduled.over 200,000 patients at ucsdh use the patient portal functionality within the ehrtethered patient portal (epic mychart), which allows patients to utilize the video visit capability described above in addition to scheduling appointments, secure messaging with the care team, and viewing and downloading test results. 22 the aforementioned modification of the display names for our pre-existing coronavirus assay ensured non-covid coronavirus lab results displayed to patients as "non-covid-19." an early operational decision was made to delay the release of positive covid-19-specific test results to allow ucsdh to directly contact and inform patients. however, we elected to immediately post negative covid-19 test results to mychart as testing volume made it more challenging to contact all tested patients in a timely fashion.we describe a series of ehr enhancements designed to support the rapid deployment of new policies, procedures, and protocols across a healthcare system in response to the covid-19pandemic. within the span of a few weeks, the magnitude of the outbreak within the unitedstates became clear to healthcare leaders on local, state, and federal levels. [10, 18] as our own institution faced a growing number of known and suspected covid-19 cases, as well as a variety of patient care and operational needs related to the pandemic, we recognized the importance of the ehr and other technology-based tools as an enabling adjunct to accelerated process design and implementation. the development of a multidisciplinary task force involving institutional leaders, infectious disease and infection prevention specialists, and technology experts is a critical first step in addressing hospital-specific concerns and developing open and productive communication. [23] [24] [25] an initial needs-based assessment was done of the current state to determine the necessary operational processes for outbreak management, the existing informatics structure to support these processes, and the gaps that needed to be bridged in a timely fashion. doing so allowed us to expediently configure the ehr to support covid-19outbreak management as detailed in this report. information can serve to assist governments and regional health systems in combatting the outbreak. however, to our knowledge no reports have detailed the specific tools within an ehr that can be developed and leveraged to support the efforts of the public health response against covid-19. in the modern era, essentially all of the processes mentioned above rely heavily on technology and, for individual health systems, direct interfacing with the ehr. therefore, we have summarized our recent efforts to enhance our informatics infrastructure.there are other recent examples of utilizing technology during this public health crisis. in taiwan, a national health insurance database was integrated with immigration and customs data to generate real-time alerts during clinic visits to aid in case identification. [29] online questionnaires were utilized to risk stratify travelers so that low risk citizens were automatically sent a health declaration border pass while high-risk individuals were quarantined at home and remotely monitored for the development of symptoms with mobile device applications. [29] healthcare systems in houston, texas, developed remote communication channels between physicians and emergency responders to assist with triaging. [14] virtual home visits for high risk individuals and remote icu monitoring is also being employed to reduce hospital-staff contact with patients with suspected or confirmed cases of covid-19. [14] multiple institutions across the united states have transitioned to telemedicine in an effort to reduce emergency room visits through remote triaging. [23] telemedicine has already proved useful during epidemiological emergencies, including through use of live video counseling with patients, virtual patient monitoring, and mobile applications for symptom observation. [15] telemedicine can be used in the setting of emergency medicine to triage patients, decrease the rate of discharge without complete treatment and proper follow-up, and reduce the number of in-person visits and subsequent risk of transmission of infection. [12] [13] an additional application is in early symptom identification and triaging as a mitigation strategy for potential delays in access to healthcare. [30] this was previously observed in wuhan, china during the initial outbreak of covid-19 when 89% of patients were not hospitalized until at least 5 days into their illness. [30] enhancing existing ehr platforms with tools for triaging and screening for symptoms has the potential to identify symptomatic patients earlier and decrease the physical burden on healthcare systems. [31] at our own institution, much of the informatics framework to support outbreak balancing the need to focus on the pandemic while maintaining high-quality healthcare and operations unrelated to the novel infection in order to provide service to all aspects of the community. finally, the frequently changing landscape of a pandemic, with often daily guideline and protocol updates that generally require approval from multiple stakeholders within a large and complex health system, presented challenges to maintaining the rapid project momentum.the most significant mitigation strategy for these challenges was the establishment of aservices. this enabled real-time identification of failures and successes, a focus on evolving needs, and feedback on subsequent interventions. the covid-19 pandemic has highlighted the importance of a multidisciplinary team approach to medical care and building cohesive systems capable of sustaining unanticipated trials.in the face of the covid-19 pandemic, healthcare systems can best prepare by following guidelines and recommendations set forth by federal and global institutions. the electronic health record and associated technologies are vital and requisite tools in supporting outbreak management that should be leveraged to their full potential, and we hope that our experiences in developing these tools will be helpful to other health systems facing the same challenge.we t he novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) was first reported in late 2019 to cause coronavirus disease . the rapid global spread and exponential growth of the pandemic wave have stretched the limits of the available healthcare and intensive care unit capacity. since the initial notification of an outbreak on december 31st, the global response has transitioned from the initial policy of active case finding and containment to an increasingly complex package of confinement measures including closures of schools, implementation of travel restrictions, and physical distancing measures. at present, given the global circulation of sars-cov-2, the consensus is that elimination of the virus is no longer feasible, and that longer-term strategies are needed that strike a balance between the economically and socially damaging (near) lockdown approaches and full release of any control measures. there is wide agreement that, in the latter situation, rapid resurgence would be very likely, with modeled epidemic peaks potentially exceeding the current healthcare capacity 1 .the so-called exit strategy is defined as the transition from the current approach, which focuses entirely on flattening the peak of the covid-19 emergence curve, to the transition phase in which restrictions are gradually lifted. the gradual lifting of control measures will require active surveillance to allow early detection of new cases or clusters, coupled with contact tracing and quarantine, most likely combined with continued physical distancing recommendations and enhanced protection of those at-risk from most severe disease. a key knowledge gap is the level and duration of protective immunity in the population at large and in specific groups, including persons with different clinical severity 1,2 .to assess the extent of virus circulation in the community, and the likelihood of protection against a re-infection, there is a crucial need to add serology to the testing algorithms. the required performance of a serological assay will depend on the specific aim of testing, which may be either population screening (in the general population or at-risk populations) or diagnostic support. we recently showed that antibodies directed against the s1 subunit of the sars-cov-2 spike protein and specifically to the receptor binding domain (rbd) within the s1 subunit strongly correlate with virus neutralization 3 . the likelihood of predicting protective antibody responses will thus increase when using either s1 antigens or rbd in the assay. the specificity of serological tools detecting antibodies against sars cov-2 might be hampered by the presence of antibodies against other circulating coronaviruses in the population, and thus testing for cross reactivity is crucial. when selecting an appropriate assay for a specific purpose, decision making should include the available knowledge on antibody specificities, kinetics, and functions 4 . the limited knowledge on antibody kinetics in emerging virus infections is always a challenge for design and validation of serological assays during an outbreak. recent studies in covid-19 patients have shown that in both hospitalized patients and patients with mild disease, seroconversion rates reach 100% after 10-14 days, and that antibody levels may correlate with clinical severity 2,3,5 . this is in line with observations in middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) infection, in which antibody responses varied depending on disease severity, with mild and asymptomatic infections resulting in weaker immune responses 6 . therefore, for meaningful interpretation of serological assays and extrapolation of results to population screening, sufficient samples from persons with mild and asymptomatic disease should be included in validation studies.in our study we compare three platforms, which are widely used in diagnostic laboratories (three rapid tests, four elisas, and a high throughput chemiluminescent assay (clia)), which can be used to address different needs: for individualized (home) testing, as supplement to diagnostics and in population screening. we analyze their performance in correlation to an in-house virus neutralization assay 3 , which is currently the gold standard when assessing protective immunity against sars cov-2.patient diagnostics. serological testing to support clinical diagnostic work-up is mostly requested in hospitalized patients. this can be for example when sars cov-2 rna diagnostic testing remains negative in a patient despite a strong clinical suspicion or for patients whose samples during the symptomatic phase were not collected. other patients in whom antibody testing can be very valuable are those who have been hospitalized for weeks and in whom a pcr test continues to be positive with increasing cycle threshold values. in these patients, the detection of virus neutralizing antibodies can help with the decision to stop using personal protective equipment. in these patients usually the serological results are interpreted by laboratory staff and there is a possibility to test follow-up sera or perform confirmation serological testing. when comparing the laboratory assays in patients with different severity and stages of disease (overall), and in patients tested more than 14 days post-onset of disease, the rbd antigen based wantai total ig assay performed best ( fig. 1 , table 1 ). both igg assays targeting the s antigen (euroimmun and liaison) lacked sensitivity in hospitalized patients as the sample set included early time-points. the s1 based iga assay by euroimmun, in contrast, had a good sensitivity, and showed the best quantitative relationship, specifically once neutralizing titers were higher than 80 (prnt50 units), upon which the rbd ig assay becomes non-linear. iga testing will detect both early and memory iga responses and will thus be a useful addition to igg assays. the possible relevance of quantitative antibody measurements will need to be assessed when results of longer-term patient follow-up studies become available. an alternative of the prnt50 can be the use of a surrogate virus neutralization test for sars cov-2 (as recently produced by genscript, usa) which allows direct quantification. extensive studies on the performance have however not yet been published.despite the differences in sensitivity, all laboratory assays had sufficient positive predictive value (ppv) in covid-19 hospitalized patients when assuming an expected seroprevalence in this population of ≥50% (table 1) , or when using serology as an adjunct to rt-pcr testing to monitor the clinical course of illness. their application as sole diagnostic, however-for instance in primary care, where the seroprevalence will be much lower-will be more challenging as illustrated by the variation in ppv of the assays with a seroprevalence estimate of 4%, which is the level currently observed in the netherlands 7 .in addition to specialized elisa assays used in laboratory settings, a wide range of rapid diagnostic tests (rdt) has been put on the market, triggering the question whether they can be used in patient care or for triage in a medical care facility. we selected three rdts by following criteria (1) preferably targetting the spike of sars-cov-2 (2) at least european conformity (ce) marking or other authorization, and (3) sufficient production capacity. the rdts provide qualitative (yes/no) results, which does not allow quantification or the definition of a cut-off for neutralization ( fig. 1f-h) . all three rdts had a sufficient ppv in high seroprevalence scenarios, which implies that there might be a role for the rdts when used for the individual patient with a sufficiently high pretest probability as an add on to pcr based diagnostics. the high negative predictive value (npv) of the rdts in a low seroprevalence scenario could offer opportunities for the use of the test in the general population, if the aim is to rule out the presence of sars cov-2 antibodies (table 1) .population screening. population screening during a pandemic phase requires a highly specific assay, to assure an acceptable ppv in populations with a low sero-prevalence 3 , and additionally a reasonable sensitivity (table 1 ). this condition was met for the wantai elisas and euroimmun igg elisa. the euroimmun iga and liaison clia analyzer performed less well, with specificities <95% when testing serum samples from persons exposed to a range of viruses (table 1) 8 . this led to very low ppv's of respectively 39% and 26% for the euroimmun iga and the clia analyzer in low prevalence settings, while the wantai total ig continued to perform reasonably well. tested specimen were obtained from patients with mild, moderate, and severe disease. all patients had detectable antibodies by prnt50 from day 18 (supplementary data). the severity of disease did not affect the range of detected neutralizing titers or sensitivity of selected assays (table 1 , supplementary data). due to limitations in sample volumes of mild patients, these were not equally tested in all assays. in addition, future studies are recommended to address the performance of alternative high throughput assays like the roche elecsys anti-sars-cov-2 or abbott sars-cov-2 igg, in correlation to neutralization.for the rdts the specificities varied from 85 to 99% (table 1) , although the overall performance of the cellex assay with 99% specificity was hampered by its low sensitivity of 80%. generally, the use of the selected rdt is not recommended in population screening where estimated seroprevalence is mostly <5% and the ppv will be too low for a reliable interpretation (table 1) . a final question in population screening is whether the antibody measurements correlate with functional antibodies that can protect a population during a subsequent exposure. in our analyses, samples testing positive in the wantai ig elisa with an od ratio > 10 all had detectable levels of neutralizing antibodies which suggests that-using a cut-off-in this assay could be used to indicate presence of neutralizing antibodies. the exact kinetics and functionality of these antibodies in offering protection remains to be determined.in conclusion, our presented data support decision making for the use of serology in either individual patient care or populationlevel serological testing. we conclude that for the aim of detecting protective antibodies, the rbd based wantai elisa had the best overall performance including the potential to set a cut-off indicating the presence of protective antibodies. the global performance of the selected rdts is not robust enough for over the counter personalized testing in the population.blood samples. all specimen used in the study have been collected and delivered to our diagnostic laboratory for patient diagnostics, and not following a predefined covid-19 research protocol. to determine specificity of the assays, we used a well-defined panel of 147 serum and plasma samples from 147 individuals exposed to human coronaviruses (hcov-229e, nl63 or oc43), sars, mers), or with a range of other respiratory viruses ( sensitivity was calculated by using a total of 187 sera from 107 individuals in the netherlands, in whom covid-19 was confirmed by rt-pcr and antibodies were detected by prnt50. disease severity varied from (1) mild, non-hospitalized, (2) moderate, hospitalized, and (3) severe, admitted to the intensive care unit. specimen were taken at different time-points post-onset of disease (supplementary data, fig. 1 ). all specimen were stored at −20°c until use. the variation in the number of samples tested per assay is caused by the fact that validation was part of the acute diagnostic response during the first phase of the covid-19 pandemic. initially, a set of 75 patient sera was tested in all assays. these sera were mostly collected from hospitalized patients and involved only three sera from mild patients. to assess the performance of the assays in population screening it is important to involve sera from mild patients so we increased the number of tested sera in the wantai elisas, liaison, and rdts. the selection of these assays was based on the best overall performance of wantai elisas in the first analyses and the likely application of liaison and rdts in population screening. the exact number of specimen tested per assay varied due to availability of serum. figure 1 depicts the outcome of the assays per time interval, analyses in mild patients are shown in table 1 , source data can be found in the supplementary data 1.ethics declarations. the use of specimen was approved by the erasmus mc medical ethical committee (mec approval: 2014-414), which allows the use of clinical data and left-over material from the specimen delivered to our laboratory for diagnostics, unless patients have declared they opted out of this scheme. in addition, the erasmus mc institutional research committee regulated that all covid-19 patients admitted to erasmus mc are asked for permission to use their clinical data and left-over patient material for covid-19 research purposes. all patients who refused have been excluded from the analyses.elisa. four selected elisas were performed according to manufacturer's protocol: (1) wantai sars-cov-2 total ig and igm elisas from beijing wantai biological pharmacy enterprise co., ltd., china. the elisas are coated with rbd antigen. (2) euroimmun anti-sars-cov-2 igg and iga elisa assays from euroimmun medizinische labordiagnostika ag, lübeck, germany. the euroimmun elisas are coated with s1 antigen.diasorin liaison xl. the liaison xl by diasorin (saluggia, italy), is a semiautomated system using chemiluminescent immunoassay (clia) technology for detection of ab in human samples. the assay is based on s1 and s2 coating antigens. the assays were performed following manufacturer's protocol.rapid antibody test. the rapid tests we evaluated are (1) rapid sars -cov-2 antibody (igm/igg) test from intec utilizing the nucleocapsid protein as antigen (test lots s2020021505 and gj20030288), (2) the qsars-cov-2 igg/igm cassette rapid test (gica) from cellex inc. utilizing both the spike and the nucleocapsid protein (test lot 20200416wi5513c) and (3) the covid-19 igg/igm rapid test cassette (whole blood/serum/plasma) from orient gene / healgen (test lot 2003309), utilizing both the spike and the nucleocapsid protein. all three tests are based on immunochromatography for detection of igg and igm specific to sars cov-2 in human whole blood (venous and fingerstick) serum or plasma. we performed the tests following the manufacturers' instructions. each sample was tested by one test and readout (positive/negative) interpreted by two operators in parallel.prnt 50. an in-house plaque-reduction neutralization test (prnt50) was used as a reference for this study, because virus neutralization assays are the gold standard in coronavirus serology. we tested serum and plasma samples for their neutralizing capacity against sars-cov-2 (german isolate; gisaid id epi_isl 406862; european virus archive global # 026v-03883) by prnt50 as previously described by okba et al. 3 .statistical analysis. the outcome of commercial testing was correlated to functional antibody measurements, to assess likelihood of predicting protective antibody responses. the results of the different elisas and rdts were compared with those detected by prnt50. for sensitivity calculations only the prnt50 positive samples were used for the calculations. specificity was calculated by using the cross reactive panel of non-sars cov-2 sera. graphs were made by using graphpad prism version 8 (https://www.graphpad.com). the predictive values were calculated for three scenarios 4% seroprevalence in a general population, 50% seroprevalence in a high-risk sub-population and 95% seroprevalence in confirmed or highly suspect covd-19 hospitalized patients.reporting summary. further information on research design is available in the nature research reporting summary linked to this article.source data are provided with this paper. other data are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable requests. source data are provided with this paper.received: 27 may 2020; accepted: 25 june 2020; accurate and timely diagnosis of acute viral respiratory tract infections (rtis), which is important for individual patients management decisions, as well as appropriate infection control, remains challenging both for clinicians and laboratorians (mahony, 2008) . many clinical virology laboratories still rely on labour intensive or time-consuming diagnostic algorithms which incorporate antigen or culture-based methods (mahony, 2008) . molecular diagnostic assays hold great potential to impact infectious disease diagnosis and clinical management, particularly for viral infections, where conventional methods (i.e. antigen and culture based methods) do not provide timely or highly accurate results (ratcliff et al., 2007) . while many rapid nucleic acid amplification tests have been developed to identify individual virus (liolios et al., 2001) , the utility of molecular diagnostics in clinical settings may best be realized by single system diagnostic platforms that can simultaneously detect multiple pathogens (liao et al., 2009; pabbaraju et al., 2008; raymond et al., 2009; wu and tang, 2009) .electrospray ionization mass spectrometry following broadrange reverse transcription-pcr (rt-pcr/esi-ms), one of the single system diagnostic platforms, that has the potential to not only detect rapidly but also identify and quantify multiple pathogens simultaneously. to date, studies with rt-pcr/emi-ms have been restricted to the detection of individual respiratory bacteria or viruses [i.e. streptococcus , coronavirus (sars) , adenovirus (russell et al., 2006) , and algorithm of clinical reference diagnostic test in clinical virology laboratory for respiratory samples. diagnostic algorithm used in clinical virology laboratory to detect respiratory viruses mainly divided into respiratory season or non-respiratory season. respiratory season defined as october to the following january (october to november for rsv, december to january for influenza). immunochromatographic assays were used in respiratory season as the sole screening test for rsv and influenza, which will stop the testing algorithm if results are positive. respiratory panel cocktail dfa tests serve for adenovirus, influenza a and b, parainfluenza types 1-3 and rsv, which will stop the testing algorithm if results are positive in non-respiratory season or for those screened negative by immunochromatographic assays in respiratory season as well. rsv, respiratory syncytial virus; piv, parainfluenza virus; hsv, herpes simplex virus; cmv, cytomegalovirus; hmpv, human metapneumovirus; dfa, direct fluorescent antibody test; cpe, cytopathic effect; rbc, red blood cells.influenza viruses (sampath et al., 2007) ], or detailed characterization [e.g. resistance gene recognition , genotyping of the organism ]. the capacity of rt-pcr/emi-ms for broad range, simultaneous and multiple pathogen detection with rapid turnaround may translate into a useful tool for clinicians in health care settings to aid in early diagnosis of respiratory tract infections.this hospital-based pilot study was conducted over one season of respiratory infections to compare the performance characteristics of this rt-pcr/esi-ms platform versus conventional virologic procedures, for identification of multiple clinically relevant respiratory viruses in nasopharyngeal aspirate samples collected from emergency department patients presenting with acute respiratory illnesses.patients visiting the adult or paediatric emergency departments at a tertiary care inner-city hospital, between december 1, 2007 and may 31, 2008 were assessed for eligibility. all eligible patients, operationally defined as any patients with a suspected acute upper respiratory tract infection, in whom the emergency physicians ordered nasopharyngeal aspirate testing, were approached consecutively and recruited. eligible patients were identified by dedicated study coordinators by the daily review of nasopharyngeal aspirate testing order lists from the emergency department, and sought informed consent (in person, for those who were still in the hospital, or by telephone, for those who were already discharged either from the emergency department or the inpatient setting). there were at least three separate attempts in different periods of different days to attempt contact and informed consent for potentially eligible subjects, which resulted in 30% participation rate. clinical information was obtained by chart review to derive patient demographic variables, hospitalization related to the respiratory tract infection episode, and length of stay in the hospital in days if admitted. samples were maintained by the clinical virology laboratory frozen at −80 • c, after standard virologic procedures were completed as part of their standard laboratory protocol. this study was approved by the johns hopkins university institutional review board.nasopharyngeal aspirate tests (i.e. rapid immunochromatographic testing [binax now, inverness, bedford, uk] for influenza viruses and rsv during the respiratory season, direct fluorescent antibody testing [d3 ultra dfa respiratory virus id kit, diagnostic hybrids, athens, oh] and shell vial culture identification [r-mix too, diagnostic hybrids, athens, oh] for adenovirus, influenza viruses, parainfluenza viruses and rsv, tube culture for adenovirus, influenza viruses, parainfluenza viruses, human mpv and rsv, hsv, cmv and enterovirus, and hemadsorption inhibition testing) were processed according to a standardized algorithm ( fig. 1 ) at this clinical virology laboratory for virologic identification. routine pcr testing was not performed in the clinical virology laboratory.samples were processed for total nucleic acid extraction using the thermo king-fisher (waltham, ma) robot according to an ambion (abi, foster city, ca) magmax viral kit extraction protocol.all pcr wells are amplified under a one-step rt-pcr cycle protocol. this protocol was developed to support both rt-pcr and conventional pcr equally for primer pairs used. rt-pcr was performed in a 50 l reaction mix consisting of 4 u of amplitaq gold (applied biosystems, foster city, ca); 20 mm tris, ph 8.3; 75 mm kcl; 1.5 mm mgcl 2 ; 0.4 m betaine; 800 mm mix of datp, dgtp, dctp, and dttp (bioline usa, inc., randolph, ma); 10 mm dithiothreitol; 100 ng sonicated polya dna (sigma corp., st. louis, mo); 40 ng random hexamers (invitrogen corp., carlsbad, ca); 1.2 u superasin (ambion corp., austin, tx); 400 ng t4-gene-32 protein (roche diagnostics corp., indianapolis, in); 2 u superscript iii (invitrogen corp., carlsbad, ca); 20 mm sorbitol (sigma corp.); and 250 nm of each primer. the following rt-pcr cycling conditions were used: 60 • c for 5 min, 4 • c for 10 min, 55 • c for 45 min, 95 • c for 10 min, followed by 8 cycles of 95 • c for 30 s, 48 • c for 30 s, and 72 • c for 30 s, with the 48 • c annealing temperature increasing 0.9 • c each cycle for reverse transcription. the pcr was then continued for 37 additional cycles of 95 • c for 15 s, 56 • c for 20 s, and 72 • c for 20 s. the rt-pcr cycle ended with a final extension of 2 min at 72 • c followed by a 4 • c hold.the assay was performed using the ibis t5000 respiratory virus surveillance ii kit (ibis biosciences, inc., carlsbad, ca), which is designed to detect and subtype viruses from seven groups of "conventional viruses" (respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), influenza a and b, parainfluenza types 1-4, adenoviridae types a-f) and viruses that are not identifiable conventionally (coronaviridae, human bocavirus, and human metapneumovirus).rt-pcr products were analysed using the ibis t5000 universal biosensor platform (ibis biosciences, inc., carlsbad, ca), which performs automated post-pcr desalting, esi-ms signal acquisition, spectral analysis, and data reporting as described previously . briefly, steps were as follows: each pcr was desalted and purified using a weak anion exchange protocol as described elsewhere (jiang and hofstadler, 2003) . accurate mass (61 ppm), high-resolution (m/dm 100,000 fwhm) mass spectra were acquired for each sample using high-throughput esi-ms protocols (sampath et al., 2007) . for each sample, approximately 1.5 l of analyte solution was consumed during the 74-s spectral acquisition. raw mass spectra were post-calibrated with an internal mass standard and deconvolved to monoisotopic molecular masses. unambiguous base compositions were derived from the exact mass measurements of the complementary single-stranded oligonucleotides. the detailed information of the software used to interrogate amplicon mass and viruses identification was described elsewhere . a calibrant consists of a specially designed nucleic acid sequence that similar to but distinguishable from any potential sequence were amplified in each well as the internal positive control. a negative control was implemented in each batch of processing with sterile viral transport media.the clinical virology laboratory at this institution does not perform pcr tests routinely for all respiratory viruses. accordingly, those samples for which clinical virology laboratory and rt-pcr/esi-ms did not agree, and for which sufficient volume (200 l) was available, were sent to viracor (lee's summit, mo) for identification by another pcr-based platform (luminex respiratory assay, austin, tx) designed to detect all of viruses that the rt-pcr/esi-ms could detect, except human bocavirus (pabbaraju et al., 2008) .sample throughput determination with rt-pcr/esi-ms included using one king/fisher extraction robot, one janus automated dispensing robot, four eppendorf thermocyclers simultaneously, and one t5000 clean-up and injection automation system.for the primary analysis evaluating performance of rt-pcr/esi-ms, conventional virology laboratory results were used as the reference standard. fig. 2 describes the number of subjects, each of which had one nasopharyngeal aspirate sample evaluated. also included in the figure is the number of 'evaluable results' operationally defined here for purposes of primary and secondary performance evaluation as the number of individual evaluable results which could be compared to one another, since each nasopharyngeal aspirate sample could yield test results (by culture or rt-pcr/ms-esi) of 'negative', single positive, or multiple viral detections. in the secondary analysis, clinical virology laboratory results and the secondary (i.e. luminex) pcr-based results were combined as the reference test. samples containing viruses for which the clinical virology laboratory had no protocol available (i.e. bocavirus and coronavirus detection) were excluded from the primary analysis but included in the secondary analysis if the viral agent could be detected by the other (luminex) rt-pcr-based method (i.e. all viruses except bocavirus). confidence intervals for sensitivity, and specificity were based on exact binomial probabilities. subgroup analysis was performed to detect any difference of performance among paediatric and adult patients.during december 1, 2007 and june 30, 2008, 650 patients were eligible and 192 (29.5%) were recruited. among those consented patients, most were younger than 18 years of age (n = 147, 76%), male (n = 95, 52%), african american (n = 95, 52%), and hospitalized (n = 116, 63%) (supplementary table 1 ). the most common reason for patients not participating in this study was inability to reach the subjects (e.g. wrong telephone numbers in registry, inability to connect the telephone call). the median storage time of nasopharyngeal aspirates was 7 months (range 5.5-11). (table 1a) 194 evaluable results for secondary analysis (table 1b) 6 subjects had multiple viruses detected (table 2) 6 coronavirus detections with sufficient volume sent to 2 nd rt-pcr fig. 2 . flow diagram of recruitment and performance analysis process. bocavirus that were not detectable in both clinical virology laboratory and secondary rt-pcr based platform were excluded (2 subjects with bocavirus only detection and 2 bocavirus detection). after excluding bocavirus and coronavirus detections that clinical virology laboratory had no protocol to detect, 188 were included in the primary performance analysis as in table 3 . six coronavirus and 31 samples for which clinical virology laboratory and rt-pcr/esi-ms did not agree with sufficient volume left were sent to secondary rt-pcr based assay for secondary analysis.of the 192 patients, there were 188 evaluable results for the primary analysis. among 46 positive detections tested by the clinical virology laboratory, most were found by shell vial culture (n = 21, 46%), followed by immunochromatographic tests (n = 10, 22%), which detected 8 of 28 influenza viruses (28.6%) and 2 of 11 rsv (18.2%) isolated by viral culture. as described above, 4 bocaviruses were excluded (2 specimens with bocavirus only, and 2 bocavirus detections from samples, which had multiple detections), as well as 7 coronavirus only samples in primary analysis. after exclusions, the overall agreement between rt-pcr/esi-ms with conventional virology was 82.4% (95% c.i.: 76.2-87.6%). sensitivity and specificity were 89.1% and 80.3% (95% c.i.: 76.4-96.4, 72.7-86.5%, respectively (table 1a) ). (table 3) .total evaluable results were 194 (fig. 2) . there were 33 evaluable results from the primary analysis where findings from the rt-pcr/esi-ms disagreed with the clinical virology; 31 of these had sufficient volume, and together with 6 coronavirus positive specimens from rt-pcr/esi-ms (no protocol by clinical virology laboratory) were sent for evaluation by the secondary pcr-based method (luminex, total 37 samples). twenty-one of 37 (57%) rt-pcr/esi-ms results were confirmed by luminex, including 17 conventional viruses detections (10 influenza a, 6 rsv, 1 adenovirus) and 4 coronavirus detections (not detectable by conventional clinical virology). the overall agreement, sensitivity and specificity, after secondary analysis of available samples were 89.7% (95% c.i.: 84.5-93.6%), 92.4% (95% c.i.: 83.2-97.5%) and 89.0% (95% c.i.: 82.2-93.8%), respectively (table 1b) . the results for individual pathogens shown in table 2b . accuracy of rt-pcr/esi-ms did not differ significantly between adult and paediatric patients.time to first result from sample preparation to detection of rt-pcr/esi-ms was 8 h:1 h of dna/rna extraction, 4 h of rt-pcr, and 3 h of processing in esi-ms. estimated throughput of rt-pcr/esi-ms was 300 samples with 2 technicians working 8 h.this hospital-based pilot study was designed to describe the preliminary performance of a novel rt-pcr/esi-ms platform versus the current diagnostic algorithm used in the clinical virology laboratory in clinical specimens. the findings demonstrate that the assay has high throughput and was able to detect simultaneously and type multiple clinically relevant respiratory pathogens in nasopharyngeal aspirates from patients with suspected viral infections with 82.4% accuracy, compared to conventional clinical virology laboratory testing. this study also shows that pathogens not detectable by conventional clinical virology methods could be detected successfully by the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform.advantages of the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform over conventional testing include rapid turnaround, capacity to detect multiple respiratory pathogens simultaneously with high throughput, and provision of more detailed pathogen characterization (i.e. semiquantitation, typing, and subtyping of species). the commonly used diagnostic methods in less well-equipped clinical virology laboratories are culture-based, which may take days to yield results, are labour-intensive and costly (anzueto and niederman, 2003) . although some rapid antigen tests offer faster detection times for individual pathogen, clinical utility is limited, as the pathogenic agent is usually not known a priori, and these tests have sub-optimal sensitivity and specificity (ginocchio, 2007) . as demonstrated in this study that the rapid antigen tests detected only small proportions of influenza and rsv in clinical specimens, the sub-optimal sensitivity restricts the wider utilization of these rapid tests in clinical settings. compared to diagnostic algorithms used commonly in hospitals (fig. 1) , the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform provides a more straightforward approach for identification of clinically relevant respiratory viruses and may serve as a diagnostic adjunct ultimately.data demonstrating capacity of rt-pcr/esi-ms platform to type and subtype, while not shown here, comes from a pilot (gaydos, 2010) . viral load quantitation capacity of the assay, not detailed here, was being performed in a separate pilot study from this group demonstrating that readouts of viral genome copy/well by rt-pcr/esi-ms correlate positively with the type of detection method employed by clinical virology (chen et al., 2008) . methods for evaluating the performance of novel assays, which are potentially more "accurate" than the current reference tests, remain controversial. some researchers employ other similar assays (i.e. secondary pcr based assay) to confirm findings from the novel assays discordant with conventional culture or rapid antigen test (liolios et al., 2001; pabbaraju et al., 2008) , while others propose using adjunctive clinical data as reference (doring et al., 2008) . although this retrospective study design did not permit detailed clinical data collection for reference, the secondary analysis was performed using a secondary pcr assay. however, the secondary pcr assay itself is still not perfect in diagnosing every type of respiratory virus in clinical samples. as a result, two of four adenovirus detections, for which the luminex assay had poor sensitivity to detect (pabbaraju et al., 2008) , were not able to be confirmed in this study and may have underestimated the performance of rt-pcr/esi-ms platform for adenoviruses.in the subgroup analysis, differences were not found in the performance characteristics of the platform among different clinical subgroups of the study population as hypothesized, which could be due to small sample size of this pilot. however, specimens from the clinical virology laboratory negative groups were found to contain significantly lower viral load in the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform compared to the positive group (data not presented), which could be explained by the better sensitivity of the nucleic acid amplification tests (mahony, 2008) . further studies to confirm performance among patients with different demographic characteristics, are merited.the current study has several important limitations. although the optimal design to determine whether the candidate assay performs potentially better than the "gold standard" is to have a third confirmatory test done for every sample, the limited volume of the excess nasopharyngeal aspirate samples, precluded this type of detailed evaluation. accordingly, readers should be cautioned to interpret results of the secondary analysis carefully, since they could be overestimating performance of the assay (hadgu et al., 2005) . because of the same reason, specimens with bocavirus detected by rt-pcr/esi-ms could not be confirmed. another limitation is that rt-pcr/esi-ms testing on excess nasopharyngeal aspirate samples was performed several months after initial clinical samples were obtained and tested by clinical virology. although the effect of length of storage of nasopharyngeal aspirates has been shown to be minimal within 2 months (ward et al., 2004) , another study suggests nucleic acid degradation may be associated the −70 • c storage (frisbie et al., 2004) , and the impact of longer periods of storage remains unknown. furthermore, the majority of the study population was comprised of paediatric patients (<18 years of age), which limits generalizability of the findings to the adult population. future validation of the performance of the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform on adult population is necessary. lastly, this ibis t5000 respiratory virus surveillance ii kit was not designed to detect rhinovirus, one of the most prevalent respiratory viruses. however, a modified respiratory virus surveillance kit is under development to include rhinovirus, the accuracy and reliability of this type of platform merits further studies using prospective clinical respiratory specimens.in conclusion, the innovative rt-pcr/esi-ms technology could detect most viruses identified by conventional virology methods rapidly and accurately, and allowed identification of mixed pathogens in clinical specimens. detection of conventional viruses missed by the clinical virology algorithm, and unconventional viruses required additional confirmatory testing to further evaluate performance characteristics of this assay. the rt-pcr/esi-ms method is a promising diagnostic platform for rapid identification of conventional and unconventional viruses and merits further prospective evaluation.accurate and timely diagnosis of acute viral respiratory tract infections (rtis), which is important for individual patients management decisions, as well as appropriate infection control, remains challenging both for clinicians and laboratorians (mahony, 2008) . many clinical virology laboratories still rely on labour intensive or time-consuming diagnostic algorithms which incorporate antigen or culture-based methods (mahony, 2008) .molecular diagnostic assays hold great potential to impact infectious disease diagnosis and clinical management, particularly for viral infections, where conventional methods (i.e. antigen and culture based methods) do not provide timely or highly accurate results (ratcliff et al., 2007) . while many rapid nucleic acid amplification tests have been developed to identify individual virus (liolios et al., 2001) , the utility of molecular diagnostics in clinical settings may best be realized by single system diagnostic platforms that can simultaneously detect multiple pathogens (liao et al., 2009; pabbaraju et al., 2008; raymond et al., 2009; wu and tang, 2009 ).electrospray ionization mass spectrometry following broad-range reverse transcription-pcr (rt-pcr/esi-ms), one of the single system diagnostic platforms, that has the potential to not only detect rapidly but also to identify and quantify multiple pathogens simultaneously. to date, studies with rt-pcr/emi-ms have been restricted to detection of individual respiratory bacteria or viruses [i.e. streptococcus , coronavirus (sars) , adenovirus (russell et al., 2006) , and influenza viruses (sampath et al., 2007) ], or detailed characterization [e.g. resistance gene recognition , genotyping of the organism ]. the capacity of rt-pcr/emi-ms for broad range, simultaneous and multiple pathogen detection with rapid turnaround may translate into a useful tool for clinicians in health care settings to aid in early diagnosis of respiratory tract infections.this hospital-based pilot study was conducted over one season of respiratory infections to compare the performance characteristics of this rt-pcr/esi-ms platform versus conventional virologic procedures, for identification of multiple clinically relevant respiratory viruses in nasopharyngeal aspirate samples collected from emergency department patients presenting with acute respiratory illnesses.patients visiting the adult or paediatric emergency departments at a tertiary care inner-city hospital, between december 1, 2007 and may 31, 2008 were assessed for eligibility. all eligible patients, operationally defined as any patients with a suspected acute upper respiratory tract infection, in whom the emergency physicians ordered nasopharyngeal aspirate testing, were approached consecutively and recruited. eligible patients were identified by dedicated study coordinators by the daily review of nasopharyngeal aspirate testing order lists from the emergency department, and sought informed consent (in person, for those who were still in the hospital, or by telephone, from those who were already discharged either from the emergency department or the inpatient setting). there were at least three separate attempts in different periods of different days to attempt contact and informed consent for potentially eligible subjects, which resulted in 30% participation rate. clinical information was obtained by chart review to derive patient demographic variables, hospitalization related to the respiratory tract infection episode, and length of stay in the hospital in days if admitted. samples were maintained by the clinical virology laboratory frozen at -80°c, after standard virological procedures were completed as part of their standard laboratory protocol. the study was approved by the johns hopkins university institutional review board.nasopharyngeal aspirate tests (i.e. rapid immunochromatographic testing [binax now, inverness, bedford, uk] for influenza viruses and rsv during the respiratory season, direct fluorescent antibody testing [d3 ultra dfa respiratory virus id kit, diagnostic hybrids, athens, oh] and shell vial culture identification [r-mix too, diagnostic hybrids, athens, oh] for adenovirus, influenza viruses, parainfluenza viruses and rsv, tube culture for adenovirus, influenza viruses, parainfluenza viruses, human mpv and rsv, hsv, cmv and enterovirus, and hemadsorption inhibition testing) were processed according to a standardized algorithm ( figure 1 ) at this clinical virology laboratory for virologic identification. routine pcr testing was not performed in the clinical virology laboratory.samples were processed for total nucleic acid extraction using the thermo king-fisher (waltham, ma) robot according to an ambion (abi, foster city, ca) magmax viral kit extraction protocol.all pcr reaction wells are amplified under a one-step rt-pcr cycle protocol. this protocol was developed to support both rt-pcr and conventional pcr equally for primer pairs used. rt-pcr was performed in a 50ul reaction mix consisting of 4u of amplitaq gold (applied biosystems, foster city, ca); 20mm tris, ph 8.3; 75mm kcl; 1.5mm mgcl2; 0.4m betaine; 800mm mix of datp, dgtp, dctp, and dttp (bioline usa inc., randolph, ma); 10mm dithiothreitol; 100ng sonicated polya dna (sigma corp., st louis, mo); 40ng random hexamers (invitrogen corp. carlsbad ca); 1.2u superasin (ambion corp, austin, tx); 400ng t4-gene-32 protein (roche diagnostics corp., indianapolis, in); 2u superscript iii (invitrogen corp, carlsbad ca.); 20mm sorbitol (sigma corp.); and 250nm of each primer. the following rt-pcr cycling conditions were used: 60°c for 5min, 4°c for 10 min, 55°c for 45min, 95°c for 10min, followed by 8 cycles of 95°c for 30seconds, 48°c for 30seconds, and 72°c for 30seconds, with the 48°c annealing temperature increasing 0.9°c each cycle for reverse transcription. the pcr was then continued for 37 additional cycles of 95°c for 15seconds, 56°c for 20seconds, and 72°c for 20seconds. the rt-pcr cycle ended with a final extension of 2min at 72°c followed by a 4°c hold.the assay was performed using the ibis t5000 respiratory virus surveillance ii kit (ibis biosciences, inc., carlsbad, ca), which is designed to detect and subtype viruses from seven groups of "conventional viruses" (respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), influenza a and b, parainfluenza types 1-4, adenoviridae types a-f) and viruses that are not identifiable conventionally (coronaviridae, human bocavirus, and human metapneumovirus).rt-pcr products were analysed using the ibis t5000 universal biosensor platform (ibis biosciences, inc., carlsbad, ca), which performs automated post-pcr desalting, esi-ms signal acquisition, spectral analysis, and data reporting as described previously . briefly, steps were as follows: each pcr reaction was desalted and purified using a weak anion exchange protocol as described elsewhere (jiang and hofstadler, 2003) . accurate mass (61ppm), high-resolution (m/dm.100,000 fwhm) mass spectra were acquired for each sample using high-throughput esi-ms protocols (sampath et al., 2007) . for each sample, approximately 1.5ul of analyte solution was consumed during the 74second spectral acquisition. raw mass spectra were post-calibrated with an internal mass standard and deconvolved to monoisotopic molecular masses. unambiguous base compositions were derived from the exact mass measurements of the complementary singlestranded oligonucleotides. the detailed information of the software used to interrogate amplicon mass and viruses identification was described elsewhere . a calibrant consists of a specially designed nucleic acid sequence that similar to but distinguishable from any potential sequence were amplified in each well as the internal positive control. a negative control was implemented in each batch of processing with sterile viral transport media.the clinical virology laboratory at this institution does not perform pcr tests routinely for all respiratory viruses. accordingly, those samples for which clinical virology laboratory and rt-pcr/esi-ms did not agree, and for which sufficient volume (200ul) was available, were sent to viracor (lee's summit, mo) for identification by another pcr-based platform (luminex respiratory assay, austin, tx) designed to detect all of viruses that the rt-pcr/ esi-ms could detect, except human bocavirus (pabbaraju et al., 2008) .sample throughput determination with rt-pcr/esi-ms included using one king/fisher extraction robot, one janus automated dispensing robot, four eppendorf thermocyclers simultaneously, and one t5000 clean-up and injection automation system.for the primary analysis evaluating performance of rt-pcr/esi-ms, conventional virology laboratory results were used as the reference standard. figure 2 describes the number of subjects, each of which had one nasopharyngeal aspirate sample evaluated. also included in the figure is the number of 'evaluable results' operationally defined here for purposes of primary and secondary performance evaluation as the number of individual evaluable results which could be compared to one another, since each nasopharyngeal aspirate sample could yield test results (by culture or rt-pcr/ms-esi) of 'negative', single positive, or multiple viral detections. in the secondary analysis, clinical virology laboratory results and the secondary (i.e. luminex) pcr-based results were combined as the reference test. samples containing viruses for which the clinical virology laboratory had no protocol available (i.e. bocavirus and coronavirus detection) were excluded from the primary analysis but included in the secondary analysis if the viral agent could be detected by the other (luminex) rt-pcr-based method (i.e. all viruses except bocavirus). confidence intervals for sensitivity, and specificity were based on exact binomial probabilities. subgroup analysis was performed to detect any difference of performance among paediatric and adult patients.during december 1, 2007 and june 30, 2008, 650 patients were eligible and 192 (29.5%) were recruited. among those consented patients, most were younger than 18 years of age (n=147, 76%), male (n=95, 52%), african american (n=95, 52%), and hospitalized (n=116, 63%) (s- table 1 ). the most common reason for patients not participating in this study was inability to reach the subjects (e.g. wrong telephone numbers in registry, inability to connect the telephone call). the median storage time of nasopharyngeal aspirates was 7 months (range 5.5-11).of the 192 patients, there were 188 evaluable results for the primary analysis. among 46 positive detections tested by the clinical virology laboratory, most were found by shell vial culture (n=21, 46%), followed by immunochromatographic tests (n=10, 22%), which detected 8 out of 28 influenza viruses (28.6%) and 2 out of 11 rsv (18.2%) isolated by viral culture. as described above, 4 bocaviruses were excluded (2 specimens with bocavirus only, and 2 bocavirus detections from samples, which had multiple detections), as well as 7 coronavirus only samples in primary analysis. after exclusions, the overall agreement between rt-pcr/esi-ms with conventional virology was 82.4% (95% c.i.: 76.2-87.6%). sensitivity and specificity were 89.1% and 80.3% (95% c.i.: 76.4-96.4, 72.7-86.5%, respectively (table 1a) ).sensitivity of rt-pcr/esi-ms for individual pathogens was as follows: 100% parainfluenza, 92.9% influenza viruses, 81.8% rsv, and 67% adenovirus (table 2a) . rt-pcr/esi-ms successfully typed pathogens including 40 influenza a, one influenza b, four parainfluenza type 3 and one adenovirus type a, which were 100% matched to the findings of clinical virology, and six adenovirus type c adenovirus for which clinical virology laboratory had no protocol to type. rt-pcr/esi -ms detected multiple virus detections in 6 samples (table 3) .total evaluable results were 194 (figure 2 ). there were 33 evaluable results from the primary analysis where findings from the rt-pcr/esi-ms disagreed with the clinical virology; 31 of these had sufficient volume, and together with 6 coronavirus positive specimens from rt-pcr/esi-ms (no protocol by clinical virology laboratory) were sent for evaluation by the secondary pcr-based method (luminex, total 37 samples). twenty-one of 37 (57%) rt-pcr/esi-ms results were confirmed by luminex, including 17 conventional viruses detections (10 influenza a, 6 rsv, 1 adenovirus) and 4 coronavirus detections (not detectable by conventional clinical virology). the overall agreement, sensitivity and specificity, after secondary analysis of available samples were 89.7% (95% c.i.84.5-93.6%), 92.4% (95% c.i.83.2-97.5%) and 89.0% (95% c.i.82.2-93.8%), respectively (table 1b) . the results for individual pathogens shown in table 2b . accuracy of rt-pcr/esi-ms did not differ significantly between adult and paediatric patients.time to first result from sample preparation to detection of rt-pcr/esi-ms was 8 hours: 1 hour of dna/rna extraction, 4 hours of rt-pcr, and 3 hours of processing in esi-ms. estimated throughput of rt-pcr/esi-ms was 300 samples with 2 technicians working 8 hours.this hospital-based pilot study was designed to describe the preliminary performance of a novel rt-pcr/esi-ms platform versus the current diagnostic algorithm used in the clinical virology laboratory in clinical specimens. the findings demonstrate that the assay has high throughput and was able to detect simultaneously and type multiple clinically relevant respiratory pathogens in nasopharyngeal aspirates from patients with suspected viral infections with 82.4% accuracy, compared to conventional clinical virology laboratory testing. this study also shows that pathogens not detectable by conventional clinical virology methods could be detected successfully by the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform.advantages of the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform over conventional testing include rapid turnaround, capacity to detect multiple respiratory pathogens simultaneously with high throughput, and provision of more detailed pathogen characterization (i.e. semi-quantitation, typing, and subtyping of species). the commonly used diagnostic methods in less wellequipped clinical virology laboratories are culture-based, which may take days to yield results, are labour-intensive and costly (anzueto and niederman, 2003) . although some rapid antigen tests offer faster detection times for individual pathogen, clinical utility is limited, as the pathogenic agent is usually not known a priori, and these tests have suboptimal sensitivity and specificity (ginocchio, 2007) . as demonstrated in this study that the rapid antigen tests detected only small proportions of influenza and rsv in clinical specimens, the sub-optimal sensitivity restricts the wider utilization of these rapid tests in clinical settings. compared to diagnostic algorithms used commonly in hospitals (figure 1) , the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform provides a more straightforward approach for identification of clinically relevant respiratory viruses and may serve as a diagnostic adjunct ultimately.data demonstrating capacity of rt-pcr/esi-ms platform to type and subtype, while not shown here, comes from a pilot study by our group in which 26 of 29 novel h1n1 influenza a viruses detections were confirmed by additional state laboratory testing using the centers for disease control and prevention novel h1n1 influenza a pcr typing method, supporting a role for this platform for surveillance in clinical or public health settings (gaydos, 2010) . viral load quantitation capacity of the assay, not detailed here, was being performed in a separate pilot study from this group demonstrating that readouts of viral genome copy/well by rt-pcr/esi-ms correlate positively with the type of detection method employed by clinical virology (chen, 2008.) .methods for evaluating the performance of novel assays, which are potentially more "accurate" than the current reference tests, remain controversial. some researchers employ other similar assays (i.e. secondary pcr based assay) to confirm findings from the novel assays discordant with conventional culture or rapid antigen test (liolios et al., 2001; pabbaraju et al., 2008) , while others propose using adjunctive clinical data as reference (doring, unertl, and heininger, 2008) . although this retrospective study design did not permit detailed clinical data collection for reference, the secondary analysis was performed using a secondary pcr assay. however, the secondary pcr assay itself is still not perfect in diagnosing every type of respiratory virus in clinical samples. as a result, two out of four adenovirus detections, for which the luminex assay had poor sensitivity to detect (pabbaraju et al., 2008) , were not able to be confirmed in this study and may have underestimated the performance of rt-pcr/esi-ms platform for adenoviruses.in the subgroup analysis, differences were not found in the performance characteristics of the platform among different clinical subgroups of the study population as hypothesized, which could be due to small sample size of this pilot. however, specimens from the clinical virology laboratory negative groups were found to contain significantly lower viral load in the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform compared to the positive group (data not presented), which could be explained by the better sensitivity of the nucleic acid amplification tests (mahony, 2008) . further studies to confirm performance among patients with different demographic characteristics, are merited.the current study has several important limitations. although the optimal design to determine whether the candidate assay performs potentially better than the "gold standard" is to have a third confirmatory test done for every sample, the limited volume of the excess nasopharyngeal aspirate samples, precluded this type of detailed evaluation. accordingly, readers should be cautioned to interpret results of the secondary analysis carefully, since they could be overestimating performance of the assay (hadgu, dendukuri, and hilden, 2005) . because of the same reason, specimens with bocavirus detected by rt-pcr/esi-ms could not be confirmed. another limitation is that rt-pcr/esi-ms testing on excess nasopharyngeal aspirate samples was performed several months after initial clinical samples were obtained and tested by clinical virology. although the effect of length of storage of nasopharyngeal aspirates has been shown to be minimal within 2 months (ward et al., 2004) , another study suggests nucleic acid degradation may be associated the -70°c storage (frisbie et al., 2004) , and the impact of longer periods of storage remains unknown. furthermore, the majority of the study population was comprised of paediatric patients (< 18 years of age), which limits generalizability of the findings to the adult population. future validation of the performance of the rt-pcr/esi-ms platform on adult population is necessary. lastly, this ibis t5000 respiratory virus surveillance ii kit was not designed to detect rhinovirus, one of the most prevalent respiratory viruses. however, a modified respiratory virus surveillance kit is under development to include rhinovirus, the accuracy and reliability of this type of platform merits further studies using prospective clinical respiratory specimens.in conclusion, the innovative rt-pcr/esi-ms technology could detect most viruses identified by conventional virology methods rapidly and accurately, and allowed identification of mixed pathogens in clinical specimens. detection of conventional viruses missed by the clinical virology algorithm, and unconventional viruses required additional confirmatory testing to further evaluate performance characteristics of this assay. the rt-pcr/esi-ms method is a promising diagnostic platform for rapid identification of conventional and unconventional viruses and merits further prospective evaluation.refer to web version on pubmed central for supplementary material. diagnostic algorithm used in clinical virology laboratory to detect respiratory viruses mainly divided into respiratory season or non-respiratory season. respiratory season defined as october to the following january (october to november for rsv, december to january for influenza). immunochromatographic assays were used in respiratory season as the sole screening test for rsv and influenza, which will stop the testing algorithm if results are positive. respiratory panel cocktail dfa tests serve for adenovirus, influenza a and b, parainfluenza type 1-3 and rsv, which will stop the testing algorithm if results are positive in non-respiratory season or for those screened negative by immunochromatographic assays in respiratory season as well. rsv: respiratory syncytial virus, piv: parainfluenza virus, hsv: herpes simplex virus, cmv: cytomegalovirus, hmpv: human metapneumovirus, dfa: direct fluorescent antibody test, cpe: cytopathic effect, rbc: red blood cells bocavirus that were not detectable in both clinical virology laboratory and secondary rt-pcr based platform were excluded (2 subjects with bocavirus only detection and 2 bocavirus detection). after excluding bocavirus and coronavirus detections that clinical virology laboratory had no protocol to detect, 188 were included in the primary performance analysis as in table 3a. six coronavirus and 31 samples for which clinical virology laboratory and rt-pcr/esi-ms did not agree with sufficient volume left were sent to secondary rt-pcr based assay for secondary analysis. na: not available * one coronavirus isolation that detected by conventional virology reference test as adenovirus. ** excludes one coronavirus detection with insufficient volume to send to the secondary pcr methodestablishing rapid and widespread testing for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is essential to containing the pandemic and reopening society. the current gold standard test measures viral nucleic acids extracted from clinical swabs by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qrt-pcr). this assay requires trained medical personnel, specialized instrumentation, supply-limited reagents, and significant technical labor. isothermal nucleic acid amplification tests are an alternative to conventional pcr methods that do not require expensive instruments or trained personnel to perform the reaction or quantify the results. specifically, loop-mediated isothermal amplification (lamp) with simultaneous reverse-transcription (rt-lamp) allows for rapid and sensitive detection of nucleic acids within one hour in an easily interpretable colorimetric assay that requires only a heat source 1,2 .several groups around the world are currently developing lamp-based protocols for the detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), the virus causing covid-19 [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] . the sensitivity of lamp compares well to the limit-of-detection of qrt-pcr on purified rna samples, and may achieve higher sensitivity on crude clinical samples 5 . the robustness of the lamp bst polymerase to pcr inhibitors makes it especially well-suited and widely used for pathogen detection in unpurified samples 8 . this confers a major potential advantage over current testing protocols as it enables skipping the cost-, labor-, and reagent-consuming step of rna extraction.saliva is a promising sample for expanding and facilitating testing due to the ease, safety, and non-invasive nature of its collection and its relatively high viral load 9, 10 . recognizing these benefits, the fda approved a saliva collection and preservation device for downstream covid-19 testing. direct comparison of saliva to nasopharyngeal (np) swabs from the same individuals revealed that saliva samples provided more consistent and sensitive results for covid-19 detection 11 . these saliva-based methods, however, still employ rna extraction followed by qrt-pcr.here, we sought to establish and optimize a simple lamp-based assay for the qualitative detection of sars-cov-2 virus directly from saliva without an rna extraction step.to develop our assay, we first compared the performance of five sets of recently developed lamp primer sets targeting different regions of the sars-cov-2 genome 3-6 . we used a commercially available neb colorimetric enzyme mix to perform lamp reactions on quantitative in vitro transcribed rna standards corresponding to regions targeted by lamp primers 12 . of these, the neb gene n-a 3 and lamb et al. 4 primers targeting the nucleocapsid (gene n) and orf1ab regions respectively had the highest sensitivity and lowest rates of false positives in the water-only control (supplementary figure 1) . demonstrating specificity to sars-cov-2, these primers had no crossreactivity with mers coronavirus controls. these primer sets were prioritized for further testing.next, we validated these primer sets on both rna standards and heat-inactivated viral particles spiked into water or human saliva to simulate clinical samples ( figure 1a ). across both sets of lamp primers, and for both rna and particles, saliva strongly inhibited lamp detection of sars-cov-2 compared to water (fig. 1b) . particles were weakly and inconsistently detected in saliva whereas their detection in water was on par with detection of rna (fig. 1c) . this suggests the presence of an inhibitor in saliva rather than an inaccessibility of particle-associated rna. we observed time sensitivity of the colorimetric assay especially from saliva, with many samples tinting yellow after prolonged incubation in the lamp reaction (longer than 40 minutes). we found that a 30-minute incubation provided a more reliable readout. values indicate number of viral genome equivalents per reaction. purple-framed boxes indicate 30-minute reactions. black-framed boxes indicate 1-hour reactions. b) quantification and comparison of approximate limits of detection (viral genome equivalents per reaction) were compared by rna type, water or saliva, and primer sets. limit of detection was recorded as the lowest value with a clear colorimetric change from magenta to yellow. inconclusive or undetected values were recorded as not detected. quantification and comparison of approximate limits of detection (viral genome equivalents per reaction) were compared by rna type, water or saliva, and primer sets. p-values indicate one-sided t-tests (saliva greater than water). inconclusive or non-detected values were excluded.to neutralize or otherwise reduce inhibitors in human saliva, we tested several approaches that have been demonstrated to improve viral rna detection in crude samples including saliva [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] . we tested simple dilution of particle-containing saliva into water, and various heat and chemical treatments. first, we found that dilution of saliva into water enabled sensitive detection of sars-cov-2 particles using lamp (figure 2a , top). a heat treatment of 55˚c for 15 minutes followed by 98˚c for 5 minutes further improved lamp sensitivity ( fig. 2a, middle) . identical heating steps plus the addition of proteinase k increased lamp sensitivity relative to dilution alone ( fig. 2a, bottom) but not markedly more than heat treatment. importantly, we found that the combined heating steps above or proteinase k treatment improved sars-cov-2 particle detection in undiluted human saliva samples (fig. 2b) and conferred a consistent limit of detection on the order of 10 2 particles per reaction. we experimented with additional heat and chemical pretreatments including the hudson protocol (heating unextracted diagnostic samples to obliterate nucleases) 14 and various detergents, but all of these conditions decreased assay sensitivity or interfered with colorimetry (supplementary figure 2a -c). we also varied the amount of crude sample input to the lamp reaction. we found that adding up to 8 µl of direct saliva was compatible with the assay but increased volume did not improve sensitivity (supp. fig. 2d ). figure 2 : dilution, heat, and proteinase k treatments improve sars-cov-2 detection from saliva. a) dilution of particle-containing saliva into water improved lamp detection by at least two orders of magnitude from undetectable to ~10 3 particles per reaction. heat treatment and heat treatment plus proteinase k further increased lamp sensitivity to ~10 2 viral genome equivalents per reaction (p < 0.1, one-sided t-tests compared to dilution alone). *replicate 3 used lamb et al. primers but gave nearly identical results to neb gene n-a primers. b) heat treatment or heat treatment plus proteinase k treatments increased lamp sensitivity from undetectable to ~10 2 viral genome equivalents in undiluted saliva. all reactions are purple-framed to indicate 30-minute reactions. w = water, s = saliva.to further improve the accuracy of our assay, we sought to multiplex lamp primer sets in a single reaction. combining primers can potentially increase sensitivity through additive signals of simultaneous amplification reactions 18, 19 . including multiple primer sets will also confer diagnostic robustness against mutations that arise in the sars-cov-2 genome 20 . non-specific primer interactions, however, could result in potential false positives. we compared pairwise combinations of neb gene n-a primers with the other four primer sets targeting various regions across the sars-cov-2 genome. encouragingly, all pairs of primer sets outperformed the neb gene n-a primer set alone, with no apparent increase in spurious background amplification (supplementary figure  3) .we next tested whether multiplexing primer sets could improve signal detection in untreated and heat and chemical treated particle-containing saliva ( figure 3a ). as before, we found that heat treatment (55˚ for 15 minutes, 98˚ for 3 minutes) alone gave a marked improvement in sars-cov-2 particle detection from saliva (fig. 3b , p < 1e-5, two-sided t-test). this effect was consistent across all primer sets. the same heat treatment plus proteinase k further improved assay sensitivity compared to heat alone (p < 0.003, two-sided t-test). multiplexed primer sets slightly improved the sensitivity of the assay, pushing the limit of detection to the order of ~10 1 particles per reaction. at this sensitivity, the multiplexed lamp assay would detect the vast majority of covid positive samples based on reported saliva viral loads (median ~10 2 -10 3 per ul) 10, 11 . as viral loads peak around day zero of symptom onset, lamp would have the most accuracy at this critical timepoint 21 .to benchmark the performance of our extraction-free protocol on qrt-pcr, we performed qrt-pcr using the cdc gene n1 probe set directly on untreated and treated simulated saliva samples. we found that qrt-pcr had similar sensitivity to lamp on crude samples, reliably detecting sars-cov-2 in all samples down to 10 1 particles per reaction (fig. 3c ). 10 0 particles were not reliably detected in this assay. we observed strong improvements in cycle thresholds (ct) using either heat alone or heat plus proteinase k (p < 1e-3, two-tailed paired t-tests). these results provide further evidence that saliva pretreatment can significantly increase the sensitivity of viral rna detection.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. . heat treatment improves lod (p = 6e-6, t-test, two-tailed vs 'untreated'). proteinase k treatment further improves heat treatment (p = 0.002, ttest, two-tailed vs 'heat'). multiplexed primers may slightly improve limit of detection to ~ 10 1 particles / reaction. c) qrt-pcr on crude lysate (neb gene n-a reactions) showed similar increase in sensitivity with either heat or proteinase k treatment (p < 1e-3 for either treatment, 2-tailed paired t-test). proteinase k did not further improve qrt-pcr sensitivity. n = neb gene n-a.we obtained saliva samples collected at day zero of hospital admission from six presumptive covid-19 positive individuals. one sample was excluded because its viscosity prevented pipetting. the other five were aliquoted into 3 tubes for either no treatment, heat inactivation (55˚ for 15 minutes, 98˚ for 3 minutes), or the same heat treatment plus proteinase k. following pretreatment, the rt-lamp reaction was performed with the neb gene n-a primers. photographs were taken at 10, 20 and 30 minutes to track colorimetric shifts over time ( figure 4a ). an aliquot of 10 4 viral particles in saliva was used as a positive control. after 30 minutes, 4 of the five samples were clearly positive in the heat plus proteinase k treated samples (fig. 4a, bottom right) . positive and negative controls were positive and negative in all reactions at the 30minute timepoint, allowing an interpretable readout of the assay. untreated samples showed positivity for samples 3-5, and heat-alone indicated clear positivity for samples 2-4. these differences may reflect altered ratios of free viral rna to particle-associated . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. . rna in these samples, which could be differentially affected by our heat treatment. proteinase k treatment both protects free rna by inactivating nucleases, and releases particle-bound rna. incorporating quantitative colorimetric decomposition and analysis will enhance sensitivity and interpretability of borderline samples in future experiments 22 .we did not have corresponding gold-standard qrt-pcr results from these samples. instead, we performed qrt-pcr with the cdc n1 probe directly on the untreated and treated samples, along with our positive and negative controls. qrt-pcr results were qualitatively concordant with the rt-lamp results, identifying 4 clear positives (samples 2-5, ct < 40, fig. 4b ). sample #1 tested negative in all lamp treatments and qrt-pcr, and an attempt to purify rna from this saliva sample was unsuccessful. this may indicate rna degradation prior to lamp and qrt-pcr. further work is needed to establish best practices for upstream handling of saliva specimens. toward this end, we have shown that the lamp reaction is compatible with samples in te buffer (10 mm tris, 0.1 mm edta), diluted hudson buffer (2.5 mm tcep, 0.5 mm edta), and rnasecure (supplementary figure 4a) .as with lamp, our pre-treatment regimens significantly improved nucleic acid detection by qrt-pcr (fig. 4c ). heat treatment (55˚ for 15 minutes, 98˚ for 3 minutes) with and without proteinase k outperformed untreated samples (p < 0.01 and p < 0.001 respectively). proteinase k did not further significantly improve sensitivity compared to heat alone. extrapolation of viral loads in clinical saliva samples by comparing to our quantitative positive control yielded estimates of 1.4 x 10 1 -9.8 x 10 2 particles per µl and demonstrates the sensitivity of our assay on real clinical samples. further validation and optimization on additional positive and negative saliva specimens are necessary for clinical assay deployment.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. . to enable significant scale-up of testing capacity using the lamp assay on human saliva, we adapted our protocol to a 96-well plate format. spectrophotometric plate scanning before and after the assay provided an unbiased, quantitative interpretation. initial plate scanning was implemented to normalize for baseline differences induced by variation in ph across human saliva samples. heat treatment (55˚ for 15 minutes, 98˚ for 3 minutes) with and without proteinase k enabled sensitive detection of viral particles in human saliva samples down to 10 2 particles per reaction, with some detection at 10 1 and even 10 0 particles per reaction ( figure 5a ). this assay was quantitative over at least four orders of magnitude. quantification of the limit-of-detection and assay validation on clinical specimens are ongoing.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. .a) rt-lamp assay was adapted to a high-throughput 96-well plate format with a quantitative absorbance readout, achieving a limit of detection < 10 2 particles per reaction from saliva samples. absorbance for 430 nm (yellow) and 560 nm (red) wavelengths was measured before and after the lamp reaction and normalized to negative controls. heat = 55˚ for 15 minutes, 98˚ for 3 minutes, with or without proteinase k (prok). two biological replicates were each run in triplicate.isothermal lamp is well-suited to point-of-care testing because it requires only a heatsource. we sought to avoid the 98 ˚c heating step to make the saliva pre-treatment compatible with a single isothermal heat source. whereas a mild heat treatment consisting of 50 ˚c for 5 minutes and 64˚ for 5 minutes did not enable sensitive detection of sars-cov-2 in undiluted saliva (sup. figure 2b) , a 64˚ c treatment for 15 minutes of saliva that had been diluted 1:1 in either te (10 mm tris, 0.1 mm edta) or dilute hudson buffer (2.5 mm tcep, 0.5 mm edta) improved detection (sup. fig. 4b ). addition of rnasecure, a non-enzymatic ribonuclease inhibitor that does not require heat-inactivation, boosted assay sensitivity to 10 2 viral particles per reaction (sup. fig  4b) . sars-cov-2 in samples treated with a thermolabile version of proteinase k (inactivated by incubation at 65˚ for 10 minutes) was not detected in a sensitive fashion (sup. fig 4c) . finally, we found that guanidine hydrochloride (40 mm) was compatible with the lamp reaction and that both rnasecure and primer multiplexing provided further enhancements to sensitivity (sup. 4d). these pretreatment methods will enable the use of saliva in lamp reactions using a single heat step, simplifying point-of-care testing.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.07.20093542 doi: medrxiv preprintour proposed approach combines three promising avenues to enable rapid and widespread covid-19 detection: 1) colorimetric rt-lamp, 2) self-collected saliva specimens, and 3) compatibility with crude saliva samples without rna-extraction. this approach solves two major bottlenecks in massively scaling up covid-19 nucleic acid testing: sample acquisition and rna extraction, and it enables test results in less than an hour. viral shedding likely begins several days prior to onset of any symptoms and viral load peaks during this period 21 . colorimetric rt-lamp directly on saliva would enable rapid and frequent testing of pre-or asymptomatic carriers, enabling their isolation prior to unwitting viral transmission. such testing is critical to curtailing the ongoing pandemic.due to its ease of use, rapid amplification of nucleic acids, high specificity arising from the use of six primers, and high tolerance of reaction inhibitors 8 , rt-lamp has been widely used for pathogen detection. sensitive diagnostic assays have been developed for viruses including zika 19,23 and such assays are being developed for sars-cov-2 by several groups including ours [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] 18, [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] . speed, cost, turnaround time, and a simple colorimetric readout make rt-lamp an effective solution to ramping up testing. further, because it does not require specialized equipment or training for performing or interpreting the assay, rt-lamp is especially well-suited for point-of-care detection.sample acquisition is currently limited by the reliance on np swabs, which need to be carefully performed by a trained health-care worker and require the use of ppe. midnasal swabs are a promising alternative to np swabs because they can be selfadministered, and contain high viral loads [29] [30] [31] . however, due to potential swab shortages, we instead focused on expectorated saliva due to its ease of collection and high viral load 11 . our work adds to the growing body of evidence that saliva will facilitate the adoption of widespread testing.several groups are optimizing workarounds to avoid the rna extraction step for pcr based sars-cov-2 testing while maintaining sensitivity 13, 15, 17, 29 . here, we have demonstrated a variety of saliva pre-treatment protocols that enable sensitive detection of sars-cov-2 by both rt-lamp and qrt-pcr. rna in saliva likely comprises a mixture of free and particle-associated rna. capsid release of rna and nuclease inactivation by heat or chemicals may damage free viral rna, so a careful balance must be achieved to maximize sensitivity. despite requiring brief inactivation at 98˚c, proteinase k treatment to release viral rna and inactivate ribonucleases and other inhibitors in saliva worked well to increase sensitivity in both rt-lamp and qrt-pcr. alternatively, te buffer, guanidine, hudson buffer, and rnasecure allowed us to perform a heat step isothermal with the lamp reaction conditions while maintaining high assay sensitivity. this version of the protocol is compatible with point-of-care testing. our proof-ofconcept validation on actual clinical samples suggests high sensitivity of the current assay to detect sars-cov-2 directly from treated saliva. further optimizations may improve assay sensitivity and robustness.daily screening of employees, especially health-care workers, is feasible with this approach due to its rapid turnaround, low complexity, and low cost. as viral loads are correlated with transmission, only weakly infectious carriers risk false negative results which is also true for the current gold standard. colorimetric rt-lamp on saliva has broad potential to increase covid-19 screening speed and capacity, as demonstrated by our adaptation of this assay to a plate-based format. similar approaches by others have now been validated on clinical samples, deployed for disease surveillance, and adapted for home testing and point-of-care use 27, 28 .in summary, we have optimized rt-lamp reaction conditions to enable sensitive sars-cov-2 detection from unpurified saliva samples. this optimization overcomes the burden of rna extraction reagent, need for sophisticated instrumentation, and the time and labor bottlenecks of the current gold standard nucleic acid-based tests. our assay can be deployed as a point-of-care test or in a centralized laboratory facility. while nonexhaustive, our current optimizations have enabled reliable detection below ~10 2 viral genomes per reaction from simulated saliva samples. using these conditions, we observed high performance of this assay on a limited number of clinical saliva specimens without rna extraction.all lamp reactions were performed following new england biolab's recommended protocol using warmstart colorimetric lamp 2x master mix (neb, massachusetts usa, m1800l). 20 µl reactions with 10 µl lamp master mix, 2 µl of 10x primer mix (2 µm f3 and b3, 16 µm forward inner primer (fip) and backward inner primer (bip), and 4 µm of loop forward (lf) and loop backward (lb) primers (25 or 100 nmol scale idt), 5 µl nuclease-free water, and 3 µl samples. lamp reactions were incubated at 65˚c using biorad dna engine thermocyclers for 30-60 minutes. photographs were taken with cell phone cameras on samples laid on white sheets of paper.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. . in vitro transcribed rna standards were prepared as described 12 . https://www.protocols.io/view/generation-of-sars-cov-2-rna-transcript-standards-bdv6i69e in brief, gblocks (idt) corresponding to sars-cov-2 regions targeted by lamp primer sets were pcr amplified and in vitro transcribed using megashortscript t7 transcription kit (thermofisher). rna products were column-purified using the monarch rna cleanup kit (neb) and quantified using qubit.heat inactivated sars-cov-2 particles were acquired from cdc through bei resources. particle stock concentrations were 1.16 x 10 6 particles per µl. 10 µl particles were resuspended in 90 µl water or saliva to make 10 5 particles/ µl stock. alternatively, 10 µl particles were added into 990 µl saliva to make 10 4 particles/ µl stocks which were individually aliquoted to reduce freeze-thaw.dna plasmid coronavirus controls corresponding to sars-cov-2 and mers were obtained from idt as plasmid dna solutions. ncov-n control: severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 isolate wuhan-hu-1, complete genome (genbank: nc_045512.2). mers control: middle east respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus isolate knih/002_05_2015, complete genome (genbank: mk796425.1)hudson (heating unextracted diagnostic samples to obliterate nucleases) 14 was performed as described using tcep (100 mm) and edta (1 mm) final concentrations. a mild heat treatment consisting of 50 ˚c for 5 minutes and 64˚ for 5 minutes was employed. neutral ph tcep was also investigated, but still caused an instant colorimetric shift in lamp reactions. while diluted tcep/edta was compatible with lamp, its ability to inactivate nucleases or lyse viral particles remains to be validated.proteinase k from neb (#p8107s) was added to saliva at 1/10 volume (5 µl in 50 µl saliva). 1:1 and 1:10 dilutions of proteinase k into water or te were also used. all concentrations were effective so 1:10 dilutions were used in ongoing experiments. we performed heat inactivation of proteinase k for 5 minutes at 98˚c. we also tested thermolabile proteinase k from neb (p8111s). samples were incubated at 37 ˚c for 10 minutes followed by proteinase k inactivation at 65 ˚c for 10 minutes.rnasecure (25x, thermofisher, am7006) was added to some reactions at 1x.during our optimizations, we observed that low levels of te buffer were effective in preventing negative control samples from tinting yellow over prolonged lamp . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. . reactions. a pulse spin in a microfuge improved the reliability of viral detection across various batches of saliva.qrt-pcr reactions were performed according to cdc eua guidelines using taqpath 1-step rt-qpcr master mix gc (thermo a15300) and the ncov-n1 probe form the 2019-ncov ruo kit (idt). reactions were performed on quantstudio 3 and 6 real-time pcr systems (thermofisher). when using crude lysate as input, 3 µl was used as input to match the lamp protocol.assay scale-up was performed in a 96-well plate format (biorad 96 well skirted pcr plate) with only minor modifications to the lamp reaction. 4 µl of saliva samples were used in 25 µl total volume reactions. heat treatment (55˚ for 15 minutes, 98˚ for 3 minutes) and proteinase k treatment were identical to single tube format. rnasin (promega) was included in these samples. samples were run in technical triplicate at each dilution.utilizing a biotek epoch microplate spectrophotometer, sample plates are scanned prior to heating, designated as the pre-read, to establish "background" due to variations in color related to individual saliva samples. after heating at 65 ˚c for 30 minutes, the plate was read a second time, designated as the post-read. each read takes approximately 1 minute. the reader software returns endpoint absorbance for 430 nm and 560 nm wavelengths that measure positive and negative reaction results, respectively. analytically, the ratio of 430 nm to 560 nm is computed for the pre-and post-read scans. for each well, the pre-read ratio is subtracted from the post-read ratio to establish a background subtracted value. the mean and standard deviation of the background subtracted negative controls (saliva + pbs) were computed from 12 wells across the plate. for each replicate, an adjusted absorbance ratio is computed by taking the ratio of each sample to the average negative control value (background subtracted sample ratio / background subtracted negative control ratio).neb_orf1a-a-f3 ctgcacctcatggtcatgtt neb_orf1a-a-b3 agctcgtcgcctaagtcaa neb_orf1a-a-fip gagggacaaggacaccaagtgtatggttgagctggtagcaga neb_orf1a-a-bip ccagtggcttaccgcaaggttttagatcggcgccgtaac . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. saliva samples were collected at day zero of hospital admission from six presumptive covid-19 positive individuals. saliva samples were diluted 1:1 in phosphate buffered saline to facilitate pipetting and then frozen. samples were then thawed and heattreated at 56˚c for 30 minutes to inactivate the majority of live virus 32 . samples were then re-frozen. samples were thawed on ice prior to lamp and qrt-pcr reactions.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)establishing rapid and widespread testing for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is essential to containing the pandemic and reopening society. the current gold standard test measures viral nucleic acids extracted from clinical swabs by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qrt-pcr). this assay requires trained medical personnel, specialized instrumentation, supply-limited reagents, and significant technical labor. isothermal nucleic acid amplification tests are an alternative to conventional pcr methods that do not require expensive instruments or trained personnel to perform the reaction or quantify the results. specifically, loop-mediated isothermal amplification (lamp) with simultaneous reverse-transcription (rt-lamp) allows for rapid and sensitive detection of nucleic acids within one hour in an easily interpretable colorimetric assay that requires only a heat source 1,2 .several groups around the world are currently developing lamp-based protocols for the detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), the virus causing covid-19 [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] . the sensitivity of lamp compares well to the limit-of-detection of qrt-pcr on purified rna samples, and may achieve higher sensitivity on crude clinical samples 5 . the robustness of the lamp bst polymerase to pcr inhibitors makes it especially well-suited and widely used for pathogen detection in unpurified samples 8 . this confers a major potential advantage over current testing protocols as it enables skipping the cost-, labor-, and reagent-consuming step of rna extraction.saliva is a promising sample for expanding and facilitating testing due to the ease, safety, and non-invasive nature of its collection and its relatively high viral load 9, 10 . recognizing these benefits, the fda approved a saliva collection and preservation device for downstream covid-19 testing. direct comparison of saliva to nasopharyngeal (np) swabs from the same individuals revealed that saliva samples provided more consistent and sensitive results for covid-19 detection 11 . these saliva-based methods, however, still employ rna extraction followed by qrt-pcr.here, we sought to establish and optimize a simple lamp-based assay for the qualitative detection of sars-cov-2 virus directly from saliva without an rna extraction step.to develop our assay, we first compared the performance of five sets of recently developed lamp primer sets targeting different regions of the sars-cov-2 genome 3-6 . we used a commercially available neb colorimetric enzyme mix to perform lamp reactions on quantitative in vitro transcribed rna standards corresponding to regions targeted by lamp primers 12 . of these, the neb gene n-a 3 and lamb et al. 4 primers targeting the nucleocapsid (gene n) and orf1ab regions respectively had the highest sensitivity and lowest rates of false positives in the water-only control (supplementary figure 1) . demonstrating specificity to sars-cov-2, these primers had no crossreactivity with mers coronavirus controls. these primer sets were prioritized for further testing.next, we validated these primer sets on both rna standards and heat-inactivated viral particles spiked into water or human saliva to simulate clinical samples ( figure 1a ). across both sets of lamp primers, and for both rna and particles, saliva strongly inhibited lamp detection of sars-cov-2 compared to water (fig. 1b) . particles were weakly and inconsistently detected in saliva whereas their detection in water was on par with detection of rna (fig. 1c) . this suggests the presence of an inhibitor in saliva rather than an inaccessibility of particle-associated rna. we observed time sensitivity of the colorimetric assay especially from saliva, with many samples tinting yellow after prolonged incubation in the lamp reaction (longer than 40 minutes). we found that a 30-minute incubation provided a more reliable readout. values indicate number of viral genome equivalents per reaction. purple-framed boxes indicate 30-minute reactions. black-framed boxes indicate 1-hour reactions. b) quantification and comparison of approximate limits of detection (viral genome equivalents per reaction) were compared by rna type, water or saliva, and primer sets. limit of detection was recorded as the lowest value with a clear colorimetric change from magenta to yellow. inconclusive or undetected values were recorded as not detected. quantification and comparison of approximate limits of detection (viral genome equivalents per reaction) were compared by rna type, water or saliva, and primer sets. p-values indicate one-sided t-tests (saliva greater than water). inconclusive or non-detected values were excluded.to neutralize or otherwise reduce inhibitors in human saliva, we tested several approaches that have been demonstrated to improve viral rna detection in crude samples including saliva [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] . we tested simple dilution of particle-containing saliva into water, and various heat and chemical treatments. first, we found that dilution of saliva into water enabled sensitive detection of sars-cov-2 particles using lamp (figure 2a , top). a heat treatment of 55˚c for 15 minutes followed by 98˚c for 5 minutes further improved lamp sensitivity ( fig. 2a, middle) . identical heating steps plus the addition of proteinase k increased lamp sensitivity relative to dilution alone ( fig. 2a, bottom) but not markedly more than heat treatment. importantly, we found that the combined heating steps above or proteinase k treatment improved sars-cov-2 particle detection in undiluted human saliva samples (fig. 2b) and conferred a consistent limit of detection on the order of 10 2 particles per reaction. we experimented with additional heat and chemical pretreatments including the hudson protocol (heating unextracted diagnostic samples to obliterate nucleases) 14 and various detergents, but all of these conditions decreased assay sensitivity or interfered with colorimetry (supplementary figure 2a -c). we also varied the amount of crude sample input to the lamp reaction. we found that adding up to 8 µl of direct saliva was compatible with the assay but increased volume did not improve sensitivity (supp. fig. 2d ). figure 2 : dilution, heat, and proteinase k treatments improve sars-cov-2 detection from saliva. a) dilution of particle-containing saliva into water improved lamp detection by at least two orders of magnitude from undetectable to ~10 3 particles per reaction. heat treatment and heat treatment plus proteinase k further increased lamp sensitivity to ~10 2 viral genome equivalents per reaction (p < 0.1, one-sided t-tests compared to dilution alone). *replicate 3 used lamb et al. primers but gave nearly identical results to neb gene n-a primers. b) heat treatment or heat treatment plus proteinase k treatments increased lamp sensitivity from undetectable to ~10 2 viral genome equivalents in undiluted saliva. all reactions are purple-framed to indicate 30-minute reactions. w = water, s = saliva.to further improve the accuracy of our assay, we sought to multiplex lamp primer sets in a single reaction. combining primers can potentially increase sensitivity through additive signals of simultaneous amplification reactions 18, 19 . including multiple primer sets will also confer diagnostic robustness against mutations that arise in the sars-cov-2 genome 20 . non-specific primer interactions, however, could result in potential false positives. we compared pairwise combinations of neb gene n-a primers with the other four primer sets targeting various regions across the sars-cov-2 genome. encouragingly, all pairs of primer sets outperformed the neb gene n-a primer set alone, with no apparent increase in spurious background amplification (supplementary figure  3) .we next tested whether multiplexing primer sets could improve signal detection in untreated and heat and chemical treated particle-containing saliva ( figure 3a ). as before, we found that heat treatment (55˚ for 15 minutes, 98˚ for 3 minutes) alone gave a marked improvement in sars-cov-2 particle detection from saliva (fig. 3b , p < 1e-5, two-sided t-test). this effect was consistent across all primer sets. the same heat treatment plus proteinase k further improved assay sensitivity compared to heat alone (p < 0.003, two-sided t-test). multiplexed primer sets slightly improved the sensitivity of the assay, pushing the limit of detection to the order of ~10 1 particles per reaction. at this sensitivity, the multiplexed lamp assay would detect the vast majority of covid positive samples based on reported saliva viral loads (median ~10 2 -10 3 per ul) 10, 11 . as viral loads peak around day zero of symptom onset, lamp would have the most accuracy at this critical timepoint 21 .to benchmark the performance of our extraction-free protocol on qrt-pcr, we performed qrt-pcr using the cdc gene n1 probe set directly on untreated and treated simulated saliva samples. we found that qrt-pcr had similar sensitivity to lamp on crude samples, reliably detecting sars-cov-2 in all samples down to 10 1 particles per reaction (fig. 3c ). 10 0 particles were not reliably detected in this assay. we observed strong improvements in cycle thresholds (ct) using either heat alone or heat plus proteinase k (p < 1e-3, two-tailed paired t-tests). these results provide further evidence that saliva pretreatment can significantly increase the sensitivity of viral rna detection.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. . heat treatment improves lod (p = 6e-6, t-test, two-tailed vs 'untreated'). proteinase k treatment further improves heat treatment (p = 0.002, ttest, two-tailed vs 'heat'). multiplexed primers may slightly improve limit of detection to ~ 10 1 particles / reaction. c) qrt-pcr on crude lysate (neb gene n-a reactions) showed similar increase in sensitivity with either heat or proteinase k treatment (p < 1e-3 for either treatment, 2-tailed paired t-test). proteinase k did not further improve qrt-pcr sensitivity. n = neb gene n-a.we obtained saliva samples collected at day zero of hospital admission from six presumptive covid-19 positive individuals. one sample was excluded because its viscosity prevented pipetting. the other five were aliquoted into 3 tubes for either no treatment, heat inactivation (55˚ for 15 minutes, 98˚ for 3 minutes), or the same heat treatment plus proteinase k. following pretreatment, the rt-lamp reaction was performed with the neb gene n-a primers. photographs were taken at 10, 20 and 30 minutes to track colorimetric shifts over time ( figure 4a ). an aliquot of 10 4 viral particles in saliva was used as a positive control. after 30 minutes, 4 of the five samples were clearly positive in the heat plus proteinase k treated samples (fig. 4a, bottom right) . positive and negative controls were positive and negative in all reactions at the 30minute timepoint, allowing an interpretable readout of the assay. untreated samples showed positivity for samples 3-5, and heat-alone indicated clear positivity for samples 2-4. these differences may reflect altered ratios of free viral rna to particle-associated . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. . rna in these samples, which could be differentially affected by our heat treatment. proteinase k treatment both protects free rna by inactivating nucleases, and releases particle-bound rna. incorporating quantitative colorimetric decomposition and analysis will enhance sensitivity and interpretability of borderline samples in future experiments 22 .we did not have corresponding gold-standard qrt-pcr results from these samples. instead, we performed qrt-pcr with the cdc n1 probe directly on the untreated and treated samples, along with our positive and negative controls. qrt-pcr results were qualitatively concordant with the rt-lamp results, identifying 4 clear positives (samples 2-5, ct < 40, fig. 4b ). sample #1 tested negative in all lamp treatments and qrt-pcr, and an attempt to purify rna from this saliva sample was unsuccessful. this may indicate rna degradation prior to lamp and qrt-pcr. further work is needed to establish best practices for upstream handling of saliva specimens. toward this end, we have shown that the lamp reaction is compatible with samples in te buffer (10 mm tris, 0.1 mm edta), diluted hudson buffer (2.5 mm tcep, 0.5 mm edta), and rnasecure (supplementary figure 4a) .as with lamp, our pre-treatment regimens significantly improved nucleic acid detection by qrt-pcr (fig. 4c ). heat treatment (55˚ for 15 minutes, 98˚ for 3 minutes) with and without proteinase k outperformed untreated samples (p < 0.01 and p < 0.001 respectively). proteinase k did not further significantly improve sensitivity compared to heat alone. extrapolation of viral loads in clinical saliva samples by comparing to our quantitative positive control yielded estimates of 1.4 x 10 1 -9.8 x 10 2 particles per µl and demonstrates the sensitivity of our assay on real clinical samples. further validation and optimization on additional positive and negative saliva specimens are necessary for clinical assay deployment.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. . to enable significant scale-up of testing capacity using the lamp assay on human saliva, we adapted our protocol to a 96-well plate format. spectrophotometric plate scanning before and after the assay provided an unbiased, quantitative interpretation. initial plate scanning was implemented to normalize for baseline differences induced by variation in ph across human saliva samples. heat treatment (55˚ for 15 minutes, 98˚ for 3 minutes) with and without proteinase k enabled sensitive detection of viral particles in human saliva samples down to 10 2 particles per reaction, with some detection at 10 1 and even 10 0 particles per reaction ( figure 5a ). this assay was quantitative over at least four orders of magnitude. quantification of the limit-of-detection and assay validation on clinical specimens are ongoing.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. .a) rt-lamp assay was adapted to a high-throughput 96-well plate format with a quantitative absorbance readout, achieving a limit of detection < 10 2 particles per reaction from saliva samples. absorbance for 430 nm (yellow) and 560 nm (red) wavelengths was measured before and after the lamp reaction and normalized to negative controls. heat = 55˚ for 15 minutes, 98˚ for 3 minutes, with or without proteinase k (prok). two biological replicates were each run in triplicate.isothermal lamp is well-suited to point-of-care testing because it requires only a heatsource. we sought to avoid the 98 ˚c heating step to make the saliva pre-treatment compatible with a single isothermal heat source. whereas a mild heat treatment consisting of 50 ˚c for 5 minutes and 64˚ for 5 minutes did not enable sensitive detection of sars-cov-2 in undiluted saliva (sup. figure 2b) , a 64˚ c treatment for 15 minutes of saliva that had been diluted 1:1 in either te (10 mm tris, 0.1 mm edta) or dilute hudson buffer (2.5 mm tcep, 0.5 mm edta) improved detection (sup. fig. 4b ). addition of rnasecure, a non-enzymatic ribonuclease inhibitor that does not require heat-inactivation, boosted assay sensitivity to 10 2 viral particles per reaction (sup. fig  4b) . sars-cov-2 in samples treated with a thermolabile version of proteinase k (inactivated by incubation at 65˚ for 10 minutes) was not detected in a sensitive fashion (sup. fig 4c) . finally, we found that guanidine hydrochloride (40 mm) was compatible with the lamp reaction and that both rnasecure and primer multiplexing provided further enhancements to sensitivity (sup. 4d). these pretreatment methods will enable the use of saliva in lamp reactions using a single heat step, simplifying point-of-care testing.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.07.20093542 doi: medrxiv preprintour proposed approach combines three promising avenues to enable rapid and widespread covid-19 detection: 1) colorimetric rt-lamp, 2) self-collected saliva specimens, and 3) compatibility with crude saliva samples without rna-extraction. this approach solves two major bottlenecks in massively scaling up covid-19 nucleic acid testing: sample acquisition and rna extraction, and it enables test results in less than an hour. viral shedding likely begins several days prior to onset of any symptoms and viral load peaks during this period 21 . colorimetric rt-lamp directly on saliva would enable rapid and frequent testing of pre-or asymptomatic carriers, enabling their isolation prior to unwitting viral transmission. such testing is critical to curtailing the ongoing pandemic.due to its ease of use, rapid amplification of nucleic acids, high specificity arising from the use of six primers, and high tolerance of reaction inhibitors 8 , rt-lamp has been widely used for pathogen detection. sensitive diagnostic assays have been developed for viruses including zika 19,23 and such assays are being developed for sars-cov-2 by several groups including ours [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] 18, [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] . speed, cost, turnaround time, and a simple colorimetric readout make rt-lamp an effective solution to ramping up testing. further, because it does not require specialized equipment or training for performing or interpreting the assay, rt-lamp is especially well-suited for point-of-care detection.sample acquisition is currently limited by the reliance on np swabs, which need to be carefully performed by a trained health-care worker and require the use of ppe. midnasal swabs are a promising alternative to np swabs because they can be selfadministered, and contain high viral loads [29] [30] [31] . however, due to potential swab shortages, we instead focused on expectorated saliva due to its ease of collection and high viral load 11 . our work adds to the growing body of evidence that saliva will facilitate the adoption of widespread testing.several groups are optimizing workarounds to avoid the rna extraction step for pcr based sars-cov-2 testing while maintaining sensitivity 13, 15, 17, 29 . here, we have demonstrated a variety of saliva pre-treatment protocols that enable sensitive detection of sars-cov-2 by both rt-lamp and qrt-pcr. rna in saliva likely comprises a mixture of free and particle-associated rna. capsid release of rna and nuclease inactivation by heat or chemicals may damage free viral rna, so a careful balance must be achieved to maximize sensitivity. despite requiring brief inactivation at 98˚c, proteinase k treatment to release viral rna and inactivate ribonucleases and other inhibitors in saliva worked well to increase sensitivity in both rt-lamp and qrt-pcr. alternatively, te buffer, guanidine, hudson buffer, and rnasecure allowed us to perform a heat step isothermal with the lamp reaction conditions while maintaining high assay sensitivity. this version of the protocol is compatible with point-of-care testing. our proof-ofconcept validation on actual clinical samples suggests high sensitivity of the current assay to detect sars-cov-2 directly from treated saliva. further optimizations may improve assay sensitivity and robustness.daily screening of employees, especially health-care workers, is feasible with this approach due to its rapid turnaround, low complexity, and low cost. as viral loads are correlated with transmission, only weakly infectious carriers risk false negative results which is also true for the current gold standard. colorimetric rt-lamp on saliva has broad potential to increase covid-19 screening speed and capacity, as demonstrated by our adaptation of this assay to a plate-based format. similar approaches by others have now been validated on clinical samples, deployed for disease surveillance, and adapted for home testing and point-of-care use 27, 28 .in summary, we have optimized rt-lamp reaction conditions to enable sensitive sars-cov-2 detection from unpurified saliva samples. this optimization overcomes the burden of rna extraction reagent, need for sophisticated instrumentation, and the time and labor bottlenecks of the current gold standard nucleic acid-based tests. our assay can be deployed as a point-of-care test or in a centralized laboratory facility. while nonexhaustive, our current optimizations have enabled reliable detection below ~10 2 viral genomes per reaction from simulated saliva samples. using these conditions, we observed high performance of this assay on a limited number of clinical saliva specimens without rna extraction.all lamp reactions were performed following new england biolab's recommended protocol using warmstart colorimetric lamp 2x master mix (neb, massachusetts usa, m1800l). 20 µl reactions with 10 µl lamp master mix, 2 µl of 10x primer mix (2 µm f3 and b3, 16 µm forward inner primer (fip) and backward inner primer (bip), and 4 µm of loop forward (lf) and loop backward (lb) primers (25 or 100 nmol scale idt), 5 µl nuclease-free water, and 3 µl samples. lamp reactions were incubated at 65˚c using biorad dna engine thermocyclers for 30-60 minutes. photographs were taken with cell phone cameras on samples laid on white sheets of paper.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. . in vitro transcribed rna standards were prepared as described 12 . https://www.protocols.io/view/generation-of-sars-cov-2-rna-transcript-standards-bdv6i69e in brief, gblocks (idt) corresponding to sars-cov-2 regions targeted by lamp primer sets were pcr amplified and in vitro transcribed using megashortscript t7 transcription kit (thermofisher). rna products were column-purified using the monarch rna cleanup kit (neb) and quantified using qubit.heat inactivated sars-cov-2 particles were acquired from cdc through bei resources. particle stock concentrations were 1.16 x 10 6 particles per µl. 10 µl particles were resuspended in 90 µl water or saliva to make 10 5 particles/ µl stock. alternatively, 10 µl particles were added into 990 µl saliva to make 10 4 particles/ µl stocks which were individually aliquoted to reduce freeze-thaw.dna plasmid coronavirus controls corresponding to sars-cov-2 and mers were obtained from idt as plasmid dna solutions. ncov-n control: severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 isolate wuhan-hu-1, complete genome (genbank: nc_045512.2). mers control: middle east respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus isolate knih/002_05_2015, complete genome (genbank: mk796425.1)hudson (heating unextracted diagnostic samples to obliterate nucleases) 14 was performed as described using tcep (100 mm) and edta (1 mm) final concentrations. a mild heat treatment consisting of 50 ˚c for 5 minutes and 64˚ for 5 minutes was employed. neutral ph tcep was also investigated, but still caused an instant colorimetric shift in lamp reactions. while diluted tcep/edta was compatible with lamp, its ability to inactivate nucleases or lyse viral particles remains to be validated.proteinase k from neb (#p8107s) was added to saliva at 1/10 volume (5 µl in 50 µl saliva). 1:1 and 1:10 dilutions of proteinase k into water or te were also used. all concentrations were effective so 1:10 dilutions were used in ongoing experiments. we performed heat inactivation of proteinase k for 5 minutes at 98˚c. we also tested thermolabile proteinase k from neb (p8111s). samples were incubated at 37 ˚c for 10 minutes followed by proteinase k inactivation at 65 ˚c for 10 minutes.rnasecure (25x, thermofisher, am7006) was added to some reactions at 1x.during our optimizations, we observed that low levels of te buffer were effective in preventing negative control samples from tinting yellow over prolonged lamp . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. . reactions. a pulse spin in a microfuge improved the reliability of viral detection across various batches of saliva.qrt-pcr reactions were performed according to cdc eua guidelines using taqpath 1-step rt-qpcr master mix gc (thermo a15300) and the ncov-n1 probe form the 2019-ncov ruo kit (idt). reactions were performed on quantstudio 3 and 6 real-time pcr systems (thermofisher). when using crude lysate as input, 3 µl was used as input to match the lamp protocol.assay scale-up was performed in a 96-well plate format (biorad 96 well skirted pcr plate) with only minor modifications to the lamp reaction. 4 µl of saliva samples were used in 25 µl total volume reactions. heat treatment (55˚ for 15 minutes, 98˚ for 3 minutes) and proteinase k treatment were identical to single tube format. rnasin (promega) was included in these samples. samples were run in technical triplicate at each dilution.utilizing a biotek epoch microplate spectrophotometer, sample plates are scanned prior to heating, designated as the pre-read, to establish "background" due to variations in color related to individual saliva samples. after heating at 65 ˚c for 30 minutes, the plate was read a second time, designated as the post-read. each read takes approximately 1 minute. the reader software returns endpoint absorbance for 430 nm and 560 nm wavelengths that measure positive and negative reaction results, respectively. analytically, the ratio of 430 nm to 560 nm is computed for the pre-and post-read scans. for each well, the pre-read ratio is subtracted from the post-read ratio to establish a background subtracted value. the mean and standard deviation of the background subtracted negative controls (saliva + pbs) were computed from 12 wells across the plate. for each replicate, an adjusted absorbance ratio is computed by taking the ratio of each sample to the average negative control value (background subtracted sample ratio / background subtracted negative control ratio).neb_orf1a-a-f3 ctgcacctcatggtcatgtt neb_orf1a-a-b3 agctcgtcgcctaagtcaa neb_orf1a-a-fip gagggacaaggacaccaagtgtatggttgagctggtagcaga neb_orf1a-a-bip ccagtggcttaccgcaaggttttagatcggcgccgtaac . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 11, 2020. saliva samples were collected at day zero of hospital admission from six presumptive covid-19 positive individuals. saliva samples were diluted 1:1 in phosphate buffered saline to facilitate pipetting and then frozen. samples were then thawed and heattreated at 56˚c for 30 minutes to inactivate the majority of live virus 32 . samples were then re-frozen. samples were thawed on ice prior to lamp and qrt-pcr reactions.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)rapid testing for the respiratory viruses has become widely appreciated in the clinical laboratory as virus-specific indirect fluorescent antibody (ifa) and spot enzyme immunoassay (eia) kits have become commercially available and quantitative tests such as eia and time-resolved fluoroimmunoassay (tr-fia) have been improved. both of these tests are of proven greater sensitivity than ifa, and tr-fia performed with monoclonal antibodies has been shown to be of greater sensitivity even than similarly constructed eia tests (reviewed in hierholzer et al., 1990; mclntosh et al., 1993) .we and others have described monoclonal tr-fia tests for influenza, adenovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza l-4, mumpsvirus, and the enteroviruses responsible for acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis (halonen et al., 1985 walls et al., 1986; hierholzer et al., 1987 hierholzer et al., , 1989 hierholzer et al., , 1990 hierholzer et al., , 1993 brown et al., 1990; siitari, 1990; bucher et al., 1991) . coronaviruses are another group of viruses that cause widespread respiratory infections and thus should be included in the tr-fia battery for rapid viral diagnosis. of the four recognized human coronavirus strains, only two have been characterized, and both are associated with upper and occasionally lower respiratory tract disease. ifa and eia tests for these strains, called human coronavirus (hcv) 229e and hcv-oc43, have been described and applied to epidemiologic surveys with good success (mcintosh et al., 1978; isaacs et al., 1983; macnaughton et al., 1983) . in the present report, we describe the production of monoclonal antibodies to hcv-229e and hcv-oc43 and describe their use in ifa, eia, and tr-fia, with emphasis on the tr-fia as a highly-sensitive rapid antigen test.the prototype strain of hcv-229e was initially obtained from dorothy hamre, university of chicago, at the shkzwi3811 passage level (hamre and procknow, 1966) . it has been maintained in a variety of human embryonic lung diploid fibroblast cell lines, e.g., wi38, ru-1, mrc-5, helf, hlf. the present studies were commenced with strain 229e after a 3 x plaque purification in helf cells, at the shkzwi381~rushelf5 hlf 2 passage (hierholzer, 1976; kemp et al., 1984) .the prototype of hcv-oc43 was obtained from ken mcintosh, national institutes of health, after adaptation from human embryonic tracheal organ culture to suckling mouse brain (smb), at the hetssmb v passage level (mcintosh et al., 1967) . for this study, oc43 was further adapted to human embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (rd) cells as suggested by schmidt et al. (1979; schmidt and kenny, 1982) . oc43 was then used at the het5smb18rd6 passage level throughout this study.the xhlfe and xro 6 working stock passages of 229e and oc43, respectively, were made under a fortified maintenance medium consisting of rpmi-1640 with 5% fetal calf serum, and incubated on a roller or rocker platform at 35°c for 28 36 h post-adsorption as previously described (hierholzer, 1976) . the flasks were harvested by 2 cycles of freeze/thawing and stored in aliquots as crude working stocks for the preparation of test antigens and for antibody production. due to the extreme lability of coronaviruses and the association of biological activities with intact virions, an aliquot was used only once, and tests were run in a manner to minimize the exposure of virus to ambient temperatures (kaye et al., 1970; hierholzer, 1976; hierholzer and tannock, 1988) .prototype and wild strains of other respiratory viruses were obtained from our reference virus collection, maintained at -100°c. they were used in this study without further passage.nasopharyngeal aspirates positive for 229e or oc43 were obtained from the department of virology, university of turku, and had been identified there by eia tests with hyperimmune rabbit and guinea pig antisera made with purified virions (halonen et al., 1985; mertsola et al., 1991) . specimens positive for other respiratory viruses were obtained from the cdc diagnostic service and from prior studies (halonen et al., 1983 (halonen et al., , 1985 hierholzer et al., 1987 hierholzer et al., , 1989 . all specimens had been stored at -70°c as a 1:5 dilution in pbs containing 20% fcs, 2% tween-20, and 0.004% merthiolate (halonen et al., 1985) .antisera. polyclonal (hyperimmune) antiserums used in some eia formats were prepared in adult rabbits, guinea pigs, mice, and chickens by immunization with crude virus supernatants or purified virions as previously described (kaye et al., 1970; hierholzer et al., 1972; hierholzer, 1976; halonen et al., 1985) .production of monoclonals. the production of monoclonal antibodies to human coronaviruses was more problematic than usual because of the prevalence of latent murine coronaviruses (the mouse hepatitis viruses) in mouse colonies and the strong antigenic cross-reactions between oc43 and many strains of mhv (reviewed in robb and bond, 1979; macnaughton, 1981; siddell et al., 1983; hierholzer and tannock, 1988) . thus, our mouse colonies were carefully monitored by eia for serologic evidence of mhv infection organon teknika corp., durham, nc) , as well as by eia for infection by other murine viruses, to ensure that adventitious viruses would not compromise the oc43 monoclonals.monoclones to 229e and oc43 viruses were prepared as previously described (hierholzer et al., 1993) . for 229e, balb/c mice were immunized with crude virus supernatants from hlf cultures that were frozen/thawed 3 x and clarified at 1000 x g for 10 min at 4°c; the immunizing antigen had an infectivity titer of 108.3 tcidso/ml in 5 days in the hlf microneutralization system (see below). for oc43, mice were immunized with an smb seed stock after 4 x freeze/thawing and clarification at 6 600 x g for 20 min at 4°c to remove the maximum amount of cellular debris while retaining full infectivity (kaye et al., 1970) ; this preparation had an infectivity titer of 10 7.9 ld~o/ml in 9 days in suckling mice inoculated i.c. with 0.02 ml of virus dilution. the spleen cells from immunized mice were fused with sp2/0-agl4 myeloma cells (atcc no. crl-1581) in the presence of 50% peg [2 ml basic opti-mem medium at 37°c plus 2 ml of melted polyethylene glycol-1500 (no. 29575, bdh ltd., poole, uk), filter-sterilized], and the hybridoma cells were selectively grown out by standard media.the hybrid cells were screened for antibody production by the tissue culture eia procedure (anderson et al., 1985) . for 229e, hlf cells at 20 000 cells per well in 100/~1 of eagles mem/10% fcs growth medium were added to all wells of 96-well tissue culture plates (no. 3596, costar, cambridge, ma) . entire rows were alternately supplemented with 50 #1 of rpmi-1640/5% fcs maintenance medium for the cell control wells or infected with a standard dose of 229e working stock virus in 50 #1 of maintenance medium to give minimal cpe after 3 days of incubation at 35°c under co2. the plates were then washed 3 × (see eia methods), fixed with 75 pl of 80% acetone/20% pbs for 20 rain at 4°c, air-dried, and stored in protective plastic at -20°c until needed. for testing, 50 pl of pbs/gt diluent (see eia methods) was added to all wells, 25 pi of supernatant from the hybridoma wells was added into a virus well and a cell control well, and the test incubated for 1 h at 37°c in a moist chamber. the plates were then washed 3 × and 75 pl of goat antimouse peroxidase (no. 14-18-06, kirkegaard and perry laboratories, gaithersburg, md) at a 1:3000 dilution in pbs-gt was added; the test was incubated for 1 h at 37°c as above. after a 6 × wash step, 125 #1 of tmb (see eia methods) was added, reacted 15 min at ambient temperature, stopped with 25 #1 of 2 m sulfuric acid, and read spectrophotometrically at 450 nm. monoclones for hcv-oc43 were screened in similar manner, with oc43 working stock virus infecting rd cells seeded at 15 000 cells/well. positive cultures were cloned by limiting dilutions and again screened for specific antibody. mouse ascitic fluids were prepared with cells from a subsequent second cloning, clarified by centrifugation at 2850 × g for 30 min at 4°c, pooled, and stored at -80°c. these ascitic fluid-derived monoclonal antibodies were tested by the same eia procedure as the cell culture supernatants, except that they were titrated to higher dilutions.the antibodies as mouse ascitic fluids were characterized as previously described (hierholzer et al., 1993) . antibody subclass was determined by commercial eia kit. ifa assays utilized hlf and rd cell cultures, as appropriate, and incubation following inoculation was for 3 days at 35°c. hemagglutination (ha) and hemagglutination-inhibition (hi) tests for oc43 were done by standard procedures, using human and chicken erythrocyte suspensions at ambient temperature (hierholzer et al., 1969 (hierholzer et al., , 1972 . for biotinylation, antibody igg was purified and labeled at 1 mg/ml concentration with the enzo biotin reagent (no. ebp-406, enzo biochemical inc., new york, ny).for western blots, the coronaviruses were grown in hlf or rd cells, as appro-priate, under medium 199 with 5% fcs for 24 h (before any cytopathology was evident), then the monolayers were washed and incubated briefly under pbs to remove non-viral proteins. the cultures were harvested by 2 x freeze-thaws and light centrifugation. the viral proteins in the supernatant fluids were then solubilized, electrophoresed under both reducing and non-reducing conditions, and identified by the blotting technique of tsang et al. (1983) . microneutralization test. serum neutralization (sn) tests for 229e and oc43 were carried out in hlf and rd cells, respectively, in 96-well, flat-bottom styrene microculture plates (costar no. 3596, cambridge, ma) . working stock passages at 1:1000 starting dilutions were first titrated in replicas of 6 in growth medium (gm, rpmi-1640 with 10% fcs, l-glutamine, penicillin, and streptomycin) in 2-fold dilution series using an autodiluter (cetus pro/pette model 1077, perkin-elmer/cetus corp., norwalk, ct); cell control passages were titrated in the other 2 rows in the plate. then, 0.10 ml of cell suspension (1 x 105 cells/ml) was added per well to the entire plate, and the plate was gently agitated for mixing, wrapped in plastic film, and incubated for 5 days at 35°c under 5% co2/80% humidity. for reading, the cells were stained by immersion for 20 min in a fixative/stain solution consisting of 1.46 g of crystal violet in 50 ml 95% ethanol, 300 ml of 37% (wt/wt) formaldehyde, 650 ml distilled water, and 1000 mi 0.01 m phosphate-buffered saline, ph 7.2; final concentrations were 5.55% formaldehyde and 0.07% crystal violet, and the final ph was 6.5. endpoints were read in the wells which showed <~25% of the stained area (i.e., uninfected cells) present in the uninoculated cell control wells (rows 7,8). the virus titer was thus defined asthe reciprocal of the highest dilution of virus showing a 0 to 1 + staining in 5 days; this dilution was called 1 u of virus/0.05 ml.sn tests were carried out in replicas of 6, with rows 7 and 8 as serum control wells. the untreated antibody samples at 1:4 starting dilution were diluted in gm through 2-fold series; 0.05 ml of virus dilution containing 2 u of virus/0.05 ml was added to each well in the first 6 rows; 0.05 ml of gm was added to each well in the last 2 rows; and the plates were incubated at room temperature for 1 h. then, cells were added and the test was mixed, incubated, and stained as above. a virus backtitration was done to determine the actual dosage of virus in the test. the serum titer was defined as the reciprocal of the highest dilution of serum inhibiting 2 u of virus for 5 days.the eia procedures were modifications of those previously described (hierholzer et al., 1993) . eia format 1 was an all-monoclonal test designed to parallel that used for the tr-fia as closely as possible, and required the use of biotinylated igg. the eia was carried out in 96-well polystyrene microtiter plates with purified monoclonal igg diluted in carbonate buffer, ph 9.6 as capture antibody. after overnight incubation at 4°c, the plates were washed with 0.01 m pbs, ph 7.2/0.05°/,, tween-20. the specimen (npa or virus culture) was added at 1:5 dilution in pbs-gt diluent (0.01 m pbs, ph 7.2, with 0.5% gelatin and 0.15% tween-20) or in the tr-fia antigen diluent, and the plates incubated and washed. next, the biotinylated detector antibody diluted in pbs-gt was added, and the test again incubated and washed. the test was finally developed with streptavidin/peroxidase and tmb substrate, and absorbance read at 450 nm in an eia reader.eia format 2 for each virus was our optimal polyclonal test derived from hyperimmune antisera. the steps were the same as for format 1 except that the capture antibody was a polyclonal igg and the detector antibody was the same igg after biotinylation or a different species antiserum. when a different species igg was tried as detector, followed by the appropriate anti-species igg-peroxidase conjugate, the diluent for the detector was tried with 2% normal goat serum or 1.5-2% normal species serum, as needed to reduce background signal; the same diluent was then used for the conjugate.the purification and europium labeling of monoclonal antibodies from mouse ascitic fluids was done as described (hierholzer et al., 1993) . the one-incubation tr-fia procedure also was done as described therein. briefly, purified monoclonal igg, diluted to optimal concentration in ph 9.6 carbonate buffer, was added to wells of 12-well polystyrene strips , icn biomedicals, inc., horsham, pa) in 250-pl volumes and adsorbed overnight at ambient temperature in a moist chamber. the wells were washed 3 × with aqueous 0.9% nac1/0.05% tween-20. wells were then saturated with 250 pl of 0.1% gelatin (difco, detroit, mi) in 0.05 m tris/0.9% nac1/0.05% nan3 buffer, ph 7.75, again with overnight incubation at ambient temperature. after removing the excess volume (leaving ~25 #l/well), the strips could be stored in sealed plastic up to 1.5 years at 4°c at this point with no loss of activity.for the test, the wells were washed 3 ×, and 100 #1 each of antigen and eu-detector antibody were added to appropriate wells. the antigen (npa or culture suspensions) was diluted 1:5 in specimen diluent, consisting of 50 mm tris, ph 7.75, 0.9% nacl, 0.01% nan3, 0.5% gelatin, 0.01% tween-40, 20/tm dtpa, and 2% bsa; the eu-labeled detector antibody was diluted to the appropriate concentration in the same diluent. the strips were then incubated for 1 h at 37°c in a moist chamber, washed 6 x, and 200 ~1 per well of enhancement solution was added. th6 plates were gently agitated on a shaker for 10 min at ambient temperature and then placed in the fluorometer for counting. the fluorometer was programmed to take the mean and coefficient of variation (cv) of 12 reagent blanks and to take the mean and cv of the duplicates or triplicates of each specimen minus the reagent blanks. we then further analyzed the printed data by computing the mean and standard deviation (sd) of the negative specimens run in the same test, and used this mean + 3 sds as the cut-off value for positive specimens (hierholzer et al., t990, 1993) .mouse ascitic fluids to all monoclonals which possessed useable homologous titers by eia were considered for use in tr-fia. the protein specificity of these clones was determined by western blots. the first blots reacted the electrophoresed viral proteins with hyperimmune rabbit antisera to 229e and mouse, guinea pig, and rabbit antisera to oc43, followed by the appropriate anti-species peroxidase, to confirm the presence of coronavirus proteins in the test lanes (schmidt and kenny, 1982; hierholzer and tannock, 1988; arpin & talbot, 1990) ; replicate lanes were then reacted with the individual monoclonals, followed by anti-mouse peroxidase. all eleven 229e and oc43 monoclonals with suitable eia titers were directed to the nucleoprotein (n), which had a mean molecular weight of 51.3 kda in the reducing gels (table 1 ) .characterization and labeling data for these antibodies are listed in table 1 also. most had type-specific eia titers of > 10 -4 after purification; their eu:igg molar ratios varied from 5.6 to 10.1, indicating acceptable labeling of the antibody. ifa titers of the 229e monoclonals ranged from 1:10 to 1:160 and of the oc43 antibodies from 1:10 to 1:40, with no cross-reaction between serotypes and no reactions with a large panel of heterologous viruses (prototype plus 1-4 strains each of parainfluenza 1, 2, 3, and 4, measles, mumps, respiratory syncytial virus groups a and b, influenza a and b, herpes simplex 1 and 2, adenovirus 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 11, and 37, polio 2, coxsackie a9 and b2, and echo 11 ). none of the coronavirus monoclonals had neutralizing activity (i.e., > li4 antibody titer with 50 tcidso's of virus per 0.05 ml), and none of the oc43 monoclonals possessed hi activity (i.e., >__1:2 antibody titer with 4 ha units of virus/0.05 ml). [hcv-229e does not exhibit ha activity, and therefore the 229e mabs were not tested by hi.] the lack of sn and *eia titers are expressed as the loglo of the highest dilution of antibody whose absorbance values exhibit a p/n ratio of _> 3.0 in 229e-or oc43-infected cells, respectively, where the absorbance value in uninfected cell controls constitutes n.hi activities and the low ifa titers were all consistent with the characterization of the antibodies as anti-n.the monoclonal eia (format 1) for each virus using the same antibodies as tr-fia was optimized by checkerboard titrations. we also biotinylated the other purified antibodies and tested all possible combinations in eia. the optimal monoclonal eia formats for antigen detection are given in table 2 . for 229e, several capture/detector combinations were reasonably sensitive in detecting virus, but the most sensitive combination was the same as the one chosen as the best tr-fia format. antibody 401-3c as capture with 401-4a as detector gave mean od values of 1.683 with 229e virus in hlf cultures, 0.016 with oc43 in smb and rd cultures, and 0.011 with negative hlf and rd cell controls, for a mean p/n value of 153. the second best format (401-4a capture/401-4a detector) gave a mean negative od value of 0.026 and a mean p/n with 229e of 47.for oc43 virus, the optimal format 1 was also the same as that found for tr-fia: monoclonal 541-8f as capture with 542-7d as detector. this combination gave mean od values of 1.165 with oc43 virus in rd cultures, 0.043 with 229e virus in hlf cultures, and 0.045 with negative rd cell controls, for a mean p/n value of 26. another format (542-7d capture/542-7d detector) gave very similar values: 1.013/0.040, for a mean p/n with oc43 cultures of 25. the same panel of heterologous viruses tested by ifa was also tested by direct eia, with the antigen coating the wells followed by a monoclonal antibody and anti-mouse peroxidase, diluent for capture antibodies was ph 9.6 carbonate buffer, incubated overnight at 4°c. antigen was diluted in tr-fia antigen diluent; incubation was 1.5 h, 37°c. diluent for the detector antibodies and developing system was pbs-gt (0.01 m phosphate-buffered saline, ph 7.2, with 0.5% gelatin and 0.15% tween-20) throughout, except that the 229e polyclonal test required 2% normal goat serum added to the pbs-gt for these steps; incubation was 1 h, 37°c. the developing system for format 1 was incubated 10 rain at ambient temperature, and for format 2 was incubated 1 h at 37°c. and again the coronavirus monoclonals were uniformly negative and were thus type-specific. the polyclonal eias (format 2) also were optimized as shown in table 2 but were of much less utility because of higher background signals or lower serum antibody levels. all of the polyclonal 229e tests had relatively high backgrounds which were lowered only slightly by the addition of normal goat serum to the detector side of the formats. thus, the optimal 229e test with guinea pig capture antibody gave mean od values of 1.466 with 229e cultures, 0.214 with oc43 cultures, and 0.212 with negative cell controls in the presence of 2% normal goat serum; the mean p/n was 7. none of the oc43 tests were improved by addition of any normal serum to the detector antibodies; thus, the oc43 test with mouse capture antibody gave similar positive od values (1.402/0.034); the mean p/n ratio was 41, and the test was as type-specific as the 229e test. these results show that for both viruses as cell culture supernatants the all-monoclonal format was more sensitive than the polyclonal test in antigen detection. limited testing with npa specimens confirmed both the optimally-sensitive tests described above and the monoclonal tests as superior to polyclonal tests.the one-incubation tr-fia was formatted for the coronaviruses by testing all combinations of the monoclonals at serial dilutions with tissue culture isolates and then with npa specimens. the optimization utilized checkerboard titrations of capture antibodies at 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1.0 #g/well and detector antibodies at 6. 25, 12.5, 25, 50, 75 , and 100 ng/well. for each concentration of capture antibody, the optimal concentration of detector antibody was determined by the p/n ratio for representative positive and negative samples to obtain the greatest sensitivity. in the tr-fia, system background was the mean of 12 reagent (system) controls and was automatically subtracted out when samples were run. test background was measured as the fluorescence values in known negative specimens that were tested in parallel with positive specimens; thus, a p/n value was the mean of the replicate tests for a positive specimen divided by the mean of all the negative specimens tested (in replicates) in the run.the p/n values were used to ascertain the best format in tr-fia (table 3) . of 11 mabs evaluated in this study, only 4 were found to be useable in either capture or detector position in the tr-fia. for 229e virus, clone 401-3c in capture position @0.50 #g/well, with clone 401-4a in detector position @25 ng/well, gave a mean p/n value of 143 with 229e cultures and 1 with oc43 cultures, and a mean p/n of 10 with 229e clinical specimens and 0.9 with oc43 specimens. in l:10-diluted test samples, signals for 229e cultures ranged from 6 260 to 138 780 (mean=61 329) cps (mean of negatives=429 cps), and for 229e clinical specimens were 640-4 411 (mean = 2 520) cps. for oc43 virus, clone 541-8f in capture position @0.50 #g/well, with clone 542-7d in detector position @50 ng/well, gave a mean p/n value of 964 with oc43 cultures and 1 with 229e cultures, and a mean p/n of 174 with oc43 clinical specimens and 1 with 229e specimens. in l:10-diluted test samples, signals for oc43 cultures ranged from 2 105 to 1 498 080 (mean= 756 595) cps (mean of italics denotes optimal test system for direct detection tr-fia. negatives = 785 cps), and for oc43 clinical specimens were 3 976-734 406 (mean = 347 937) cps. the 401-3c/401-4a format was thus the most sensitive test for 229e in both cell cultures and clinical specimens, and the 541-8f/542-7d format was the most sensitive for oc43 in both cultures and specimens. both tests were more sensitive than the next best combinations (clones 401-4a/401-4a for 229e; 541-8f/542-7d at lower detector concentration for oc43). as in the eia tests, the optimized tr-fia formats for coronaviruses 229e and oc43 were type-specific when tested against the same panel of heterologous viruses used in the ifa and eia tests.to determine the dose-response curves for the optimized tr-fia formats, working stock cultures of 229e in hlf cells and of oc43 in rd cells were clarified, concentrated 10-fold by ultrafiltration, and purified through glycerol/tartrate gradients at 107 000 xg (hierholzer, 1976; hierholzer et al., 1981) . the visible band for whole virus at the 1.18 density position was harvested, dialyzed, confirmed to be coronavirus by electron microscopy, measured for total protein by the lowry method, and titrated in a 10-fold dilution series in tr-fia. sham-inoculated cell control cultures for each virus were treated, the 1.18 density position harvested from gradients, and the harvests titrated in tr-fia in identical fashion; the cps values for these samples constituted the negative values averaged for the cut-off calculations. the cut-off point was defined as the mean + 3 standard deviations of the negative samples, and was 384 and 892 cps for 229e and oc43, respectively.the purified 229e sample had a protein content of 230 #g/ml and a fluorescence value at 1:10 dilution of 183 410 cps. the oc43 sample had a higher protein content (736 ~tg/ml), higher fluorescence value at 1:10 dilution (1 242 360 cps), and a higher background. the log-log relationship of signal-to-antigen concentration in the optimized tests is shown in fig. 1 . the all-monoclonal tr-fia had a threshold of detection of 0.3l ng/well (3.082 ng/ml) of 229e virus and 0.098 ng/well (0.986 ng/ml) of oc43 virus; these correspond to 16.57 × 105 and 5.30 x 105 virions per well, respectively. using the optimum reagents and dilutions just described, the tr-fia was compared with eia formats 1 and 2 in testing original clinical specimens (table 4) . for 229e, the comparative evaluation included 13 229e-positive specimens, 10 oc43-positive specimens, and 10-20 negative specimens. seven negative specimens were positive for adenovirus, rsv, or parainfluenza types 1 and 3 and thus were important controls in the study; the remaining specimens were negative for any recognized virus by culture and tr-fia. all specimens were tested at 1:10 dilution in the specimen diluent. none of the negative specimens were positive by any of the three tests, but several positive specimens failed to be detected by the eia tests. in all of these cases, the absorbance values were slightly below the eia cutoff value. the 5 specimens (4 229e, 1 oc43) which were not detected in the monoclonal eias were also not detected in the respective polyclonal eias, and furthermore were minimally positive in tr-fia, suggesting that these specimens had deteriorated to the point where the eia tests were not sufficiently sensitive to detect the viruses.thus, the tr-fia was the most sensitive of these tests, detecting 100% of both 229e and oc43 in clinical specimens considered positive by the initial polyclonal eias carried out with fresh specimens, compared with 69% and 90% detected by the monoclonal eias, and 54% and 80%, respectively, detected by the polyclonal eias. due to the small number of coronavirus specimens available, however, these numbers must be considered provisional.fluorescent antibody tests -the first rapid antigen tests developed for respiratory viruses -are still widely used in clinical laboratories and have been successfully applied to the human respiratory coronaviruses as well (mcintosh et al., 1978) . enzyme immunoassays have become even more important for rapid viral diagnosis, because eia is more sensitive than ifa and is therefore the critical test with which to compare any new test (halonen et al., 1983 (halonen et al., , 1985 grandien et al., 1985; hornsleth et al., 1986; hughes et al., 1988; hierholzer et al., 1990; takimoto et al., 1991; mcintosh et al., 1993) . thus, this study included optimized eia tests with monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies in a direct comparison with optimized tr-fia tests with monoclonal antibodies.we have shown previously that the tr-fia with polyclonal antibodies was more sensitive for detecting respiratory virus antigens than other rapid antigen tests (halonen et al., 1983 (halonen et al., , 1985 . subsequent studies with monoclonal antibodies revealed even greater sensitivities for detecting influenzavirus (walls et al., 1986) , adenovirus (hierholzer et al., 1987) , enterovirus 70 and coxsackie a24 viruses in eye swabs (hierholzer et al., 1990) , respiratory syncytial virus and parainfluenza type 1-3 viruses , and parainfluenza type 4(a and b) and mumps viruses (hierholzer et al., 1993) directly in clinical specimens. in the present study, we describe monoclonal antibodies for the human respiratory coronaviruses which are useable in similarly-constructed, all-monoclonal tr-fia formats. like the other direct-antigen tr-fia tests, these tests are also highly useful for identifying viruses in cell culture supernatants.for coronavirus 229e, the most sensitive eia was a monoclonal assay using clone 401-3c as capture antibody and clone 401-4a as detector, and for oc43 virus was a monoclonal assay with clone 541-8f as capture and clone 542-7d as detector. these tests detected virus in 69% of 229e-and 90% of oc43-positive clinical specimens, respectively. the tr-fia, on the other hand, detected virus in 100% of 229e-and 100% of oc43-containing specimens. these detection rates may change with additional experience with the formatted tests, because the numbers of original specimens that were known eia-positive and were available for testing were too low for an accurate determination; we have no culture-positive coronavirus specimens owing to the extreme lability of these viruses.the most reactive monoclonal antibodies made in this study were directed against the n nucleoprotein. they were type-specific and did not possess neutralizing activity, consistent with the known biological functions of coronavirus proteins (reviewed in schmidt et al., 1982; schmidt, 1984; hierholzer and tannock, 1988) . the anti-n antibodies of hcv-oc43 also did not exhibit hi activity, which resides in the peplomers; hcv-229e does not possess ha activity, and thus the 229e antibodies could not be tested for hi titers (hierholzer et al., 1981) . anti-n monoclonals, in addition to anti-e1 (envelope) and anti-e2 (peplomer) antibodies, were type-specific in other studies as well (arlene collins and ernesto denardin, suny, buffalo ny, personal communication, 1987; fleming et al., 1988) . furthermore, probes and pcr primers based on the n gene sequences of 229e and oc43 have also been successfully used in type-specific diagnostic tests (kamahora et al., 1989; myint et al., 1989 myint et al., , 1990 stewart et al., 1992) . thus, our findings of the utility of the n protein in tr-fia tests is consistent with other tests based on this highly conserved protein or its gene.the optimized tr-fia formats described herein should be well-suited to the detection of coronavirus types 229e and oc43 directly in clinical specimens, to the identification of virus isolates recovered in cell culture should this be successful, and to much-needed epidemiologic studies of the role of these viruses in upper and lower respiratory disease.in late 2019, a cluster of cases of viral pneumonia of unknown aetiology was reported in wuhan, hubei province, china. this new viral pneumonia, covid-19 (coronavirus disease 2019), caused by the novel sars-cov-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2), spread rapidly and developed into a global pandemic within three months from its initial detection [1] [2] [3] . among other symptoms, those of covid-19 often include fever and dry cough, which resemble respiratory illnesses caused by other viruses or bacteria [4] [5] [6] [7] . due to the overlapping manifestations, clinical diagnosis becomes problematic, especially during seasonal flu [8] , why confirmation of covid-19 depends on the detection of sars-cov-2 nucleic acid by reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr).more than 1.26 million cases of covid-19 in > 200 countries and territories, with more than 66.000 human deaths, have been reported ( [9] , 5 april 2020). due to the limited testing in many geographical regions, it is clear that the total number of actual covid-19 cases is much higher than the number of confirmed ones. in most of the confirmed covid-19 cases, the patients are symptomatic showing fever, dry cough, and pneumonia, but also more atypical symptoms such as gastrointestinal manifestations as well as anosmia and ageusia. however, the virus has been detected in completely asymptomatic individuals, e.g. in a recent study from italy, showing that 44% of the laboratory-confirmed cases lacked symptoms [10] . the knowledge concerning the actual number of asymptomatic vs. symptomatic infections is still limited. the same is true for the potentially growing herd immunity, where almost no data is available to date.in the present study, we evaluated a commercially available assay, the covid-19 igg/igm rapid test cassette (zhejiang orient gene biotech co ltd, huzhou, zhejiang, china), developed for detection of sars-cov-2-specific antibodies.capillary blood samples or serum from 29 pcrconfirmed covid-19 patients or convalescents, and capillary blood samples from 24 healthy volunteers, without any known history of sars-cov-2 infection/ covid-19, were included in the study. anonymous blood donor sera from healthy adults (n = 80) and 20 serum samples from babies (6-12 months) collected before or during 2018 from the uppsala academic hospital were used as negative controls. clinical samples that had been deposited in uppsala biobank were anonymized and used in accordance with local ethical guidelines. they were all used with informed consent according to the swedish biobank law, which allows anonymized diagnostic patient samples to be used for purposes similar to those of the original sampling. the 29 samples from covid-19 confirmed individuals, as well as the 100 negative controls and the 24 healthy volunteers were all from unique individuals. all samples were analyzed anonymously.the test was run according to the manufacturers instructions (covid-19 igg/igm rapid test cassette (whole blood/serum/plasma), product/ model: gccov-402a, lot: 2003242, zhejiang orient gene biotech co ltd, huzhou, zhejiang, china) [11] . briefly, 5 µl of serum or one drop of capillary blood were added to the test slide, followed by 80 µl of the buffer provided in the kit. the results were read after 10 min (max 15 min), by the naked eye. only tests in which the control line changed its color were regarded as valid (3 out of 156 (1.9%) cassettes did not function). if a line was observed for igm and/or igg, the test was considered positive. the intensity of the color was not judged.none of the 80 negative sera from healthy blood donors tested igm positive in the assay, while one tested igg positive (1/80, 1.25%, 95% confidence level: 0.03-6.77%) (tables 1 and 2 ). the single iggpositive sample was re-analyzed and remained igg positive in the second test. none of the 20 serum samples from the 6-12 months old babies tested positive for either igm or igg.none of the 24 healthy volunteers, without any known history of sars-cov-2 infection/covid-19, tested positive for igm or igg.altogether 20 of 29 (69%) samples from pcrconfirmed covid-19 patients tested igm positive and 27 tested (93.1%) igg positive (tables 1 and 2) . when the patients were grouped into two groups depending on the time between onset of disease and testing, seven out of ten patients in the first group (9-17 days) and 13/19 patients in the second group (18-29 days) tested igm positive. nine out of ten patients in the first group (9-17 days) and 18/19 patients in the second group (18-29 days) tested igg positive ( figure 1 ). there was no statistical difference between the two groups for neither igm or igg seropositivity. all samples that were igm positive were also igg positive.assay sensitivity, specificity and accuracy based on the results described above and summarized in tables 1 and 2 , the assay showed a sensitivity of 69% (20/29) and 93.1% (27/29) for igm and igg, respectively. the assay showed an overall specificity of 100% (124/124) and 99.2% (123/124, 1 false positive) for igm and igg, respectively.using pcr-positive cases as true positives, the accuracy of the test was 94.1% (144/153) and 98.0% (150/153) for igm and igg, respectively. the positive and negative predictive values (the likelihood of being a case given a positive test result, and the likelihood of being healthy given a negative test result) for igm were 100% (20/20) and 93.2% (124/133), respectively. in this study we evaluated a commercial rapid test for detection of sars-cov-2-specific igm and igg. for the evaluation, samples from covid-19 cases, obtained during disease or convalescence and previously confirmed by pcr, were used as 'true positives'. this means that in the pcr-positive cases for which antibodies may not yet had time to develop, or in potential cases with immune defects, it is possible that the negative igm or igg results were in fact true negatives. if this was the case for one or more of the included patients, the actual sensitivities should be higher, i.e. when evaluated only on samples known to contain detectable levels of sars-cov-2-specific igm and/or igg. for a more optimal evaluation of the assay sensitivity, a gold standard for sars-cov -2-specific antibodies would have been needed. this is, however, unfortunately not available to date. according to the manufacturer, the specificity has been evaluated on 14 pcr-negative samples and was found to be 100% for both igm and igg, while the sensitivity evaluated on covid-19 cases was calculated at 87.9% for igm and 97.2% for igg. the results by li et al. [11] indicated an overall testing sensitivity of 88.7% and 90.6% specificity. our results showed a lower sensitivity for igm, a similar sensitivity for igg, and specificities in between the results of the two evaluations.a recent study on three chinese covid-19 cases found that seroconversions occurred between 7 and 12 days after the onset of symptoms [12] . however, larger studies on the detailed kinetics of the antibody responses (e.g. iga, igm, igg, neutralizing antibodies) are now urgently needed for a better understanding of the dynamics of the immune response during covid-19. the results of our study showed detectable igm and igg in some patients at day 9, while in other patients the seroconversion seems to occur later. the impact of early or late seroconversion on the case severity is not known, and must now be explored. interestingly, there were no igm positives that were not igg positive. generally, igm is produced first, and later there is a switch towards igg production [13] , but studies on sars-cov suggest that igm and igg often develop around the same time [14, 15] . our results are in line with this ( figure 1) , but more detailed studies on long-term sequential samples from patients are now needed. it may be worth looking into whether this is a problem with the test, or a constant finding within the immune response to sars-cov-2.there were no false igm positive samples, indicating a very high specificity of the test. one false positive igg result was observed for one healthy adult blood donor. this sample was re-tested and the result was consistent, indicating a cross-reaction to another coronavirus. serological cross-reactions have earlier been observed between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 [16] . there are other human coronaviruses (nl63, oc43, 229e, and hku1) that are globally endemic or epidemic [17] , and it may be possible that this reaction represented a crossreaction due to a previous infection with one of those. human cov nl63 has been shown to use the same receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), as sars-cov and sars-cov-2 [18] , which may indicate potential cross-reactive epitopes. how common the covs are as causative agents for 'common colds' is not known in detail, but there has been estimates that up to 20% of cases could be caused by covs [19] .the specificity and sensitivity for igg detection of the rapid test evaluated here is well in line with those of a recently reported enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa), which had a specificity and a sensitivity of 97.5% [20] .while this study showed a satisfactory performance of the rapid test, it is limited by being compared only to clinical cases and pcr-positivity, and as a next step, it is necessary to compare this assay to other serological tests. in contrast to li et al. [11] , we found less indications for using this test for clinical diagnosis. nevertheless, it might contribute to detecting potential asymptomatic infections as well as getting a notion of the magnitude of the spread in different geographical areas, which might be a key to taking the appropriate decisions and policies forward. the high negative predictive value indicates that the rapid test will be useful for detecting past infections and possible immunity, which may be crucial for restoring social functions after lockdown.diseases at the infectious disease clinic, uppsala university hospital.janina krambrich is a phd student at the department of medical biochemistry and microbiology, uppsala university, sweden. her doctoral studies concern molecular epidemiology and overwintering strategies of japanese encephalitis virus.bengt rönnberg, phd, is working as a researcher at the laboratory of clinical microbiology at uppsala university hospital and at the zoonosis science center at uppsala university. his main research focus is development of diagnostic assays and studies on zoonotic viruses.dario akaberi is a phd student at the department of medical biochemistry and microbiology, uppsala university, sweden. his doctoral studies mainly concern research on antivirals against flavi-and coronaviruses.mouna esmaeilzadeh, md. phd., is a medical doctor and neuroscientist from the karolinska institutet, sweden. she was one of the founders of scilife clinic (2009-2016) , a pioneering medical clinic within preventive and personalized medicine, using technologies such as magnetic resonance imaging and genetic sequencing to map and prevent diseases. in addition to her md. phd., she has a master's degree in philosophy from the university of oslo and stockholm university.erik salaneck is an associate professor in infectious diseases, department of medical sciences, uppsala university and responsible physician for high consequence infectious diseases at the infectious diseases clinic, uppsala university hospital.johanna lindahl is a veterinary epidemiologist working at zoonosis science centre at uppsala university, with affiliations at international livestock research institute (ilri) in nairobi kenya, and swedish university of agricultural sciences. johanna graduated from swedish university of agricultural sciences after doing her phd working on japanese encephalitis virus in vietnam. since her phd she has been focusing her research on food safety, and vectorborne, zoonotic and emerging infectious diseases in developing countries, mainly east africa and south and southeast asia.åke lundkvist, phd, is professor in virology and one of the founders of the zoonosis science center at uppsala university. his work focuses on basic virological, pathogenetic, ecological and epidemiological studies on zoonotic viruses and their vectors and hosts. new virus is able to spread from person to person while infecting the contacts easily with a sustained and efficient way, then it is called a pandemic. the novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) fulfills all those definitions strongly. at the end of the year 2019, wuhan city of china cradled the first case of the novel coronavirus. now from europe to america, its deadly effects threaten the whole world. the who named the 2019-ncov epidemic disease on february 11, 2020 as coronavirus disease .2019-ncov is a new member of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus family (sars-cov) and labeled as sars-cov-2 [2] .with its spike surface for binding to receptors (see figure 1 ), sars-cov-2 presents the covid-19with the symptoms of fever, sore throat and following pneumonia with severe acute respiratory distress. [3] . for all that, the respiratory symptoms are not in a specific form. there are so many isolated cases i.e. the existence of the covid-19 may not appear at the first clinical symptoms [4] . the rapid spreading nature of the coronavirus and the serious respiratory effects to humans make the diagnosis of the covid-19 an urgent situation [5] . today, health specialists use the reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) test for the detection of the nucleic acid forms stem from the sars-cov-2.in the process, the respiratory specimens (such as oropharyngeal swabs or nasopharyngeal sampling) are collected and the very important issue when doing this is the receipt place of the specimens. the operation is categorically open to malfunctions by the expert mistakes [6] . besides the operation procedure, the pcr test is a time-consuming process. because a patient has to be isolated in non-suitable circumstances for hours until getting the test results. in addition, these types of tests have a low detection rate of between 30 -50%. hence, most of the times they need to be repeated to make a confirmation [7] . figure 1 . three-dimensional medical image representing the shape of the coronavirus [8] to be able to procure an atmosphere where the patients could get quick treatment and care is a crucial task in the fight of the covid-19. because of the fast-spreading essence of the pandemic, patients apply to the health center in batches. at this point, the need for rapid diagnosis methods is a very important issue. for monitoring the sars-cov-2 infections to diagnose, there is another option of visualization using the radiological images, for instance, chest x-rays or computed tomography (ct). former studies prove that covid-19 causes abnormalities that are visible in the chest x-rays and ct images, in the form of ground-glass opacities. with a strong suggestion, a diagnostic with radiological images could be a first step in monitoring the covid-19 [9] . although the radiological images based diagnostic is a faster way and also it has some advances over the pcr testing in terms of the detection rate in earlier stages of the covid-19, the backbone of the system is the need of experts in comprehending the images.intrinsically, artificial intelligence (ai) based diagnostic options can encourage the experts to gain a rapid and accurate explication over the x-ray images on the way of the detection of the covid-19 [10] .for this motivation, there are several studies in the literature including the analysis conducted on aibased diagnostic of the covid-19 with the help of the radiological images [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] . in [15] , the authors propose a transfer learning model that processes a dataset including the ct images of the covid-19 infected patients. they obtain a test accuracy of 79.3%. the study [14] indicates a three-class model that can distinguish the covid-19, influenza-a viral-based pneumonia, and healthy cases. the segmentation-based study reaches the 86.7% accuracy value with the ct images dataset. in [13] , the authors propose a rapid ai development cycle using a deep learning-based ct image analysis.heretofore, the mentioned studies in the literature use non-public datasets through developing a deep learning-based diagnostic of the covid-19. the studies [11] and [12] provides public datasets including the covid-19 x-ray images of infected patients. in [11] , the authors propose a combined public dataset besides a deep learning model called covid-net for the detection of covid-19. covid-net architecture relies on a tailored convolutional neural network (cnn) model which uses the chest xrays as inputs. the authors reach a test accuracy of 92.4% with restricted covid-19 class images. in our study, we use the same dataset of the [11] to be able to outperform the existing covid-net accuracy in detecting the covid-19. in addition, there are several more studies that we can consider in covid-19 detection using chest x-rays [16] [17] [18] [19] . with a detailed pre-processed dataset, our study captures the flag with a specially designed deep learning model.the usage of deep learning models in medical image processing and analysis is a challenging topic in the ai field [20, 21] . in [22] , the authors propose a cnn model for pneumonia detection. the authors of the study [23] propose a vessel extraction from the fundus images. in [24] , an expert system is proposed for brain tumor detection in high-resolution brain magnetic resonance images. to this end, in our study, we use a specially designed deep learning model called squeezenet first proposed in [25] .the proposed deep learning model for the diagnostic of the covid-19 is based on squeezenet architecture, as because it has a smaller structure, compared to the well-known pre-trained network designs [26, 27] .in this study, we introduce a covid-19 detection ai model, covidiagnosis-net, based on deep squeezenet with bayes optimization. with a view to obtain a higher accuracy rate, the hyper-parameter optimization of the deep learning models is a crucial task [28] . the backbone of the proposed model i.e. the dataset is a public dataset that is detailed in [11] . differently from the study [11] , we perform a multiscale augmentation process to overcome the imbalance problem of the proposed public dataset. since the focus is on covid-19 diagnosis, we perform a detailed offline augmentation process for the limited number of covid-19 infected chest x-rays of the patients . with the help of the offline well-defined   augmentation process and bayes-squeezenet, our proposed diagnostic model for covid-19 outperforms the covid-net [11] while reaching a test accuracy of 0.983. in building our model, we first perform a detailed augmentation. after obtaining the augmented dataset, the data split is generated on the shuffled database to form the train, validation and test datasets. we manage the training process of the deep squeezenet while performing a bayes optimization with the validation phase at the same time. through the training, the best model is determined and the final network design is tested with the separate test dataset package. on through those developments, the proposed deep bayes -squeezenet obtains a higher detection rate in the diagnosis of the covid-19 using the chest x-ray images.herein, we can describe the contributions of our proposed model as listed below: 1) presents a novel model for the rapid diagnostic of the covid-19 based on deep bayes-squeezenet called covidiagnosis-net, 2) overcomes the imbalance problem of the public dataset, a multi-scale offline augmentation is performed,3) proposes an easy to implement deep learning network for embedded and mobile systems that could aid the health experts for a stable diagnosis of the covid-19 in the control of the current epidemic.the composition of the rest of the article is as follows: section 2 describes the materials and methods with details of the proposed deep bayes-squeezenet along with the model components i.e. squeezenet architecture, bayesian optimization, and dataset description. section 3 presents the explanation of what we design in experiments with evaluation criteria, findings, and a comparison sub-section to draw the big picture of where our study stands among the other state-of-the-art methods. finally, section 4 briefs a conclusion of the study.cnn models achieve human-like accuracies in image classification problems due to their selflearning abilities and superior classification results on multi-class problems. a convolution network occurs from a chain of a convolution layer (conv) with a rectified linear unit (relu) activation functions, pooling layers (pool) and batch normalization operation. cnns are coordinated versions of multilayer perceptrons and each neuron in a layer is related to all neurons in the next layer. layers convolute inputs with kernels and filters of the convolutions increase across the whole visual field. these processes compose more complex patterns using smaller and simpler patterns depending on the hierarchical patterns. therefore, the hierarchical network structure provides high-level feature maps, reduced computation complexity and improved generalization ability [23, 29, 30] . considering these types of characteristics, bayesian optimization based deep squeezenet architecture for diagnostic of covid-19 disease from x-ray images is proposed in this paper.the main purpose of our framework is to provide distinctive visual properties as well as a rapid diagnostic system able to classify those properties on new covid-19 x-ray images. this method may also be helpful for clinicians because it may be quickly decided which treatment plan to use depending on the type of infection. the following sections describe the proposed method, deep squeezenet architecture, bayesian optimization, dataset description and offline augmentation techniques in detail.the overall architecture of the deep bayes-squeezenet based rapid diagnostic system is presented in in the first stage, the offline augmentation method is utilized to the raw input x-ray images due to their uneven sample distributions. this method is preferred for smaller classes with fewer sample numbers in order to increase the size of the classes by a transformation factor. after the augmentation, the augmented dataset is divided into three subsets as train, validation and test sets. train and validation sets are set as the input of the training and optimization stage. the test set is used for the testing input.in the training and optimization stage, the squeezenet convolution network is utilized and it uses the squeeze and expands layers of the fire modules to construct a smaller and more effective cnn architecture. squeezenet is a pre-trained cnn model and it is pre-trained on the ilsvrc-12 challenge imagenet dataset [31, 32] . this supporting dataset is completely different from x-ray images and the squeezenet model needs to be fine-tuned to classify the covidx classes. in order to obtain the best decision-making model, the cnn network is optimized with the bayesian-based method, which is a sequential design strategy, during training. a validation error is used to update the optimization process.finally, the best squeezenet model is obtained and used for the decision-making process with the test set. the obtained best network model classifies the infection classes and classification performances are determined.squeezenet is a convolution network that executes better performance than alexnet with 50x fewer parameters [24, 25, 31] . squeezenet consists of fifteen layers with five different layers as two convolution layers, three max pooling layers, eight fire layers, one global average pooling layer, and one output layer softmax. the architecture of the network is given in figure 2 . dimensions with rgb channels. the input images are generalized by convolution and max pooling is applied. convolution layer convolutes between the weights and small regions in the input volumes, with 3×3 kernels. each convolution layer performs an element-wise activation function as the positive part of its argument. squeezenet utilizes from the fire layers, which constructed of squeeze and expansion phases, between the convolution layers. the output tensor scale and input of the fire are consistent. the squeeze phase uses the filter of size 1×1, whereas expansion uses the filters of size 1×1 and 3×3. firstly, the input tensor h×w×c passes through the squeeze and the number of convolution is equal to c/4 of the number of input tensor channels. after the first phase, the data passes through the expansions and depth of the data is expanded to c/2 of the output tensor depth. both squeeze and expansion phases are connected to the relu units. the squeeze operation compresses the depth, and expansion increases the depth by keeping the same feature size. finally, expansion outputs are stacked in the depth dimension of input tensor with concatenate operation. figure 3 summarizes the fire layer and sub-operations.assuming fm and c define the feature maps and channels, the output layer f{y} of the squeeze operation with the kernel w can be expressed as [33] :here, and . the squeeze outputs can be defined as a weighted combination table 1 presents the detailed layer configuration of the squeezenet architecture. the motivation for designing the squeezenet architecture in covid-19 diagnosis is that the network provides three main advantages [24, 25] : 1) the network is more efficient because it has fewer parameters, 2) applications developed for this network are easy to move and require less communication, 3) it has a model size of less than 5 mb and it is easy to implement to embedded systems. hyperparameters have a key role in both machine learning and deep learning algorithms inasmuch as those parameters are tightly managing the acts of the training algorithms and they affect the performance of the models significantly. therefore, the optimization of hyperparameters is a crucial task, especially when it comes to deep learning in medical image processing. in general, there exist two ways of hyperparameters optimization called manual and automatic searching. the manual searching as the name suggests looks for the hyperparameters by hand. hence, manual searching requires expertise.unfortunately, when dealing with big data and so many model parameters for tuning, even expertise may be insufficient [28, 34] . to handle the difficulties of manually searching, automatic searching alternatives take place in the literature. grid search and random search algorithms can be considered in this topic. nevertheless, there are still problems remaining in both methods such as the curse of dimensionality, and unavailability of the highly efficient performance with the time-consuming operations [28, 35] .tuning of hyperparameters is such an optimization problem that the objective function of it is latent and unknown, in other words, it is a black-box function. as its name suggests, stemming from the bayesian theorem, the bayesian optimization is an efficient algorithm dealing with such kind of optimization problem [28, 36] . bayesian optimization relies on a typical kind of approximation. dealing with an unknown function requires an approximation with the help of some known samples i.e. prior knowledge. it is like the concept of the posteriori probability. here, the food of the algorithm is observations generated by the model evaluations in which the outputs of the online learning. this means that, in bayesian optimization, we need a training process. during the training, the model will trace a function that we only have its knowledge from the learned data. in the center of the bayesian optimization algorithm, the main purpose is to obtain the related hyperparameters that make learning outline maximum [37] . in mathematical expression, we can consider a global maximization or minimization problem of the black box (unknown) function ,here, stands for a searching space of . caused by the nature of the bayes' theorem [36] , bayesian optimization calculates the posteriori probability of a model with the aid of the learned data ( | ). posteriori probability is proportional to the likelihood of observations and the multiplication ( | ) of the prior probability : ( ) (3) reflects the main behavior of the bayesian optimization [28] . in brief, bayesian optimization searches for the best model amid many of them. at this point, one can recall the crossvalidation method. however, it is very hard to find the best model in many samples of pre-listed hundreds of alternatives. thus, bayesian optimization accelerates the operation by reducing the computational cost, and we do not need expertise to guess the outputs though [38] . in the flow, we can clarify the two basic parts of the algorithm: 1) it updates the posterior distribution and 2) it maximizes the acquisition function. bayesian optimization process continues repeatedly until the defined maximum iteration value is reached. alternatively, it can also be quitted when it catches a threshold value, which is the difference between the actual value and the obtained optimal value [28, 37] . as declared before, the general detection method for covid-19 disease is the rt-pcr testing that identifies sars-cov-2 rna from sputum or nasopharyngeal swab. however, rt-pcr testing has a long time complex process and it is very troublesome [6] . another detection method is chest radiography imaging due to the abnormalities in chest x-ray images of patients infected with covid-19 [2, 11] .therefore, we have selected a distinctive and public dataset including chest x-ray images to respond to the need for a rapid disease diagnosis system [11] . in order to compose a special covid-19 dataset, two different publicly available datasets were combined as covid chest x-ray dataset [12] and kaggle chest x-ray pneumonia dataset [39] . the obtained covidx dataset [11] consists the main purpose of the selection of covidx dataset is that it is public available, so it is accessible for researchers and to be extensible. therefore, further studies based on this database may be more helpful in the diagnosis and treatment of covid-19 cases.in the classification process of both classical machine learning and deep learning algorithms, the imbalance ratio of the class distribution of the dataset has a huge impact on the performances of the models. in the study [40] , in order to evaluate the quantitative performance of the proposed method, such evaluation metrics accuracy (acc), correctness (cor), completeness (com), specificity (spe), f1 score and matthew correlation coefficient (mcc) are statistically computed from the confusion matrix. acc measures the classification performance, cor gives the rate of the truly classified x-ray images among the classes while com defines the truly detected negative images. spe represents the correctly classified the rate of opposite disease classes. f1 is a harmonic average and gives the combination of cor and com.mcc measures the quality of the classification performance. according to the confusion matrix, the selected evaluation metrics are defined as: here, define the number of correctly classified diseases, number of correctly , , , classified opposite classes, number of incorrectly classified diseases and number of the misclassified diseases, respectively. the classification procedure proves and determines the robustness, effectiveness and generalization ability of the proposed method using the aforementioned evaluation metrics.in the experimental setup, firstly we perform an offline augmentation to the raw covidx dataset.after the pre-processing, the augmented dataset is divided into three packages as training, validation and testing sets. the triple split of the dataset packages is formed as 80% for training, 10% for validation and 10% for testing. training and validation datasets are designed for the bayesian optimization-based online learning structure. as because of the bayesian contribution of our model, it needs a validation result to minimize the objective function error. after the bayesian optimization-based online training process, we reach the best network model to implement the testing phase. with a separate test dataset, the obtained best model is evaluated. all the input images are resized to 227×227 pixel size and transformed to rgb with 8-bit depth. in the meantime, all the dataset packages are shuffled to overcome the negative effect of the overfitting. thus, we reach a robust decision-making performance for the classification of the infected patient cases. in the training process, mini-batch size is given as 32 and all images are normalized with the mean subtracting operation. proposed deep bayes-squeezenet includes the bayesian optimization in the training stage with validation process. the objective function of the optimization process is given in figure 7 . it can be seen that function evaluation ends with 35 iterations because of the model saturation. at the end of the 10 th iteration, the minimum observed objective is achieved to construct the best model. the optimized parameters i.e. initial learning rate (initiallearnrate), momentum, and l2regularization are listed in table 3 along with iterations, model result, run time and observedestimation values of the objective function. during the optimization process, it is clearly seen that after catching five different best models, bayesian optimization points out the model of the 10th iteration as selected "best model". after the training process, the obtained best model parameters are used in the proposed deep bayes-squeezenet network and highlighted in table 3 . in order to evaluate the effectiveness of our augmentation improvement, we first present the raw dataset results. here, our aim is to prove the negative effect of the imbalance distributions in the raw dataset over the performance. it should be noted that we tune the squeezenet with the best model parameters for a regular training process. the re-training and testing processes are performed with the train and test packages of the related dataset, please see table 2 . figure 8 demonstrates the confusion matrix of the test process of the re-trained squeezenet. in the confusion matrix presentation, accuracies and errors of each row and columns are given as the percentage value in the lower and right cells,respectively. the accuracy rates of each column show us the correctness value of each class and the accuracy values for each row state the single accuracy values of the classes.as shown in figure 8 , the false classification rate appears majorly within normal and pneumonia.pneumonia class achieves nearly the perfect classification whereas covid class has 70% accuracy within 10 in table 4 the second phase of our experiments is performing the augmented dataset testing process. in this phase, the proposed deep bayes-squeezenet model, which is obtained by the bayesian optimization approach, is validated with the separate test dataset. it should be noted that the obtained best model is trained with the augmented dataset to overcome the above-mentioned imbalance effects as well as achieving a rapid system for covid-19 diagnosis with a robust and sustainable structure. figure 9 presents the confusion matrix of the test phase. in order to analyze the performance comparison between the experiments of the raw dataset and the augmented one, we report the increase rates of the performance values as in figure 10 . the sharp bounce is experienced in the normal class by a boosting of 2.5 times. as it is the focus of our model, when we concentrate on the performance of the covid then we detect 2.5 times boosting. in pneumonia class, there is a decreasing percentage of 2.06% considering just the accuracy value. the overall accuracy rate has also a performance increasing at the rate of 28.66%. the overall accuracy rate has also a performance increase at a rate of 28.66%. activation mapping also defines the bias regions in the training images. the first column of figure 11 defines the original input images while the second column includes the heat map images of the predicted samples. when all the class activation mappings are examined in figure 11 the proposed deep bayes-squeezenet with its low model size is easy to implement in hardware deployments. as shown in table 6 , the model size of the proposed network is less than 77.31 times lower compared to the alexnet, which is the inspiration of the squeezenet architecture.the overall experimental results show that proposed model has a significant and robust performance value. over the covid-19 patient cases, this study proposes a complete and compact solution using the chest x-ray images for rapid diagnosis. (d) figure 11 . class activation mapping visualization of the proposed deep bayes-squeezenet on sample images: a) covid b) normal c) pneumonia d) misclassified prediction the coronavirus disease 2019 was announced as an outbreak by who on february 11, 2020 [1] .due to the covid-19 outbreak, the early diagnosis of this disease has become a key topic for clinicians and radiologists in the world. the ai techniques regarding the image classification approaches can help in early diagnose of the disease. considering ai, cnn methods achieve better and faster results compared to the traditional diagnosis methods. in this paper, a rapid robust and efficient covid-19 diagnosis method, which is namely deep bayes-squeezenet, is proposed. the proposed method performs the x-ray images into multiclass as normal, pneumonia, and covid. in order to evaluate the proposed cnn model, the general performance comparison of our study with the state-of-art methods is given in this section. in the model evaluations, the related studies depend on the multiclass classification of the chest x-ray images with various ai techniques. table 7 shows the comparison results with the related studies uses the same or similar datasets. amid the performance metrics that table 8 gives, our model outperforms similar studies that use chest x-rays in the diagnosis of the covid-19. although it seems that some of the performance values have been achieved the same with the study [19] , the whole performance of the proposed method in our study is better than it.in table 8 , the performance values of the listed studies are given in terms of covid-19 class accuracy. while chowdhury et al. [19] have the same overall accuracy with our study, the covid-19class accuracy stays behind the proposed method. farooq and hafeez [18] obtain the same accuracy of covid-19 class, but our study outperforms it in the overall accuracy. in addition, the test dataset of the study includes just eight samples of covid-19. to the best of our knowledge, the proposed model reveals the excellent classification performance for the covid-19 diagnosis with chest x-rays. the proposed model has a great advantage of owning a practical network architecture with a robust and stable operation. with its nature of including fewer parameters, our network is more favorable for embedded systems among existing deep learning models.a rapid diagnosis method has a key role in the control of infectious diseases and pandemic situations like the up to date covid-19. some limitations of the rt-pcr nucleic acid-based test modules reveal a need for fast alternative methods to be able to serve the front-line experts to make them reach a quick and accurate diagnosis. in this study, we propose an ai-based decision-making system including the recognition of input x-ray images under the roof of a very practical deep learning model. this study is an important attempt including an easy to implement deep learning model which has an accuracy performance of 98.3% (among normal, pneumonia and covid cases), and 100% for the single recognition of covid-19 (among other classes). in these difficult days of the global covid-19 pandemic, our model has a strong potential to build a tool design for covid-19 monitoring. we would like to note that that the rt-pcr test method to detect the sars-cov-2 is still important. however, it is proved that there are also undeniable shortcomings along with the rt-pcr test method, which can be listed as follows: 1) its possible methodology lacks, 2) strict dependence on the level of the disease (timing), 3) the possibility for collecting the specimens in mistaken localizations and 4) its response time delay [6, 7] . in our model working with a deep learning-based practical structure, the early stage detections of the covid-19 cases could be done to manage and control the pandemic disease. in medical image processing, while deep learning methods are preferred in many areas, it is becoming more and more important especially in the interpretation of radiological images. as such, our model, which is extremely satisfactory even with its initial results, opens the door for the implementation of a comprehensive product that can work mobile and appeal to the end-user.backbone of our model is the deep bayes-squeezenet decision-making system for the covid-19diagnosis from x-ray images. squeezenet with much less model size is a state-of-the-art deep learning model, which is inspired by the well-known alexnet. with its practical structure and generalization performance, the squeezenet is preferable in the embedded applications. we improve the squeezenet structure with bayes optimization algorithm to build a robust and sustainable learning model. bayesian optimization helps us to build a best-performed model with a validation dataset. the diagnosis system is trained using the public dataset proposed in [11] with its augmented form. a separate test, which is independent of train and validation sets, performs the experiments. our experimental results also present the performance boosting of the augmentation contribution to the dataset pre-processing. thus, model training can be performed with a rich image set of x-rays of covid-19. after comprehensive literature research, the up to date studies, which use the same or similar public datasets are detected and we evaluate our model with those. the proposed diagnosis model for covid-19 using the x-ray images, the deep bayes-squeezenet outperforms its competitors. we believe that with increased training dataset, it is expected to get higher results.in further works, we aim to plan our model to be able to work mobile appealing to the health care experts for diagnosis of the covid-19. in addition, the possibility of presenting this diagnostic system as a solution for other medical image processing cases will also be explored.since severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) first emerged in wuhan, china, on 12 december 2019, it has spread quickly across the world and developed into a pandemic. [1] [2] [3] the worldhealth organization (who) announced a new name for the disease:coronavirus disease (covid-19). by 31 march 2020, more than 700 000 covid-19 cases were confirmed in over 100 countries and regions. to date, the rapid spread of sars-cov-2 has caused considerable harm to public health and the economy. 4, 5 clinical manifestations of covid-19 include fever, dry cough, and fatigue. approximately half of the infected patients developed severe pneumonia, and nearly one-third of the patients develop acute respiratory distress syndrome. [6] [7] [8] however, there is currently no specific treatment for covid-19. due to the obstacle of collecting high-quality throat swab samples in different stages of infection, nucleic acid test for sars-cov-2 showed high false negative rate. it is difficult to identify and quarantine the infected individuals to effectively break the spread chain and curb the infection. therefore, it is of urgent need to develop a more sensitive diagnostic method that can rapidly identify sars-cov-2 infected patients with high accuracy. jiajia xie and chengchao ding contributed equally to this work.currently, the viral nucleic acid real-time polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) test based on patient nasopharyngeal and throat swabs is the standard method for clinical diagnosis of covid-19.despite its crucial role in identifying sars-cov-2 infection in patients at the start of the epidemic, the limitations of this method soon became obvious. for example, one recent study demonstrated that rt-pcr only showed a positive test rate of 38% in a total of 4880 specimens with a significant number of false negative cases. 9 it is accepted that igm is the early immunoglobulin in response to the virus invasion and igg has the highest opsonization and neutralization activities in humoral immune response. previous studies have reported that igm-igg seroconversion can start as early as 4 days after the onset of sars infection. 10 most patients were admitted to the hospital due to fever or respiratory symptoms. nasopharyngeal and throat swabs were used for respiratory pathogen testing. serum levels of igm-igg antibodies targeting sars-cov-2 were tested upon patient admission. medical history about when the clinical symptoms appeared was asked and the time interval between clinical symptoms and antibody testing was recorded in detail. physical findings and hematological and biochemical results were also collected. all patients enrolled in this study were diagnosed according to the 5th edition of the guideline on diagnosis and treatment of covid-19 established by china's national health commission, including patient's epidemic history, clinical characteristics, chest computed tomographic (ct) scan, and laboratory findings. patients with covid-19 having severe illness were defined having one of the following criteria: (a) respiratory distress with respiratory frequency (rp) more than or equal to 30/min, (b) pulse oximeter oxygen saturation less than or equal to 93% at rest, or (c) oxygenation index (arterial partial pressure of oxygen/inspired oxygen fraction [pao 2 /fio 2 ]) less than or equal to 300 mm hg.clinical characteristics were compared between severe and nonsevere cases. this study was approved by the ethics committee of the first affiliated hospital of ustc. this is a retrospective and observational study and the informed consent was obtained.the presence of sars-cov-2 was detected using rt-pcr. viral rna was extracted from nasopharyngeal and throat swabs using the anti-human igg and igm assays were purchased from yhlo biological technology co, ltd, shenzhen, china. in all patients, igg and igm antibodies against the sars-cov-2 envelope (e) protein and nucleocapsid (n) protein in serum samples were measured using chemiluminescence immunoassay. the cutoff value for a positive result was 10, and samples with values greater than or equal to 10 au/ml were considered positive for sars-cov-2 infection.categorical variables are presented as numbers (%) and continuous measurements as medians (interquartile range [iqr]). antibody concentration was reported as the geometric mean (sd). continuous variables were analyzed using the mann-whitney test or unpaired t test. the correlation of igm and igg quantitative detection with hematological profiles was analyzed using pearson correlation. graphpad prism 8.3 was used for all statistical analyses. a two-sided α value less than .05 was considered statistically significant.igm-igg antibody levels and nucleic acid test results are summarized in (table 2) .interestingly, there were differences in laboratory findings between the groups with severe and nonsevere covid-19 symptoms.this included higher neutrophil counts, neutrophil percentage (neu%), and fibrinogen level, and lower lymphocyte counts and lymphocyte percentages (lym%) (p < .05) (figure 1 ). the median d-dimer level was increased in the group with severe symptoms, but the difference was not significant. procalcitonin and hypersensitive c-reactive protein levels were in the normal range in the majority of patients (table 3) . ). statistical analysis was performed using the mann-whitney test. p values indicate differences between severe and nonsevere patients. *p < .05 was considered statistically significant. abbreviation: covid-19, coronavirus disease. *p < .05. **p < .005. ***p < .001. ****p < .0001. (table 4 ; figure 2d ).in this study, we analyzed the clinical features and immunological characteristics of 56 patients with covid-19. despite negative nucleic acid test results, all patients showed high specific igg concentrations, suggesting sars-cov-2 infection. of the 56 patients, over 50% developed severe illness and required intensive care.common symptoms were fever, cough, and chest tightness, which is consistent with previous studies. 4, 6, 12 compared with patients with nonsevere symptoms, patients in the severe illness group had numerous laboratory abnormalities, such as higher neutrophil counts, neu%, fibrinogen levels, lower lymphocyte counts, and lower lym%.igm was lower while igg was higher in patients with severe symptoms. in addition, a weak correlation between igm and neu% was noted. these findings suggest that patients in the severe illness group might experience a longer virus exposure time and develop a more severe inflammatory response.currently, the nucleic acid test based on individual nasopharyngeal and throat swabs is the standard diagnostic method for covid-19. although the rt-pcr method is sensitive and effective, it still suffers from some limitations such as being labor-intensive f i g u r e 2 analysis of igm-igg findings in severe and nonsevere groups. a, kinetic analysis of igm-igg antibodies in severe and nonsevere groups; b, differences in total igm levels between severe and nonsevere groups; c, differences in total igg levels between severe and nonsevere groups; and d, correlation between igm and neu% in patients in the severe group. antibody concentration was presented as the geometric mean (sd) and analyzed using an unpaired t test. the correlation of igm-igg with hematological profiles was analyzed using pearson correlation. all statistical analyses were performed using graphpad prism 8.3 (****p < .0001). p < .05 was considered statistically significant. neu%, neutrophil percentage; sd, standard deviation on 30 january 2020, the world health organization (who) declared sars-cov-2 as a global public health emergency [1] . covid-19 originated from wuhan province in china, has led to bans on travel and public gatherings and has negatively impacted the world economy [2, 3] . covid-19 is characterized with high morbidity and low mortality, therefore representing great threat, particularly to immunocompromised, elderly people and individuals with pre-existing health problems. the data so far suggest that the virus has a case fatality rate of around 1% [4] . it is thus several times more severe than typical seasonal influenza, with a severity falling somewhere between the 1957 (0.6%) and 1918 (2%) influenza pandemics [4] , but it appears to be lower than sars (9.5%) and middle east respiratory syndrome (34.4%) [5] .in addition. the average person infected with covid-19 spreads the disease efficiently to two or three others: an exponential rate of increase. there is also strong evidence that the virus can be transmitted by infected individuals that are asymptomatic or experiencing mild symptoms [6] . this in turns complicates containment or disease control measures compared to diseases caused by other coronaviruses like middle east respiratory syndrome (mers-cov) or severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars-cov). thus, far, covid-19 has caused approximately ten times as many cases as sars-cov in a quarter of the time [7] . unlike mers-cov (camel as intermediate carrier) and sars-cov (civet cat as intermediate carrier), the source of covid-19 remains unknown according to who [8, 9] , but recent studies suggested intermediate carriers could be snakes [9] or pangolins [10] , and bats are speculated to be the reservoir host [11] .the median incubation period of covid-19 is four days (range 0-24 days), and the longest incubation period observed is 24 days [12] . particularly, some covid-19 infected individuals do not develop obvious clinical symptoms [13, 14] . the long incubation period and asymptomatic infections imply a huge risk of community transmission of sars-cov-2 [15, 16] . rapid point of care tests is required to detect the virus in suspected cases at community clinics, hospitals and possibly for house-house testing.among the measures for stopping the spread of covid-19 is the availability of reliable and aggressive testing. presently, samples collected from suspected cases presenting at community clinics and hospitals are being processed at a centralized clinical laboratory, where expensive pcr equipment and technical expertise are available. the turnaround time of the results can be up to 72 h. such delays in turnaround time could lead to anxiety and the continued spread of the virus. since self-isolation is not absolutely assured after testing with standard real-time rt-pcr at a centralized clinical laboratory [17] . however, a point of care covid-19 test can help reduce anxiety, eliminate prolonged turnaround time and reduce the spread of the virus. a point of care device that is rapid, robust, and cost-effective can be used onsite and in the field and does not necessarily require trained personnel to operate [18] is crucial and urgently needed for the detection of sars-cov-2. the importance of testing to reduce the spread of an outbreak like covid-19 has been shown to dramatically control infectious diseases [19] [20] [21] ( figure 1 ). in turns complicates containment or disease control measures compared to diseases caused by other coronaviruses like middle east respiratory syndrome (mers-cov) or severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars-cov). thus, far, covid-19 has caused approximately ten times as many cases as sars-cov in a quarter of the time [7] . unlike mers-cov (camel as intermediate carrier) and sars-cov (civet cat as intermediate carrier), the source of covid-19 remains unknown according to who [8, 9] , but recent studies suggested intermediate carriers could be snakes [9] or pangolins [10] , and bats are speculated to be the reservoir host [11] .the median incubation period of covid-19 is four days (range 0-24 days), and the longest incubation period observed is 24 days [12] . particularly, some covid-19 infected individuals do not develop obvious clinical symptoms [13, 14] . the long incubation period and asymptomatic infections imply a huge risk of community transmission of sars-cov-2 [15, 16] . rapid point of care tests is required to detect the virus in suspected cases at community clinics, hospitals and possibly for househouse testing.among the measures for stopping the spread of covid-19 is the availability of reliable and aggressive testing. presently, samples collected from suspected cases presenting at community clinics and hospitals are being processed at a centralized clinical laboratory, where expensive pcr equipment and technical expertise are available. the turnaround time of the results can be up to 72 h. such delays in turnaround time could lead to anxiety and the continued spread of the virus. since self-isolation is not absolutely assured after testing with standard real-time rt-pcr at a centralized clinical laboratory [17] . however, a point of care covid-19 test can help reduce anxiety, eliminate prolonged turnaround time and reduce the spread of the virus. a point of care device that is rapid, robust, and cost-effective can be used onsite and in the field and does not necessarily require trained personnel to operate [18] is crucial and urgently needed for the detection of sars-cov-2. the importance of testing to reduce the spread of an outbreak like covid-19 has been shown to dramatically control infectious diseases [19] [20] [21] (figure 1 ).importance of rapid testing of infectious diseases in controlling an outbreak. the y-axis represents the number of cases, and x-axis indicates the period of detection and response. the red color represents the number of cases without an intervention like testing, and yellow color is the drop in cases due to intervention, drastically reducing the response rate, unlike the graph on the left hand side [22] .since the outbreak of covid-19, regulatory bodies like us food drug administration (fda) has fast-tracked covid-19 diagnostics, including isothermal amplification technology platform like nicking enzyme-assisted reaction (near) as emergency use authorization. this has led to increased uptake of covid-19 diagnostics from commercial companies, research institutions and in-house development of the tests by clinical laboratories, and these tests are largely based on pcr technology. however, this technology is not completely amenable to onsite or field conditions. in addition, the introduction of rapid immunoassay coupled on lateral flow strip as point of care test has been developed. this test can detect either sars-cov-2 antigens or antibodies like igm and igg developed against the virus. while this testing method has the advantage of absolutely reducing the turnaround figure 1 . importance of rapid testing of infectious diseases in controlling an outbreak. the y-axis represents the number of cases, and x-axis indicates the period of detection and response. the red color represents the number of cases without an intervention like testing, and yellow color is the drop in cases due to intervention, drastically reducing the response rate, unlike the graph on the left hand side [22] .since the outbreak of covid-19, regulatory bodies like us food drug administration (fda) has fast-tracked covid-19 diagnostics, including isothermal amplification technology platform like nicking enzyme-assisted reaction (near) as emergency use authorization. this has led to increased uptake of covid-19 diagnostics from commercial companies, research institutions and in-house development of the tests by clinical laboratories, and these tests are largely based on pcr technology. however, this technology is not completely amenable to onsite or field conditions. in addition, the introduction of rapid immunoassay coupled on lateral flow strip as point of care test has been developed. this test can detect either sars-cov-2 antigens or antibodies like igm and igg developed against the virus. while this testing method has the advantage of absolutely reducing the turnaround time to less than 10 min and highly cost effective but are likely to be less sensitive and specific based on the experience with influenza viruses rapid immunoassay [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] .an alternative and comparable technology to pcr is required to enable a timely detection of sars-cov-2. this technology should also be comparable to rapid immunoassay regarding providing point of care testing in less than 30 min and cost effective. this review provides a brief description of common isothermal technologies (loop-mediated amplification and recombinase polymerase amplification) that could be potentially deployed as point of care tests at community clinics and hospitals. these technologies have been proven to have the potential to replace pcr especially in resource limited settings that is characterized with inadequate expertise and infrastructure for pcr setup. there are limited publications on the application of isothermal technologies for testing covid-19, only few studies have demonstrated its comparability with pcr.iat is the amplification of nucleic acids at a constant temperature and it does not require thermocycling like pcr. there are different strategies for achieving amplified products (table 1) , and it has been demonstrated in point of care testing as already reviewed extensively [28] . these technologies have been identified as a game changer [28] that will improve the turnaround time to results and ease of use of diagnostic tools for covid-19, new molecular diagnostic tools using iat have been developed that can be used as a point of care. unlike pcr that need to be performed by skilled personnel in a central laboratory, iat requires little to no training and can be performed at community clinics and hospitals. this means that frontline workers like nurses and medical doctors can perform covid-19 test when needed at point of care. the iat technologies offer high sensitivity and specificity when compared with pcr [29] [30] [31] , mainly due to the strand displacement enzymes that are commonly used in these technologies. for example, loop-mediated amplification (lamp) and near, uses bacillus stearothermophilus dna polymerase, while dna polymerase from bacillus subtilis is used by recombinase polymerase amplification (rpa). their polymerase activity was noted for improved sensitivity and efficiency. additionally, the use of iat is less expensive or comparable with pcr-based test. for example, estimates of affordability are less than usd 10 per test and less than usd 500 per piece of equipment [32] [33] [34] .several of isothermal technologies have been commercialized and are being used for the diagnosis of human infectious diseases including malaria, tuberculosis, viral hepatitis, chlamydia and gonorrhea [28] , using lamp, rpa, strand displacement amplification and helicase displacement amplification. among these platforms, loop-mediated amplification is widely applied with more than 1000 peer reviewed publications reported to have utilized lamp for the detection of human infectious diseases which has been extensively reviewed [33] [34] [35] . however, the uptake of lamp as a diagnostic tool for covid-19 has been very slow, particularly at point of care. yet, lamp, rpa and near have recently emerged as potential technologies that could obviate the need for pcr and can be used at community clinics and hospitals in order to identify both symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals, potentially reducing the spread of covid-19. excitedly, near was recently approved as emergency use authorization by us fda for the detection of sars-cov-2, and this test is referred to as id now™ covid-19 (abbott laboratories, illinois, il, usa). the lamp reaction mechanism simply involves nucleic acids unwinding, amplification and elongation. this approach has been described in an animation by eiken chemical (http://loopamp. eiken.co.jp/e/lamp/anim.html), which is really helpful in understanding how the principle works. essentially, lamp uses a bst dna polymerase with strand-displacement activity, coupled with two inner primers (fip, bip) and outer primers (f3, b3) that recognizes six separate regions on a dna template. additional loop primers (lf, lb) may be added to speed up the reaction by binding to and amplifying newly formed loop amplicons in the reaction. these additional primers further enhance the sensitivity and specificity of the reaction ( figure 2 ). lamp reactions are incubated at a constant temperature ranging from 60-65 • c with time to amplification (that is, a positive lamp result) in less than 60 min [39] . lamp and near are also compatible for the detection/amplification of rna templates directly with bst 3 dna polymerase (new england biolabs, melbourne, australia) or with a reverse transcriptase in the reaction [48] .a lamp positive reaction can be determined visually and quantified based on turbidity, colorimetry and fluorimetry. the insoluble byproduct, magnesium pyrophosphate, which is formed during the lamp reaction, can be seen with the naked eye (cloudiness) ( figure 3a ) [34] . recently, this endpoint detection was improved by using calcein, a fluorescein complex, which fluoresces (visible color change) in the presence of magnesium pyrophosphate ( figure 3b ) [34, 50] . nucleic acid intercalating dyes including sybr green can be added to detect (visible color change) and quantify the loop amplicons formed. this detection system allows real-time monitoring of the reaction using isothermal equipment equipped with fluorescence detectors. this commercial equipment has been optimized and is highly adaptable across a wide range of iat including near, lamp and rpa ( figure 3c ).there is paucity in the literature on the application of iat for covid-19 diagnosis. the studies so far showed that one-step rt-lamp test is comparable with rt-qpcr. lin yu et al. [29] showed rt-lamp test could detect synthesized rna equivalent to 10 copies of sars-cov-2 virus, and the clinical sensitivity was 97.6% (42/43) with samples validated by rt-qpcr. their test targeted orf1ab region of the virus and it could be performed between 20-40 min. while renfei lu et al. [30] , targeted rdrp gene and showed limit of detection as 3 copies of synthesized sars-cov rna and 100% sensitivity (17/17) as determined by rt-qpcr in 40 min. in addition. their test did not cross react with 15 clinical samples that were positive for respiratory viruses like enterovirus, respiratory syncytial virus a and b groups, parainfluenza viruses type 1-3, influenza a-c, human rhinovirus, human metapneumovirus, adenovirus, bocavirus and human coronavirus strains. unlike other studies, laura lamb et al. [31] , detected 1.02 fg of sars-cov-2 fragments and used simulated patient samples by spiking saliva, urine, serum, oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal swabs with fragments of synthetic sars-cov-2 without extractions. their reaction test time was less than 30 min and it was highly specific as it does not cross react with mers, beta-coronavirus england-1 or murine hepatitis virus when spiked into patient samples. schematic representation of loop-mediated amplification reaction and its principle. unlike pcr primer design, lamp is characterized with four different primers, specifically designed to recognize six distinct regions of the target dna. forward inner primer (fip) consists of a f2 region at the 3'-end and an f1c region at the 5'-end. while the f3 primer (forward outer primer) consists of a f3 region which is complementary to the f3c region of the template sequence. the backward inner primer (bip) is made up of a b2 region at the 3'-end and a b1c region at the 5'-end. b3 primer (backward outer primer) consists of a b3 region which is complementary to the b3c region of the template sequence. in regards to lamp reaction, amplification begins when f2 region of fip anneals to f2c region of the target dna and initiates complementary strand synthesis, and f3 primer anneals to the f3c region of the target and extends, displacing the fip linked complementary strand. this displaced strand forms a loop at the 5'-end, which provides the template for bip, and b2 anneals to b2c region of the template. dna synthesis is initiated, which results in the formation of a complementary strand and opening of the 5'-end loop. subsequently, b3 anneals to b3c region of the target dna and extends, displacing the bip linked complementary strand, which forms a dumbbellshaped dna. the nucleotides are added to the 3'-end of f1 by bst dna polymerase, which extends and opens up the loop at the 5'-end. the dumbbell-shaped dna is converted to a stem-loop structure (a and b), which initiates lamp cycling (second stage of lamp reaction). the amplicons formed are a mixture of stem-loop and cauliflower-like structures with multiple loops [49] .a lamp positive reaction can be determined visually and quantified based on turbidity, colorimetry and fluorimetry. the insoluble byproduct, magnesium pyrophosphate, which is formed during the lamp reaction, can be seen with the naked eye (cloudiness) ( figure 3a ) [34] . recently, this endpoint detection was improved by using calcein, a fluorescein complex, which fluoresces (visible color change) in the presence of magnesium pyrophosphate ( figure 3b ) [34, 50] . nucleic acid intercalating dyes including sybr green can be added to detect (visible color change) and quantify the loop amplicons formed. this detection system allows real-time monitoring of the reaction using isothermal equipment equipped with fluorescence detectors. this commercial equipment has been optimized and is highly adaptable across a wide range of iat including near, lamp and rpa ( figure 3c ). in regards to lamp reaction, amplification begins when f2 region of fip anneals to f2c region of the target dna and initiates complementary strand synthesis, and f3 primer anneals to the f3c region of the target and extends, displacing the fip linked complementary strand. this displaced strand forms a loop at the 5'-end, which provides the template for bip, and b2 anneals to b2c region of the template. dna synthesis is initiated, which results in the formation of a complementary strand and opening of the 5'-end loop. subsequently, b3 anneals to b3c region of the target dna and extends, displacing the bip linked complementary strand, which forms a dumbbell-shaped dna. the nucleotides are added to the 3'-end of f1 by bst dna polymerase, which extends and opens up the loop at the 5'-end. the dumbbell-shaped dna is converted to a stem-loop structure (a and b), which initiates lamp cycling (second stage of lamp reaction). the amplicons formed are a mixture of stem-loop and cauliflower-like structures with multiple loops [49] . the amplification of nucleic acids using rpa is faster than lamp, at 37 • c or less [51] . rpa employs recombinase proteins that forms a complex with primers that scan for homologous sequences and unwind double stranded template ( figure 4) [28, 43] . the amplified products can either be monitored in real time or sandwiched on a lateral flow strip, and the two commonly used detection systems are possible with unique probes which are the same in design except for internal modifications ( figure 5 ) [28] . usually, the test design by the diagnostic developer determines the choice of probe; the exo probe is used for real-time monitoring, while nfo is suitable for lateral flow strip. the recombinase proteins and monitoring devices (including lateral flow strips) are commercially available from companies like twistdx, cambridge, uk. hence, the developer only needs to design and screen primers and probe that targets pathogen of choice. interestingly, pcr primers could also be adopted for rpa assay development, unlike lamp primers. to date, no study has been demonstrated using this technology for covid-19 diagnosis, but rpa has been deployed during the last ebola virus outbreak that was declared as a global public health epidemic by who [52] . recombinase polymerase amplification schematic representation. it begins with the binding of recombinase (t4 uvsy and uvsx; green diamonds and orange circles, respectively) to forward and reverse primers, which forms a complex that search for homologous sequences in double stranded dna. strand exchange reaction occurs once the homology is found. the single strand binding proteins (ssb, t4 gp32 protein; brown circles) aligns to unwound dna strand, allowing dna polymerase (bacillus subtilis pol i, bsu; green circles) to initiate template amplification using the two primers, forming two double stranded dna. the repetition of the cycle leads to exponential amplification.near is driven by two enzymes (nicking endonuclease and dna polymerase) and with reaction buffer, deoxyribonucleotide triphosphate and primers, a linear amplification of dna template is achieved. this amplification eventually leads to exponential increase of amplified products [53] , and it can be coupled on a fluorometer. briefly, near reaction occurs at 60 °c and it involves five steps: (a) the dna template is hybridized with primers that are conjugated with nicking endonucleases restriction site, cleaving the double stranded dna (b) from the 3′ end of the primer, dna polymerase extends nucleotides forming a double stranded dna; (c) nicking endonucleases identifies the restriction site on the primers and nicked one of the strands, exposing the 3′end; (d) figure 4 . recombinase polymerase amplification schematic representation. it begins with the binding of recombinase (t4 uvsy and uvsx; green diamonds and orange circles, respectively) to forward and reverse primers, which forms a complex that search for homologous sequences in double stranded dna. strand exchange reaction occurs once the homology is found. the single strand binding proteins (ssb, t4 gp32 protein; brown circles) aligns to unwound dna strand, allowing dna polymerase (bacillus subtilis pol i, bsu; green circles) to initiate template amplification using the two primers, forming two double stranded dna. the repetition of the cycle leads to exponential amplification.near is driven by two enzymes (nicking endonuclease and dna polymerase) and with reaction buffer, deoxyribonucleotide triphosphate and primers, a linear amplification of dna template is achieved. this amplification eventually leads to exponential increase of amplified products [53] , and it can be coupled on a fluorometer. briefly, near reaction occurs at 60 • c and it involves five steps: (a) the dna template is hybridized with primers that are conjugated with nicking endonucleases restriction site, cleaving the double stranded dna (b) from the 3 end of the primer, dna polymerase extends nucleotides forming a double stranded dna; (c) nicking endonucleases identifies the restriction site on the primers and nicked one of the strands, exposing the 3 end; (d) dna polymerase extends from the nicked site by employing uncleaved strand as a template for a new double stranded dna, displacing the former strand for another cycle of dna synthesis, but restriction site is recovered on the newly synthesized double stranded dna; (e) these steps continuously amplified targeted dna template via cleavage, extension and recovery ( figure 6 ). the probe annealed to double stranded dna has a 3′ block (dark blue) that prevents extension. the escherichia coli endonuclease iv (nfo) or exonuclease iii (exo) recognizes and cleaves the tetrahydrofuran (thf) residue (as indicated with the arrow) within the probe, detaching the 3′-end block. this process helps the integration into the amplified products through bsu polymerase elongation from the 3′-end hydroxide; (a) regarding nfo amplification, fluorophore labeled amplicons (for example, with fluorescein amidites and biotin dyes) can be detected visually using lateral flow strips. this sandwich format allows the fluorophore (bright orange) to be captured through anti-fluorophore conjugated gold nanoparticles. it also can detect a second label like biotin (purple) by binding to a streptavidin detection line; (b) regarding exo amplification, fluorescent signals are generated when exonuclease iii (exo, pink) cuts the thf site like the nfo, separating the fluorophore (bright orange) from the quencher (red); (c) the lateral flow coupled with rpa nfo reaction can be performed within a broad range of temperatures (top) and a positive test is observed visibly after 10 min (bottom) [54] ; (d) the exo fluorescent signals are detected by a real-time device, such as the t16-iso equipment from twistdx, cambridge, uk. the probe annealed to double stranded dna has a 3 block (dark blue) that prevents extension. the escherichia coli endonuclease iv (nfo) or exonuclease iii (exo) recognizes and cleaves the tetrahydrofuran (thf) residue (as indicated with the arrow) within the probe, detaching the 3 -end block. this process helps the integration into the amplified products through bsu polymerase elongation from the 3 -end hydroxide; (a) regarding nfo amplification, fluorophore labeled amplicons (for example, with fluorescein amidites and biotin dyes) can be detected visually using lateral flow strips. this sandwich format allows the fluorophore (bright orange) to be captured through anti-fluorophore conjugated gold nanoparticles. it also can detect a second label like biotin (purple) by binding to a streptavidin detection line; (b) regarding exo amplification, fluorescent signals are generated when exonuclease iii (exo, pink) cuts the thf site like the nfo, separating the fluorophore (bright orange) from the quencher (red); (c) the lateral flow coupled with rpa nfo reaction can be performed within a broad range of temperatures (top) and a positive test is observed visibly after 10 min (bottom) [54] ; (d) the exo fluorescent signals are detected by a real-time device, such as the t16-iso equipment from twistdx, cambridge, uk. figure 6 . schematic representation of nicking enzyme-assisted reaction. unlike pcr primers, near primers are uniquely designed for a successful reaction. each primer has three regions: restriction site (5′-gagtcnnnn-3', for example, nt. bstnbi), stabilizing region and a target-binding region that is complementary to the target nucleic acid strand. first, the forward primer (primer 1) anneals with template 1 at the target-binding region and extended from its 3′ end by dna polymerase. this results in the formation of an intermediate strand, complementary to template 1 (step i). at the same time, the nicking endonuclease recognizes the asymmetric restriction site (5'-gagtc-3′) cleaves the strand with four base pairs after the recognized sequence introduces a new nick site (step ii). at the nick site, dna polymerase initiates another extension and displace the intermediate strand generated in step i (step iii and iv). this displaced strand (template 2) carries the target-binding sequence complementary to reverse primer (primer 2), and dna polymerase extends from the 3′ end of this primer (step vi). again, nicking endonuclease recognizes and cleaves the restriction site, and the polymerase enzyme extends and displaces the initial template strand (template 1) from the nick site, which is recovered (step vii and ix) for another cycle, starting from step i. the target template is exponentially amplified by repeating this cycle of events [53] .the potential of a new diagnostic technology is usually demonstrated when matched with an existing and well-established technology. for a covid-19 iat to be considered acceptable for diagnostic purposes at community clinics and hospitals, research must not only demonstrate its diagnostic sensitivity and specificity, which is the common practice, but should also consider factors that make up an ideal diagnostic test in such a setting. there are criteria that guide implementation of such a rapid molecular test: a rapid clinical decision, test safety and usage by medical doctors, nurses and non-laboratory staff, quick result during a patient visit and cost effectiveness when compared with pcr technology. iat like lamp, near and rpa have the potential to fulfil majority of these criteria, but more studies are urgently needed in order to validate these technologies for covid-19 diagnosis. in spite, the advantages of iat, the lack of internal inhibition control could result to duplication of reactions during testing. in addition, the complexity of primer design of lamp test, for example, can prove difficult in target site selection and resolution [55] . figure 6 . schematic representation of nicking enzyme-assisted reaction. unlike pcr primers, near primers are uniquely designed for a successful reaction. each primer has three regions: restriction site (5 -gagtcnnnn-3 , for example, nt. bstnbi), stabilizing region and a target-binding region that is complementary to the target nucleic acid strand. first, the forward primer (primer 1) anneals with template 1 at the target-binding region and extended from its 3 end by dna polymerase. this results in the formation of an intermediate strand, complementary to template 1 (step i). at the same time, the nicking endonuclease recognizes the asymmetric restriction site (5 -gagtc-3 ) cleaves the strand with four base pairs after the recognized sequence introduces a new nick site (step ii). at the nick site, dna polymerase initiates another extension and displace the intermediate strand generated in step i (step iii and iv). this displaced strand (template 2) carries the target-binding sequence complementary to reverse primer (primer 2), and dna polymerase extends from the 3 end of this primer (step vi). again, nicking endonuclease recognizes and cleaves the restriction site, and the polymerase enzyme extends and displaces the initial template strand (template 1) from the nick site, which is recovered (step vii and ix) for another cycle, starting from step i. the target template is exponentially amplified by repeating this cycle of events [53] .the potential of a new diagnostic technology is usually demonstrated when matched with an existing and well-established technology. for a covid-19 iat to be considered acceptable for diagnostic purposes at community clinics and hospitals, research must not only demonstrate its diagnostic sensitivity and specificity, which is the common practice, but should also consider factors that make up an ideal diagnostic test in such a setting. there are criteria that guide implementation of such a rapid molecular test: a rapid clinical decision, test safety and usage by medical doctors, nurses and non-laboratory staff, quick result during a patient visit and cost effectiveness when compared with pcr technology. iat like lamp, near and rpa have the potential to fulfil majority of these criteria, but more studies are urgently needed in order to validate these technologies for covid-19 diagnosis. in spite, the advantages of iat, the lack of internal inhibition control could result to duplication of reactions during testing. in addition, the complexity of primer design of lamp test, for example, can prove difficult in target site selection and resolution [55] .normally, respiratory samples collected as either nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal swabs in viral transport medium are processed in class ii or iii biologic safety cabinet [56] . this level of containment is not feasible at community clinics and hospital. collecting the swab samples directly into lysis buffer containing inactivating agent like guanidinium and non-denaturing detergent would be suitable for direct testing with iat like lamp. the guanidinium and detergents are able to inactivate any viable coronavirus and prevent rna degradation, respectively [57] [58] [59] , combined with personal protective equipment (latex hand gloves, laboratory coat, appropriate face mask and eye goggle) makes sars-cov-2 iat testing safe for non-laboratory personnel at clinics and hospitals.lamp has already been shown to possess the ability to withstand inhibitory substances present in cell-based clinical samples, and it was associated to its complex primer assembly on the dna or its complementary strand [39] . unlike lamp, rpa is yet to demonstrate direct detection of target from clinical samples, this means that rpa could probably be inhibited with cell-based samples. respiratory samples for covid-19 are free of cells suggesting rpa potential to directly test this type of sample. for example, rpa has been demonstrated to directly test urine samples for chlamydia trachomatis [60] . however, heating of the respiratory samples should be avoided to prevent rna degradation which could impact on the outcome of the iat test outcome.presently, at least two different targets of sars-cov-2 are required for confirmation of covid-19. this is to avoid cross reaction with other potential endemic coronaviruses and genetic drift of sars-cov-2 [56] . these targets could be envelope (e), helicase (hel), transmembrane (m), structural proteins (envelope glycoproteins spike (s) and nucleocapsid (n) [61] [62] [63] . or, species-specific accessory genes that are required for viral replication (rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp), hemagglutinin-esterase (he) and open reading frames orf1a and orf1b [14, 17, 61, 62, 64] . studies on sars-cov-2 are still evolving and the extent of the virus mutations is still not clear. notwithstanding, an ideal nucleic acid test design should include at least one conserved region and one specific region in order to mitigate against the effects of sars-cov-2 genetic drift as the virus evolves within new populations [63] . the us centers for disease control recommends two nucleocapsid protein targets (n1 and n2) [64] , while who recommends first line screening with the e gene test followed by a confirmatory test using the rdrp gene [17] . for iat to be cost-effective and efficient, a multiplex test targeting two genes will be appropriate for clinical decision. to date, the published rt-lamp tests did not evaluate sars-cov-2 using two target genes. however, these rt-lamp studies and commercialization of iat are urgently required to help prevent the spread of the virus at community level. there is high expectation from diagnostic developers that iat hold promise to reduce the spread of covid-19 at resource limited settings, where central laboratories are far away from the transmission of the disease.lamp, near and rpa do have potentials for their simplicity, sensitivity, specificity and quick result, as demonstrated by incorporation with other technologies like lateral flow strip and portable detection reader. these iat shows their ability to be easily amenable to different detection platforms. notwithstanding, clinical evaluation are expected for multiplexing of the targeted genes in order to further assess the capability of iat to confirm the diagnosis of covid-19. like pcr, only a pair of primer is required for rpa reaction, making the assay design relatively easy; however, the multiplexing ability is yet to be fully explored. notwithstanding, rpa has been used to multiplex food pathogens like staphylococcus aureus, vibrio parahaemolyticus and salmonella enteritidis coupled on a lateral flow strip, and the test line intensities were quantified using a test strip reader [65] . it will be useful to see this recent strategy deployed for sars-cov-2 multiplexing as well.currently, there is urgent demand for tests that could confirmed cases of covid-19 and not just for screening, so it will be helpful to know the extent of contribution of lamp, near and rpa in this regard. however, lamp has been used to multiplexed influenza a and b [66] with genie ii fluorometer as the detection platform ( figure 3c ). this device shows amplification signals and time to completion of reaction in real time. sample melting temperature (tm) is also shown on the device. mahony james et al. [66] employed the tm strategy in the differentiation of influenza a and b, and it was easily differentiated because the tm did not overlap. this strategy could be deployed for sars-cov-2 multiplexing as well, but it will require a technical training for point of care testers without a background in nucleic acid testing.the advantage of real-time rt-pcr testing is the amplification and analysis are done simultaneously in a closed system to reduce false-positive results commonly linked with amplicons, and the capacity of the test to process up to 96 samples at once. among all the nucleic acids tests, the integration of sample preparation, amplification and detection into a single platform has been a challenge, especially with sample preparation [67] . as a result, sample preparation is still processed in isolation of amplification and detection by most test applications. interestingly, rt-lamp could directly be performed on clinical samples without rna extractions, and this has been demonstrated with the published covid-19 rt-lamp studies [29] [30] [31] , but the throughput is 16 samples if gene ii fluorometer is used for amplification and detection, which could slow the testing process considering the high demand for covid-19 test at point of care.in addition, the inclusion of a thermolabile uracil-dna glycosylase (ung) in lamp reactions could help prevent cross-contamination between samples, as already demonstrated by laura lamb et al. [31] . this approach simply works by introducing uridine triphosphate (utp) in the reaction along with thymidine triphosphate (ttp) and the other nucleoside triphosphates. during amplification, few utp replaces ttp creating a mix of utp and ttp amplicons. the utp amplified products are cleaved by ung to prevent it from being re-amplified in the next cycle. the introduction of ung in isothermal reactions especially when coupled with lateral flow strips, makes the system suitable for point of care, where non-laboratory staff may not be proficient enough to handle nucleic acid testing.as the current covid-19 pandemic continues, urgent point of care tests like the id now™ covid-19 (abbott laboratories, illinois, il, usa), and comparable with the standard rt-pcr are needed. lamp, near and rpa have the potentials to reduce the spread of sars-cov-2, but diagnostic developers, scientific community and commercial companies are required to make contributions in this regard. importantly, our review is limited because it is a rapidly developing area in regards to covid-19 diagnosis, and the presented information is at the time of publication, and iat for sars-cov-2 testing may keep evolving until the pandemic is over.i n december 2019, a cluster of patients with pneumonia of unknown cause was reported in wuhan, china (1) . the causative pathogen was subsequently identified as severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) (2), a newly described betacoronavirus. this virus, now recognized as the etiologic agent of covid-19 disease, is the seventh known coronavirus to infect humans (1) . since the recognition of covid- 19 , there has been an exponential rise in the number of cases worldwide. as of 1 april 2020, the world health organization reported more than 926 000 cases in more than 195 countries, areas, or territories (3) . reasons for the rapid spread include high transmissibility of the virus (4, 5), especially among asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic carriers (6, 7) ; the apparent absence of any cross-protective immunity from related viral infections; and delayed public health response measures (8 -10) .age and the presence of comorbid illnesses increase the risk for death among persons with covid-19 (11, 12) . the clinical manifestations of covid-19 in children are less severe compared with adults, yet age younger than 1 year seems to increase the risk for critical illness (13) . current case-fatality rate estimates range from 0.6% to 7.2% by region and seem to be substantially higher than the 0.1% mortality rate of seasonal influenza (12, 14, 15) . however, current estimates of covid-19 case-fatality rates are probably inflated because of preferential testing in many countries of persons with severe manifestations, who are at risk for death (12, 16) . in germany and south korea, the case-fatality rates are less than 0.5%, probably because extensive testing revealed a large denominator of mild illness (17) .it has been estimated that before the wide-scale travel restrictions in china, undiagnosed sars-cov-2 represented the infection source for 79% of documented cases (7) . these observations underscore the critical importance of ample, accurate diagnostic testing in this pandemic. here, we review the current array of tests for sars-cov-2, highlight gaps in current diagnostic capacity, and propose potential solutions. only articles including human subjects and those published from 2003 to the present were included. articles in languages other than english or french were excluded. we screened the results on title and abstract for relevant information. starting from the articles found in this search, we used a snowball search strategy, scanning useful references and similar articles and retrieving those that were considered relevant. furthermore, experts were consulted for additional literature. guidelines and resources from international organizations were used where appropriate. this search was last updated on 1 april 2020.the primary goal of epidemic containment is to reduce disease transmission by reducing the number of susceptible persons in the population or by reducing the basic reproductive number (r0). this number is modulated by such factors as the duration of viral shedding, the infectiousness of the organism, and the contact matrix between infected and susceptible persons (18) . given the lack of effective vaccines or treatments (19) , the only currently available lever to reduce sars-cov-2 transmission is to identify and isolate persons who are contagious.deployment of sars-cov-2 testing has varied widely across the globe. a few asian countries have illustrated the power of preparedness, flexible isolation systems, and intensive case finding. south korea dramatically slowed the epidemic by implementing an unprecedented testing effort (20) . using innovative measures, south korea performed more than 300 000 tests (5828.6 tests per million persons) in the 9 weeks after the first case was identified (20, 21) . singapore used a broad case definition, aggressive contact tracing, and isolation (10) . moreover, to identify infected persons not meeting the case definition, singapore screened patients with pneumonia and influenza-like illnesses in hospitals and primary care settings, severely ill patients in intensive care, and deaths with a possible infectious cause (10) . taiwan and hong kong used similar approaches (22) . these countries rapidly deployed resource-intensive strategies that prioritized aggressive testing and isolation to interrupt transmission (20, 22) .in the face of widespread transmission, the role of diagnostic testing is contingent on the type of testing available, the resources required for testing, and time to obtain results. for example, rapidly identifying cases among hospitalized patients remains a high priority to properly allocate personal protective equipment and to prevent nosocomial spread with subsequent community transmission (23, 24) . likewise, specific treatment decisions and enrollment in ongoing clinical trials require prompt diagnosis.despite the remarkable speed with which accurate diagnostic tests have been developed and made available for sars-cov-2 (25), current tools only partially meet several clinically relevant needs. figure 1 illustrates different indications for diagnostic testing among persons with proven or suspected covid-19. for each of these, the most important consideration is the clinical decision a test result will help to inform. test designs must account for several parameters, such as whether the test detects infection directly (such as the virus itself) or indirectly (such as host antibodies), test turnaround time, the ability to perform many tests at the same time (that is, throughput), the need to have a minimum number of specimens before testing (that is, batching), and the ability to perform the test in lowinfrastructure settings (such as on cruise ships or in remote communities). the potential for use at the point of care depends on test complexity. the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) categorizes diagnostic tests by their complexity: waived tests are available for use at the point of care, whereas moderate-and highcomplexity tests must be performed in a laboratory. the intended use also determines which specimen types are ideal or feasible. finally, it is important to recognize that the acceptable diagnostic accuracy of a test may vary according to use case. for example, sensitivity and specificity requirements of an assay used to confirm results of a screening test need not be as stringent as those of a method used for standalone diagnosis, because the pool of persons being tested is already enriched with true infections. the foundation for innovative new diagnostics has published a detailed assessment of priority use cases to be considered by test developers and policymakers (26).in response to the rapidly evolving covid-19 pandemic, countries have used different testing approaches depending on testing capacity, public health resources, and the spread of the virus in the community. in the united states, diagnostic testing indications and capacity were limited at the beginning of the outbreak, largely because of regulatory hurdles for the use of new tests. to expand access to testing, the fda released policies to allow laboratories to use their validated assays in a more timely manner (27) . on 4 march, the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) removed restrictive testing criteria, recommending that clinicians use their judgment to determine whether a test should be performed (28). because testing capacity remains suboptimal (27) , the implementation of this recommendation remains a challenge. the cdc still recommends priority for testing 3 groups: hospitalizedthe covid-19 pandemic demonstrates the essential role of diagnostics in the control of communicable diseases.laboratory-based molecular assays for detecting sars-cov-2 in respiratory specimens are the current reference standard for covid-19 diagnosis, but point-ofcare technologies and serologic immunoassays are rapidly emerging.early, massive deployment of sars-cov-2 diagnostics for case finding helped curb the epidemic in several countries.urgent clinical and public health needs now drive an unprecedented global effort to increase testing capacity.diagnostic testing for sars-cov-2 patients with presentations compatible with covid-19, other symptomatic persons at risk for poor outcomes, and persons who had close contact with someone with suspected or confirmed covid-19 within 14 days of illness onset or have a history of travel in an affected area (28). these patients should be evaluated with a molecular diagnostic test, as described later. the cdc does not recommend testing asymptomatic persons.although real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr)-based assays performed in the laboratory on respiratory specimens are the cornerstone of covid-19 diagnostic testing, several novel or complementary diagnostic methods are being developed and evaluated (16). figure 2 depicts the adequacy of the principal assay types used or proposed for covid-19 for 4 key use cases. among patients diagnosed with covid-19, the occurrence of concomitant viral infections has been reported to range from below 6% (29) to greater than 60% (30) . as a result, it is not possible to rule out sars-cov-2 infection merely by detecting another respiratory pathogen.the current diagnostic strategy recommended by the cdc to identify patients with covid-19 is to test samples taken from the respiratory tract to assess for the presence of 1 or several nucleic acid targets specific to sars-cov-2 (25) . a nasopharyngeal specimen is the preferred choice for swab-based sars-cov-2 testing, but oropharyngeal, mid-turbinate, or anterior nares samples also are acceptable (31, 32). samples should be obtained by using a flocked swab, if available, to enhance the collection and release of cellular material. swabs with an aluminum or plastic shaft are preferred. swabs that contain calcium alginate, wood, or cotton should be avoided, because they may contain substances that inhibit pcr testing. ideally, swabs should be transferred into universal transport medium immediately after sample collection to preserve viral nucleic acid. samples taken from sputum, endotracheal aspirates, and bronchoalveolar lavage also may be sent directly to the microbiology laboratory for processing, and may have greater sensitivity than upper respiratory tract specimens (33) . inadequate sample collection may result in a false-negative test. after specimen collection, samples undergo rna extraction followed by qualitative rt-pcr for target detection.in the united states, the cdc has developed the most widely used sars-cov-2 assay. the kit contains pcr primer-probe sets for 2 regions of the viral nucleocapsid gene (n1 and n2), and for the human rnase p gene to ensure the rna extraction was successful. this assay differs from the world health organization primer-probe sets, which target the sars-cov-2 rnadependent rna polymerase (rdrp) and envelope (e) genes (25) . both assays have high analytic sensitivity and specificity for sars-cov-2, with minimal crossreactivity with other circulating strains of coronaviruses, and both use a cycle threshold of less than 40 as the criterion for positivity. the cdc kit may be used by state public health laboratories, other laboratories determined by the state to be qualified, and clinical laboratories that meet the regulatory requirements of the a test well suited for one use case (such as epidemiologic surveillance) may be completely inadequate for another (such as rapid screening of symptomatic patients for allocation of personal protective equipment). for test results to enable a specific clinical decision, test developers, policymakers, and clinicians need to consider each of these with respect to the intention of testing and the population being tested as specifically as possible. for the moment, most use cases placed above the green and gray bar are best met by nucleic acid amplification tests, whereas detection of host-derived antibodies directed against sars-cov-2 will be crucial for surveillance, epidemic forecasting, and determination of sars-cov-2 immunity. sars-cov-2 = severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus-2.clinical laboratories improvement amendment (clia) to perform high-complexity testing (27) . dozens of laboratories have applied for emergency use authorization (eua) from the fda for their own laboratorydeveloped assays (34) . the fda also has granted an eua for several commercial assays (35) , further expanding the ability of clinical laboratories to use these platforms (table) . the lack of an established reference standard, use of differing sample collection and preparation methods, and an incomplete understanding of viral dynamics across the time course of infection hamper rigorous assessment of the diagnostic accuracy of the many newly introduced sars-cov-2 assays (36) . serum and urine are usually negative for the presence of viral nucleic acid, regardless of illness severity (33) . of importance, the ability of rt-pcr assays to rule out covid-19 on the basis of upper respiratory tract samples obtained at a single time point remains unclear. conversely, after a patient has had a positive test result, several authorities have recommended obtaining at least 2 negative upper respiratory tract samples, collected at intervals of 24 hours or longer, to document sars-cov-2 clearance (37, 38).low-complexity, rapid (results within 1 hour) molecular diagnostic tests for respiratory viral infections that are clia waived (fda approved for use outside the laboratory by nonlaboratory personnel) include cartridge-based assays on platforms that include the abbott id now (abbott laboratories), biofire filmarray (biomé rieux), cobas liat (roche diagnostics), and genexpert (cepheid) (39) .rapid point-of-care assays for sars-cov-2 on instruments such as these will be critical to expand pointof-care testing. the xpert xpress sars-cov-2 test (cepheid) has received an fda eua and is performed on the genexpert platform, which is already widely used for tuberculosis and hiv testing, especially in low-and middle-income countries. this capacity might be useful to scale up testing across the world as well as in settings where rapid results at the point of care would medium green cells are those for which currently available tools are well adapted for most intended uses within the use case in terms of diagnostic accuracy, format, and turnaround time. light green cells are those for which assays that are available or projected in the short term are useful but have important limitations for their use (for example, current rt-pcr assays may yield false-negative results for persons in the incubation phase with a low viral load). dark green cells are those for which the assay type does not meet the needs of the use case. naat, nucleic acid amplification test; poc = point of care; rt-pcr = reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. * this assumes that assays in development or currently undergoing regulatory evaluation prove to be accurate. † the utility of antibody detection assays for diagnosing acute infections is probably very limited around the time of symptom onset, when viral shedding and transmission risk seem to be highest. thus, although such tests may have a role among persons presenting late in the course of their infection, the potential for misuse is high.diagnostic testing for sars-cov-2 enable clinical decisions, although testing throughput may be a limiting factor.tests that detect respiratory syncytial virus or influenza virus antigens by immunoassay directly from clinical specimens have been commercially available for decades, are of low complexity, and may provide results within minutes at the point of care (40) . current tools for influenza and respiratory syncytial virus suffer from suboptimal sensitivity to rule out disease (41, 42) ; the same challenge would probably exist for sars-cov-2, and tests would need to be implemented with clear guidance on correct interpretation. prototypes of such tests for other novel coronaviruses have not received regulatory approval (43, 44) but are under de-velopment (45) . monoclonal antibodies against the nucleocapsid protein of sars-cov-2 have been generated, which might form the basis of a future rapid antigen detection test (20) .serologic tests that identify antibodies (such as iga, igm, and igg) to sars-cov-2 from clinical specimens (such as blood or saliva), such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays, may be less complex than molecular tests and have the potential to be used for diagnosis in certain situations (46) . however, their utility for diagnosing acute infections is probably limited around the time of symptom onset, when viral shedding and transmission risk seem to be highest (32) . antibody responses to infection take days to weeks to be reliably (46) . negative results would not exclude sars-cov-2 infection, particularly among those with recent exposure to the virus. cross-reactivity of antibody to non-sars-cov-2 coronavirus proteins is also a potential problem, whereby positive results may be the result of past or present infection with other human coronaviruses (47) . serologic assays might be more relevant in scenarios in which patients present to medical care with late complications of disease, when rt-pcr may be falsely negative, because viral shedding drops over time (48) . the development of serologic assays that accurately assess prior infection and immunity to sars-cov-2 will be essential for epidemiologic studies, ongoing surveillance, vaccine studies, and potentially for risk assessment of health care workers. immunoassays are already on the market in some countries, but their diagnostic accuracy and optimal use remain undefined.the optimal use of diagnostic imaging, biomarkers, and other nonmicrobiologic tests is rapidly evolving.many centers have evaluated the utility of chest imaging for diagnosis. on chest radiography, bilateral pneumonia is the most frequently reported feature (range, 11.8% to 100%) and is more common than a unilateral focus (49, 50) . computed tomography is regarded as more sensitive than radiography, with several cohort studies reporting that most patients (77.8% to 100%) had ground glass opacities. other features commonly reported with covid-19 on chest computed tomography include a peripheral distribution, fine reticular opacities, and vascular thickening (51) . compared with serial nasopharyngeal sampling, chest computed tomography may be more sensitive than an rt-pcr test at a single time point for the diagnosis of covid-19 (52, 53) . in addition, artificial intelligence may help distinguish covid-19 from other etiologic agents of community-acquired pneumonia (54) . however, these findings are not completely specific to covid-19 and do not exclude a co-infection or an alternative diagnosis (55) .the most common laboratory features reported in patients with covid-19 include decreased albumin (75.8% [95% ci, 30.5% to 100%]), elevated c-reactive protein (58.3% [ci, 21.8% to 94.7%]), and elevated lactate dehydrogenase levels (57.0% [ci, 38.0% to 76.0%]), and lymphopenia (43.1% [ci, 18.9% to 67.3%]) (56). other biomarkers that have been reported include increased erythrocyte sedimentation rates; elevated aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and creatinine kinase levels; leukopenia; leukocytosis; and increased bilirubin and creatinine levels (57) (58) (59) . such findings are not surprising, because these biomarkers represent an inflammatory host response to sars-cov-2 or are early markers of end-organ dysfunction, similar to that seen in patients with sepsis (60) . no biomarker or combination of biomarkers currently exists that is sensitive or specific enough to establish a diagnosis of covid-19, or to pragmatically predict its clinical course.in the face of a public health emergency, important first steps to expand testing capacity include relaxing and streamlining regulatory requirements and procedures. local public health laboratories and academic diagnostic laboratories in the united states are being rapidly enabled to perform eua-granted commercial assays and laboratory-developed tests using research use-only reagents (61) . university research laboratories could also add capacity, although concerns exist regarding quality control and the absence of protocols for managing clinical specimens. flexibility regarding nucleic acid extraction methods and amplification instruments when using cdc protocols is being introduced (34) . national agencies are expeditiously making materials for test development and validation available to clinical laboratories and diagnostic test manufacturers.safely evaluating clinically stable persons for covid-19 at traditional health care access points is resource intensive and slow, and risks exposing staff to infection. many jurisdictions are enabling innovative testing venues, such as external tents or drive-through or "phone booth" testing, as well as home assessment teams to expedite specimen collection while limiting potential exposures (62) . telemedicine combined with at-home nasal swab self-testing also has been proposed (63) . of importance, in jurisdictions without universal health care coverage, policy solutions must be introduced to eliminate financial barriers to testing for uninsured and underinsured patients. efforts to increase accessibility of testing for multiple use cases need to be coupled to appropriate public health interventions to isolate infected persons and their contacts.nasopharyngeal swabs are the recommended specimen for molecular analysis. the sudden demand for flocked nasopharyngeal swabs and viral transport medium generated by the pandemic has put enormous pressures on supply chain capacities for these products. as of 19 march 2020 the cdc made oropharyngeal, mid-turbinate, and nasal swabs acceptable specimen types if nasopharyngeal swabs are not available (31). early-morning posterior oropharyngeal saliva samples (coughed up by clearing the throat) also have been assessed as useful specimen types and would not require use of a swab (48) . the cdc has released a standard operating procedure for laboratories to create their own viral transport medium (64) ; other solutions also may be used if viral transport medium is unavailable, including phosphate-buffered saline, liquid amies, and normal saline (65) . the fda has provided review diagnostic testing for sars-cov-2 guidance on its web site for alternative materials to collect and transport samples for rt-pcr sars-cov-2 assays (34) . the diagnostic value of molecular testing of nonrespiratory specimens currently is unclear.although excellent tools exist for the diagnosis of symptomatic patients in well-equipped laboratories, important gaps remain in screening asymptomatic persons in the incubation phase, as well as for the accurate determination of live viral shedding among patients in the convalescence phase to inform de-isolation decisions ( figure 2) . further, it is critical to advance solutions that require less well-equipped laboratories to curb the pandemic globally. the foundation for innovative new diagnostics (find) and others have created online resources to collate the rapidly evolving set of assays at various stages of development, from proof of concept to full regulatory approval (20, 53) . simple antigen-based tests, if sensitive enough, might be useful in lower-resource and home settings to inform quarantine and spatial distancing measures for patients without severe illness and their contacts. novel technologies, such as clustered regularly interspersed short palindromic repeats (crispr)-based diagnostics are being used to develop rapid, simple, low-cost, portable, temperature-stable assays for deployment in the field in nontraditional and resource-limited settings, such as airports and border crossings (20, 51, 54) . other technologies might be deployed to lowerresource settings if they can be standardized. for example, it might be possible to leverage existing loopmediated isothermal amplification testing networks established for other diseases, such as human african trypanosomiasis surveillance (66) .critical considerations for diagnostics used for epidemic diseases of public health importance include the quality assurance and regulatory frameworks surrounding testing. mature regulatory agencies have developed mechanisms to account for emergencies, such as the fda's eua stream, but pragmatic solutions must be found to facilitate wide-scale, independent evaluation of emerging tests.initially, the need for elaborate biosafety precautions and inconsistent recommendations for their application across regions severely hampered covid-19 testing. although these continue to evolve, current recommendations in canada and the united states acknowledge that nonpropagative work for molecular testing may be performed in containment level 2 conditions found in routine diagnostic laboratories and provide specific guidance on diagnostic testing of specimens conducted outside a biosafety level 2 laboratory, such as rapid respiratory testing performed at the point of care (67) .the covid-19 pandemic has dramatically highlighted the essential role of diagnostics in the control of communicable diseases. intensive diagnostics deployment probably contributed to the success of a few countries in controlling transmission. urgent clinical and public health needs now drive an unprecedented global effort to increase sars-cov-2 testing capacity. finally, the blinding speed with which covid-19 has spread illustrates the need for preparedness and longterm investments in diagnostic testing. disclosures: dr. cheng reports grants from the canadian institute of health research and mcgill interdisciplinary initiative in infection and immunity during the conduct of the study; after the manuscript was written and submitted, he was offered a position on the scientific advisory board of gen1e lifesciences, but this position is unrelated to the submitted work. dr. papenburg reports grants and personal fees from bd diagnostics, seegene, and abbvie; personal fees from cepheid; and grants from medimmune, sanofi pasteur, janssen pharmaceuticals, and hoffman-la roche outside the submitted work. dr. kanjilal reports grants from phast diagnostics outside the submitted work. dr. libman reports grants from geosentinel network outside the submitted work. dr. yansouni reports nonfinancial support from biomé rieux outside the submitted work. authors not named here have disclosed no conflicts of interest. disclosures can also be viewed at www.acponline.org/authors/icmje/conflictofinterestforms .do?msnum=m20-1301.among the coronaviruses, the emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) have caused threats to public health in 2002 and 2012 [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] . by the end of december 2019, another zoonotic human coronavirus has emerged in wuhan, hubei province of china [5, [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] . initially, 27 patients with clinical manifestations of pneumonia, fever, difficulty in breathing, and chest radiographs with bilateral lung infiltrative lesions were observed [10] [11] [12] [13] 16, [20] [21] [22] . all patients were clinically tested negative for both the mers-cov and sars-cov [13] . an abrupt increase in cases of viral pneumonia of unknown etiology led the chinese authorities to report the situation to the world health organization (who) on december 31, 2019 [11, 12] . during the ongoing scientific investigations, who initially proposed the interim name of this novel virus as "2019-ncov," but later, covid-19 was designated as the official name of this disease [23] . following a thorough assessment of phylogeny, taxonomy, and established practice, the international committee on taxonomy of viruses (ictv) formally recognized this virus to be related to sars-covs, and designated this virus as "sars-cov-2" [24] .sars-cov-2 falls into the genus betacoronavirus, with a sequence homology of 80-89% with coronaviruses discovered in humans, bats, and other wild animals (for instance, sars-cov and bat sars-like cov) [3, 5, 7, [16] [17] [18] 20, 22] . due to an increase in the risk of a potential spread of this virus to countries with weaker health systems, the who have declared the sars-cov-2 outbreak as a disease of "public health emergency of international concern" [25] . owing to the current disease situation, this novel coronavirus may remarkably become the third coronavirus posing significant threats to public health worldwide.the impediment of further spread and transmission of this disease requires rapid and reliable identification, especially in areas with limited laboratory capacity. concurrently, in hospitals, the identification of the causative agents of recurrent acute respiratory infections requires routine and confirmatory diagnosis through quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qrt-pcr). in recent years, the loop-mediated isothermal amplification (lamp) method that includes an exponential amplification of specific nucleic acid sequences at a constant temperature, has been widely utilized for the rapid detection of virus-specific genes [26, 27] . the specificity and sensitivity of this method is generally comparable to those of the conventional pcr and qrt-pcr. the lamp assays merged with reverse transcription steps have been developed for the detection of rna viruses, including sars-cov, mers-cov, influenza, and other respiratory viruses [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] .in the present study, a single-tube reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (rt-lamp) assay has been developed for the detection of the sars-cov-2 nucleocapsid (n) gene through colorimetric visualization. the study was aimed to develop a rapid, simple and sensitive molecular detection assay for the novel coronavirus that can differentiate it from other currently circulating human coronaviruses, including oc43, 229e, nl64, and mers-cov as well as other respiratory viruses. this method enables the detection of sars-cov-2 within 30 min, excluding rna extraction, with the detection limit of 10 2 rna copies which is close to qrt-pcr. furthermore, by combining the amplification process with colorimetric detection, the assay is suitable for rapid and simple diagnosis within poorly equipped primary hospitals and laboratories, and in situations where an urgent diagnosis is needed.the rt-lamp primers were designed for the detection of sars-cov-2 based upon the already available sequences in global initiative on sharing all influenza data (gisaid) (www.gisaid.org). the sequences were aligned using clc genomics workbench 10.0.1 (qiagen, usa). a conserved region was identified in the target n gene sequence (gen-bank accession no.: nc_045512, position 28,285-28,529) that was used as a template for the designing of the rt-lamp primers.to identify the most efficient primer set, seven sets of specific rt-lamp primers were initially designed using the primerexplorer v4 (eiken chemical co. ltd, tokyo, japan) programme based upon the published sequence of the n gene. primer sets included two external primers (forward outer primer f3 and backward outer primer b3), two internal primers (forward inner primer fip and backward inner primer bip), and two loop primers (backward loop primer lb and forward loop primer lf). all primers were synthesized by bionics, inc. (republic of korea). table 1 represents the detailed information regarding all the designed primer sets. further, 9 contributing laboratories are gratefully acknowledged for sharing their sequences and metadata in gisaid for designing primers for this assay (supplementary table 1 ).initially, primers containing t7 rna polymerase promoter were designed using betacov/wuhan-hu-1/ 2019 (gisaid, epi_isl_402125) sequence for sars-cov-2 and sars-cov/hku-39849 (genbank, accession no.: ay278491.2) sequence, and outsourced from bionics, inc (republic of korea). the t7-flagged pcr product was then synthesized for in vitro transcription. the details of sequence and primers used for the rna synthesis are provided in supplementary table 2 . the artificial sars-cov-2 and sars-cov rna was synthesized using megascript® kits (invitrogen, usa) following the manufacturer's instructions. rna was recovered through lithium chloride precipitation and stored at −80°c till further use. for quantification of rna transcript, rna copy number using endmemo dna/rna copy number calculator (http://endmemo.com/bio/dnacopynum. php) was calculated, quantitated using qubit rna hs assay kit (thermo fisher scientific inc., massachusetts, usa) following the manufacturer's instructions, and the end-point diluted rna was confirmed through qrt-pcr.moreover, betacov/korea/nmc01/2020 and beta-cov/korea/nmc02/2020 viruses were propagated and passaged twice in vero cells. vero cells were maintained in dulbecco's modified eagle's medium (dmem; gibco-invitrogen, carlsbad, ca, usa) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (fbs) and 1% antibiotics, and incubated at 37°c in 5% co 2 . intact viral rna was extracted using rneasy mini kit (qiagen, usa) followed the manufacturer's instructions. the viral rna was stored at −80°c till further use. the complete experimental work with sars-cov-2 was conducted in enhanced biosafety level 3 (bl-3 +) facility at chungbuk national university as approved by the korea center for disease control. table 1 .the rna template (2 μl) (extracted from virus and/ or synthesized rna) was added to the master mix and the rt-lamp reaction was performed at 65°c. detection limit determination was performed by processing tenfold serially diluted (1 × 10 11 to 1 × 10 0 ) synthesized viral rnas in the rt-lamp. concomitantly, same samples were subjected to qrt-pcr according to the shared protocol developed by the national institute of infectious diseases of japan, which showed one of the highest sensitivities in the comparison study [33, 34] . briefly, sars-cov-2 qrt-pcr was performed using itaq universal probes one-step kit (bio-rad, hercules, ca, usa) with conditions, including reverse transcription at 55°c for 30 min, initial denaturation at 95°c for 15 min, 40 cycles of denaturation at 95°c for 15 s and annealing at 60°c for 1 min using cfx96 touchtm real-time pcr detection system (bio-rad, hercules, ca, usa). the cycle threshold (ct) values in qrt-pcr analysis were determined based upon the set baseline threshold value of 100. the ct values of in qrt-pcr results analysis were determined based upon the set baseline threshold value (100), validated by standard curve graph generated from serially diluted copies of templates with correlation coefficient value of 0.99.to evaluate the time efficiency of the developed assay, optimization of the rt-lamp reaction was done at varying reaction time points (10, 20, 30, 40, 50 , and 60 min) using the determined limit concentration of viral rna. ten repeats of the rt-lamp reaction were performed using the determined viral rna concentrations with incubations of 30 and 60 min. for comparison, the detection limit of qrt-pcr was also determined by performing ten repeats of the reaction using 10 0 , 10 1 , 10 2 , and 10 3 rna copies. positive rt-lamp reactions resulted in a colour change of phenol red ph indicator from pink to yellow due to decreased ph in the presence of an extensive dna polymerase activity. thus, the results could be directly observed by naked eye. the results from rt-lamp reactions were also confirmed through 2% agarose gel electrophoresis.the sensitivity of the developed rt-lamp assay to detect sars-cov-2 was confirmed using the cell propagated cultures of sars-cov-2 that were grown and passaged twice in vero cells. this intact viral rna was ten-fold serially diluted to 10 −9 and processed for parallel testing with rt-lamp assay and qrt-pcr. the serially diluted rna (2 μl) was mixed with the optimized master mix and subjected to rt-lamp assay as described previously [32] .to determine the specificity of the optimized rt-lamp assay for targeting sars-cov-2, the assay was tested across three-panel sets of different rna samples that were extracted from patients' nasal swabs and/or cell-propagated isolates of respiratory disease-causing agents. the rt-lamp was crosstested against a panel set of rna samples of related coronaviruses, which includes human coronavirus 229e (229e), human coronavirus nl63 (nl63), human coronavirus oc43 (oc43), and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) tested using the developed rt-lamp assay. the optimized rt-lamp assay was also tested against a panel of human infecting and avian influenza viruses. the rna samples of a/california/04/2009 (h1n1pdm), a/perth/16/2009 (h3n2), b/brisbane/60/2008 (victoria lineage), and b/phuket/3073/2013 (yamagata lineage); highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses, including h5n1, h5n6, h5n8, and h7n9; and low pathogenic avian influenza viruses, including h2, h4∼h12 were also tested for any reactivity [32] . furthermore, a panel set of other respiratory disease-causing viruses, including adenovirus (adv), parainfluenza virus (piv), human metapneumovirus (mpv), human bocavirus (hbov), human rhinovirus (hrv), the sars-cov-2 qrt-pcr was performed following the protocol used for the optimization and the sensitivity assay. all viruses used in the panel were also confirmed for viral rna using onestep rt-pcr using their specific primers. the detailed information about the primers and pcr conditions used for these panel viruses is presented in supplementary table 3 .fourteen nasal swabs collected from covid-19 patients in the national medical center, republic of korea were processed for viral rna extraction. purified rna was used for the clinical evaluation of the rt-lamp assay in comparison to the qrt-pcr method as described above. an agreement between the two tests was also evaluated using cohen's kappa. twenty-eight sequences of sars-cov-2 deposited in gisaid were aligned. we designed the oligonucleotide primer sets to target the conserved region of the ngene sequence which exhibited zero mismatches with the highly conserved region, specifically from position 28,285 to 28,529 (figure 1(a and b) ). we performed the rt-lamp assay using in vitro transcribed 2 μl of 1 ng/ml rna (1.2 × 10 7 number of copies) of the sars-cov-2 n gene. a successful rt-lamp reaction results in a colorimetric reaction which includes a change in the colour of phenol red ph indicator from pink to yellow (figure 1(c) ). moreover, successful amplifications were indicated by a typical ladder-like pattern when electrophoresed in 2% agarose gel ( figure  1(c) ).to optimize the rt-lamp, and determine its limit of detection, a ten-fold serial dilution of the rna transcript (1 × 10 0 to 1 × 10 11 per reaction) was used as the template in both the rt-lamp (65°c, 60 min) (figure 2(a) ) and qrt-pcr (figure 2(b) ) assays. the standard curve for the qrt-pcr, and associated linear regression, was created using graphpad prism (supplementary figure 1 ). for this serial dilution, the rt-lamp assay was able to detect down to 10 2 copies per reaction. ten repetitions of the rt-lamp assay containing 10 3 , 10 2 , and 10 1 rna copies per reaction resulted in 100%, 90%, and 30% detection rate, respectively, while the qrt-pcr detected 100% in 10 3 , 10 2 , and 10 1 rna copies and 0% in 10 0 rna copies per reaction ( figure 2(a and b) ). nonetheless, compared to rt-lamp, qrt-pcr method consistently detected up to ten-fold lower (10 1 ) rna copies across ten reactions (qrt-pcr mean ct=37.43) (supplementary table 4 ). while discerning the optimal reaction time for the rt-lamp assay, a clear colorimetric change was evident at 30 min. the clarity of the colorimetric change at 20 min was hard to discern by eye; however, a ladder-like pattern was exhibited through agarose gel electrophoresis (figure 2(c) ). further assessment between 30 and 60 min incubation times showed 100% positive detection with 10 3 copies of rna per reaction to be observed at both time points (across ten repetitions). for 10 2 copies per reaction, the positive detection rate was 90% for 30 min and 100% for 60 min (across ten repetitions). moreover, during the ten repetitions, the rt-lamp was observed to possess an equal detection rate of 30% for detecting 10 1 rna copies at both the time points (figure 2(d) ).in terms of overall time efficiency, excluding the rna extraction, qrt-pcr takes 100 min to complete and obtain results (figure 2(e) ). the rt-lamp assay developed in the present study has shown a capability of sensitive detection within 30 min similar to that of 60 min incubation. hence, for the succeeding evaluation, the rt-lamp assay was set in 30 min incubation time point.the sensitivity of the rt-lamp assay was tested to detect the intact viral rna that was extracted from the cell culture supernatants of two isolates from covid-19 patients. the sensitivity was observed to be ten-fold lower than that of the qrt-pcr, which was similar to that of the rt-lamp assay performed using the synthesized rna. both assays were able to detect sars-cov-2 in a reaction in which intact viral templates were used (figure 3(a and b) ). interestingly, sars-cov-2 positive samples were confirmed in both assays. both the qrt-pcr and rt-lamp reactions were able to detect intact viral rna concentration in the range of 10 −2 to 10 −7 dilutions. significantly, qrt-pcr exhibited ten-fold (10 −8 ) higher detection rate for the two intact viral rna samples. the mean ct values observed (across three repetitions) are indicated in figure 3 (c and d).the detection limit of rt-lamp was determined using ten repetitions of serially diluted templates (10 −6 , 10 −7 and 10 −8 ) for 30 and 60 min incubation (figure 3 (e and f) ). 100% detection was observed in all ten replicates of rna diluted to 10 −6 in both the patient isolates regardless of incubation period. however, the rna samples of 10 −7 concentrations were observed with lower detection rate of 50-60% in 30 min and 60-70% in 60 min incubation. moreover, ten replicates of similar serially diluted templates (10 −7 , 10 −8 and 10 −9 ) were subjected to qrt-pcr which demonstrated a ten-fold higher detection rate in agreement with the rt-lamp results using the synthesized rna as template (supplementary table 4 ).we have examined the specificities of sars-cov-2 rt-lamp assay against coronaviruses, such as human coronaviruses (oc43, nl63, and 229e), mers-cov, influenza viruses, and other respiratory disease-causing viruses. no amplification was observed in rt-lamp assay for any of the viral rna panel of related coronaviruses (figure 4(a) . upper panel). this was further confirmed after the gel electrophoresis ( figure 4(a) , middle panel). the presence of viral rna was confirmed for all samples through rt-pcr and gel electrophoresis as shown in the lower panel of figure 4 (a).since the signs and symptoms of sars-cov-2 are similar to those of influenza virus infection, a panel of highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses and human infectious influenza viruses was tested ( figure  4 (b)). no cross-reactivity was observed in rt-lamp, either through colorimetric detection or agarose gel electrophoresis. similar results were obtained when the developed rt-lamp assay was tested using a panel of avian influenza viruses (figure 4(c) ). these results suggest that the developed assay has a high specificity for sars-cov-2 against all viruses tested which manifest and/or cause respiratory clinical signs and symptoms. evaluation of the rt-lamp assay using clinical specimens a total of 154 clinical samples were evaluated which comprised of 14 positive nasal swab specimens collected from previously diagnosed patients with covid-19 in national medical center, republic of korea, and 85 nasal swab specimens collected during the outbreak, and previously confirmed in the hospital for other respiratory disease-causing viruses. in addition, 55 samples confirmed for other respiratory disease-causing viruses and collected prior to the outbreak were also evaluated. in the collected specimens, 16 out of 154 samples were observed to react positively in the rt-lamp assay ( table 2 ). out of 16 samples, 14 were from respiratory samples of covid-19 patients. out of 140 negative samples used for this evaluation, two (1.33%) samples were observed to show a positive reaction (table 2) . using qrt-pcr, we confirmed that both specimens exhibited a false-positive reaction in rt-lamp (data not shown). we also tested 14 respiratory samples through qrt-pcr. results revealed that all collected specimens showed positive amplification with ct value ranging from 21.11 to 32.76. the results of the developed rt-lamp assay showed a calculated sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 98.70% which suggests that the primers used in this assay can be used for a sensitive and specific early detection method to identify sars-cov-2 cases.in the rt-lamp method, primers that were designed to target the nucleocapsid (n) protein gene were utilized. in general, the gene encoding n protein was found to have the most abundant expression of subgenomic mrna (sgmrna) during infection [35] [36] [37] . the coronavirus' n protein lacks the glycosylation site and possesses distinctly unaltered immunological characteristics [38] . hence, this protein has been selected as the main target for nucleic acid amplification. apart from being the most abundant throughout the infection, the gene encoding n protein is highly conserved among all coronavirus structural proteins. based upon their reported pair-wise patristic distances (ppd) value differences, the emergence of sars-cov-2 (ppd: 2.6) was completely independent of sars-cov (ppd: 0.16) that emerged in 2002 [24] . hence, this explains how specific mers-cov or sars-cov primers limitedly detect this virus and supports why the primers utilized in the rt-lamp assay are highly specific to sars-cov-2 n gene.the limit of detection revealed that the developed assay is highly capable of detection and nearly as sensitive as qrt-pcr. we have demonstrated that the rt-lamp assay is specific for sars-cov-2 and it possesses rare cross-reactivity with other viruses that manifest similar respiratory disease. moreover, this assay can discriminate currently co-circulating common human coronaviruses and mers-cov. the data presented supports that the rt-lamp is as specific as qrt-pcr in detecting sars-cov-2. in in silico figure 2 ). in addition, the rt-lamp assay using the synthesized rna of sars-cov n gene showed positive amplification with 10 7 rna copies per reaction (across three repetitions). this result shows 10,000fold lower cross reactivity compared to that of sars-cov-2 n gene (10 2 rna copies) (supplementary figure 3) . furthermore, using cohens kappa, the level of agreement between qrt-pcr and rt-lamp was revealed to be "almost perfect agreement" (kappa value = 0.8261) [39] . this supports the high sensitivity and specificity results obtained during the clinical evaluation using both assays.generally, rt-lamp methodology is regarded as new generation diagnostics [40] . however, along with its advantages, this tool may also have some technical shortcomings, such as false-positive single read-out and sensitivity to aerosol contaminants during assay manipulations [31] . the inclusion of rna extraction step also limits this assay to be genuinely used for bedside testing in patients. other lamp methodologies were able to develop assay without any need to conduct rna extraction, while some utilized a one-step syringe filter system [41, 42] . even though the optimized assay has false positive reactions, we have envisioned that this developed rt-lamp assay can be utilized as a primary screening method in the rapid detection of sars-cov-2. hence, all positive reactions may be subjected for a subsequent confirmatory diagnosis through qrt-pcr. it would be of best interest if this developed assay be optimized using real-time amplification in order to hasten time reaction and minimize false positive reactions. this rt-lamp would be an ideal pointof-care-test for covid-19, if all these limitations are met in future studies.in summary, we have developed an rt-lamp assay that can be of use in clinical laboratories in support of the preliminary detection of sars-cov-2 in suspected patients especially during the testing of an abundant number of samples. with high sensitivity and specificity, this assay has a simple methodology, low cost, and is time efficient. further, a single-tube isothermal colorimetric method does not require any expensive equipment. with the declaration of public health of international concerns against sars-cov-2, our method would significantly contribute to the public health responses and disease control of countries in providing preliminary counter detection measures, especially to those with limited laboratory capacities. coronaviruses are frequent causes of respiratory and neurological diseases in human, six major species are known to cause respiratory and neurological diseases in human [1] . these species include severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), and less virulent species hku1, oc43, nl63 and 229e [2] . an unknown pneumonia widely broke out in the word. genetic sequencing of isolates obtained from patients with pneumonia identified a previously unknown coronavirus (2019-ncov) [3] , which has been recently denoted 'covid-19' by who [4] . based on genomic characteristics of coronavirus (figure 1 ), the current diagnostic tests for coronavirus include rt-pcr, rrt-pcr (real-time reverse transcription pcr), rt-lamp (reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification), as well as real-time rt-lamp [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] .the epidemiology, aetiology and clinical characteristics of covid-19 have recently been described in detail [3, [10] [11] [12] [13] . the current diagnostic of covid-19 includes detection of virus by genomic techniques using either pcr-based method or deep sequencing [11, 14, 15] . within days of chinese researchers releasing the sequence of the virus on 11 january, scientists developed pcrbased tests to detect novel coronaviruses covid-19 from patients [16] . although diagnostic test kits have been approved, the low efficiency and low accuracy of these test kits makes severe situation that is difficult to keep up with the increasing number of patients. up to april 14, 2020, over 1.92 million confirmed cases and 119000 death worldwide. however, these detection methods heavily rely on the presence of viral genome in sufficient amounts at the site of sample collection that can be amplified. missing the time-window of viral replication can provide false negative results. similarly, an incorrect sample collection can limit the usefulness of qpcr-based assay. a false negative diagnosis can have grave consequences, specially at this stage of the pandemic by allowing infected patients to spread the infection and hampering the efforts to contain the spread of virus [17] . additional screening methods that can detect the presence of infection despite lower viral titres can be beneficial to ensure timely diagnosis of all infected patients. therefore, it's urgently needs to develop a diagnostic method with simple, quick and high accuracy to diagnose emerging pathogen infectious.the discovery and recently advance in the biology of clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (crispr) and crispr-associated cas proteins have led to rapidly research expansion and most recently molecular diagnostics ( figure 2 ). the development of crispr-cas based systems for genome editing should acknowledge the efforts from different fields in the past of 30 years [18] . the crispr locus were first discovered in 1987 and described to be arranged as highly homologous repeats with spacers in escherichia coli [19] . a subsequent sentinel discoveries were unveiled the functions and mechanisms of crispr-cas system, setting up a new era of crispr-cas mediated adaptive immunity in 2007 [20] . in 2013, the first application of crispr-cas9 technology has revolutionised the field of gene editing targeting mammalian cells, accelerating the advance of novel applications in other crispr-cas systems for basic sciences and clinical medicine [21, 22] . the crispr/cas9-based tools were firstly used to detect zike virus in 2016 [23] and methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus in 2017 [24] . the discovery of rna-guided, rna-targeting crispr effector cas13a [25] and subsequently founded cas12a [26] set up a stage of crispr-cas12 or/and -cas13 based nucleic acid detection that used for clinical diagnosis [27] . recently, crispr-cas13 based sherlock protocols described by prof. feng zhang et al provides a rapid and accurate diagnostic assay for emerging 2019 novel coronavirus (covid- 19) pneumonia. therefore, crispr/cas based technology have a good potential for application as a fast, accurate and portable diagnostic assay for emerging infectious disease.crispr-cas systems, act as rna-guided, dna or rna-targeting technique, which confer prokaryotes with heritable adaptive immunity against foreign genetic elements, including bacteriophages and plasmids from bacteria and archaea [20, [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] . excellent comprehensive reviews have summarised the main processes of crispr/cas-mediated immunity, which include adaptation, crrna maturation and interference [33] . based on the composition of the interference complex, crispr-cas systems are divided into class 1 crispr-cas systems (types i, iii, and iv) and class 2 crispr-cas systems (ii/cas9, v/cas12, and vi/cas13) [34, 35] . class 1 crispr-cas systems utilise crrna together with multi-effector complex to recognise and cleave the target sequence, whereas class 2 systems utilise single multi-domain cas protein together with the crrna for interference [34] [35] [36] [37] . to date, class 2 crispr-cas systems have been widely used for genome editing and accurate and rapid diagnosis of infectious diseases [21, 23, 24, 27] . crispr-cas12a, -cas13a and -cas13b have been recently applied to develop practical and sensitive detection assays for human pathogens, including bacteria and virus [25] [26] [27] 38] .type ii crispr-cas9 based technology has been reported by several groups for infectious disease diagnostics [23, 24, 39] . pardee et al. developed a novel method that combine crispr-cas9 with an isothermal amplification technique called nasba (nucleic acid sequence-based amplification) to differentiate zikv strains in single-base discrimination [23] . the investigators exploited the (ds)dna, an intermediate of the nasba amplification process, which serve as substrate for the cas9 endonuclease. sgrna-cas9 complex cleave the resulting dsdna, resulting in the truncated or full-length dna fragments formed upon cas9 cleavage with or without a strain-specific pam, respectively. full-length strands but not the truncated dna fragments triggered the toehold switch, leading to a colour change to distinguish the different strains. guk et al. developed a method to detect methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa) via combination crispr-cas9 with fish(dna fluorescent in situ hybridization) [24] . in this method, dcas9/sgrna complex targets and recognises target meca gene, which is associated with methicillin resistance in mrsa [40] . dcas9 does not induce dna cleavage when the dcas9/sgrna complex recognises the target dna sequence, which can be detected by fish and the corresponding fluorescence intensity reflects the concentration of mrsa. it's easy to detect mrsa at a detection concentration of 10 cfu/ml and rapid distinguish between s. aureus isolates in the presence or absence of meca gene. however, a new meca homologue mecalga251 shared 70% nucleotide homology with meca [41] , which results in possible false negative results by using this method. meanwhile, the detection of the meca gene is not specific to mrsa, because a small proportion of methicillin-susceptible staphylococcus aureus (mssa) with meca gene and a large proportion of mrsa strains lack of meca [42, 43] . combination crispr-cas9 with optical dna mapping was also applied to identify bacterial antibiotic resistance genes [39] . in this assay, cas9/grna complex specifically recognises and cleaves nucleic acid sequences of resistance genes. then fluorescent dye (yoyo-1) and netropsin independently and selectively binds to the resulting dna based on at-rich regions, resulting in a difference emission intensity allows to detect different resistance genes.identification of crispr-cas12 systems (type v) have expand the crispr-cas arsenal for genomic editing [44] . cpf1 was characterised firstly and renamed as cas12a [45] , c2c1 (cas12b) [46] and other type v members were identified subsequently [37, 47, 48] . chen et al. reported a technique named detectr (dna endonuclease-targeted crispr trans reporter), which provides a straightforward platform for molecular diagnostics [38] . detectr achieves attomolar sensitivity for dna detection by combination the activation of non-specific single-stranded deoxyribonuclease of cas12a ssdnase with isothermal amplification that enables fast and specific detection of virus from patient samples. in this assay, crrna-cas12a complex binds to target dna and induces indiscriminate cleavage of ssdna that is coupled to a fluorescent reporter. the author used detectr to differentiate between different types of human papillomavirus from cultured human cells and clinical samples within 1 h [38] . in addition, another technique combines crispr-cas12 with a fluorescence-based point-of-care (poc) system is recently reported for rapid and detection for accurate african swine fever virus (asfv) [49] . in this method, cas12a/crrna detects and binds to targeting dna, the cas12a/ crrna/dna complex becomes activated and degrades a fluorescent ssdna reporter. the author used this method to detect asfv at a detection limit of 1 mm within 2 h. a detection limit of 100 fm can be achieved after 24 h of incubation.several subtypes of type vi crispr-cas13 systems have been reported to serve as potential tools for rna editing [50] [51] [52] . generally, type vi crispr-cas13 systems contain a single 'effector' protein designated cas13a, which combines with crrna form a crrna-guided rna-targeting crispr effector complex to cleave ssrna rather than dna [34, 50, 53] . the first platforms based on type vi crispr-cas13 systems is termed sherlock (specific highsensitivity enzymatic reporter unlocking), which integrates isothermal rpa (recombinase polymerase amplification) or reverse transcription (rt)-rpa with nuclease activity of cas13a [25] . a crrna-cas13a complex specifically binds and cleaves target nucleic acid as well as nontarget rna coupled to a fluorescent reporter, which provides a fluorescent signal for rapid and real-time detection of pathogen even at low concentrations. using sherlock, gootenberg et al. identified escherichia coli and pseudomonas aeruginosa and differentiated these bacteria with mycobacterium tuberculosis, klebsiella pneumoniae and staphylococcus aureus. clinical isolates of k. pneumoniae that possess different drugresistant gene, including new delhi metallo-beta-lactamase-1 resistance (ndm) or carbapenemase (kpc), can be distinguished. moreover, the most powerful applications of sherlock allowed for the discrimination of targets that differed in only a single base pair and successfully distinguished such targets as african and american strains of zikv, different serotypes of denv, five healthrelated gene alleles from human saliva, and various cancer-related mutations in suspensions of cell-free dna. several important characteristics, including the estimated cost of the reagents and materials is less than $1 per test, a paper-based test can be used, reagents are stable and the detection can be performed within 2 h, which make it feasible for use. the revised method based on sherlock, termed sherlockv2, can simultaneously detect one dna target and three ssrna targets in a single reaction [26] . in this modified method, cas13 together with csm6, an auxiliary crispr-type iii associated nuclease [54, 55] , which can increase about 3.5-fold signal sensitivity [26] . this method can be applied to detect specific nucleic acid with high sensitivity. it takes less than 90 min to accuratly detects zika virus, dengue virus and synthetic dsdna [26] . moreover, myhrvold et al. developed a novel technique based on sherlock together with hudson (heating unextracted diagnostic samples to obliterate nucleases) [27] , which allows pathogen detection directly from bodily fluids of the patient without nucleic acid extraction. this method with high sensitivity detection that can identify dengue virus in the saliva, whole blood and serum of patient samples within 2 h. recently, a protocol for detection of covid-19 using crispr-based sherlock described by feng zhang et al. (figure 3 ). the author mentioned that the test can be performed starting with rna isolated from patient samples, and can be read out using a dipstick in less than an hour. this protocol will provide reference for researchers interested in further advancing this diagnostics system for covid-19 or other emerging infectious disease.the limitation in overall performance characteristics of traditional diagnostic methods makes novel molecular tools were quickly integrated into clinical use. tremendous advances in novel methods associated with pcr and dna sequencing allow rapidly identified the pathogen of emerging infectious diseases and facilitate timely treatment of infections. however, an ideal diagnostic reagent is characterised by rapid, reliable, inexpensive and easyto-use. perhaps non-specific dna or cleavage observed in crispr-cas type ii (cas9), v (cas12), and vi (cas13) systems provides a promising advance in crispr-based diagnostics for emerging infectious diseases. these three different techniques based on class ii crispr-cas systems applied a combination of the crispr/ cas based system with other technique to achieve described applications in diagnosis. although there is an urgent need for fast, accurate and inexpensive tests, and the possibility that the crispr-cas based diagnosis may set up a novel stage in terms of the accuracy and the speed of detection. these emerging advanced techniques based diagnostic methods will require careful validation and field testing to guarantee their functionality.the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is a new type of coronavirus belonging to the genus β. on 11 mar 2020, world health organization (who) declared coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) as a pandemic. 1 viral culture and pcr are the gold standards in the diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infection. 2 however, it takes hours to detect the nucleic acid and days to isolate the virus. in addition, specialized instrument and expertise is required. for rapid diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infection, rapid antigen detection (rad) tests for qualitative determination of sars-cov-2 antigen are available. rad tests detect viral antigen by the immobilized coated sars-cov-2 antibody on the device. the test results of rad can be interpreted without specialized instrument and available within 30 minutes. hence, rad tests can relieve the workload in diagnostic hospitals and laboratories and improve the turnaround time. however, according to who the role of rad tests for antigen detection for sars-cov-2 needs to be evaluated and is not recommended for clinical diagnosis. 3 the purpose of this evaluation is to assess the diagnostic use of the commercially available biocredit covid-19 ag test. the aim of the first part of the study was to assess the limit of detection (lod) between rad test, rt-pcr and viral culture and the second part was to evaluate performance of rad test in detecting sars-cov-2 virus in different types of respiratory specimens. the sars-cov-2 culture isolate (strain hcov-19/hong kong/vm20001097/2020, the first sars-cov-2 case detected in hong kong) was used to perform a serial tenfold dilution to determine lod between different assays. we evaluated the only commercially available rad kit in hong kong at the time of starting the evaluation, biocredit covid-19 ag for the diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infection.the intended use for biocredit covid-19 ag kit is for nasopharyngeal swab specimen. as npa & ts, nps & ts, sputum and throat saliva had either been eluted in vtm or suspended in pbs, the test was carried out with modified sample processing methods.the recommended sample volume by the biocredit covid-19 ag kit was 90-150 ul. to unify the sample volume, 100 ul sample volume was used. we evaluated two sample processing methods based on the nature of the samples.for less viscous samples these samples do not need preparation, 100 ul sample was added directly into a sample well of the device.the swab provided by the kit was used to collect the samples and the swab was immersed in the provided assay diluent tube. the subsequent procedures were carried out according to the manufacturer's instructions.in an effort to compare the performance of two sample processing methods (i.e. methods for handling less viscous and viscous samples), lod was determined using a serial tenfold dilution of virus. the results were then compared with rt-pcr and viral culture. j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fthe lod of the rad test was 1000 fold less sensitive than viral culture when 100 ul sample was added directly into a sample well of the device (rad: 10 -2 ; viral culture: 10 -5 ). pcr is the most sensitive assay for detecting sars-cov-2 virus (10 -7 ).for the rad test, there were marked differences in sensitivity when using the provided swab to transfer the sample to the assay diluent tube and then adding 100 ul of the suspension into a sample well. the fold difference between two rad sample processing method was at least 100 fold (table 1) . it seemed to be related to the volume of sample used and the dilution effect in the assay diluent tube.as shown in table 1 (figure 1 ). the rad test detected between 28.6% and 81.8% of real-time rt-pcr-positive high viral load samples from covid-19 patients.however, it only detected between 0-21.1% for normal viral load samples.in the cross-reactivity test using virus isolates, all were tested negative by the rad test.in this study, we determined the performance characteristics of the rad test, the the limitations of this study include the fact that we employed a modified sample processing method to perform the rad test. we added some sample directly into a sample well of the device instead of using the swab provided by the kit to collect the samples, immerse the swab in the provided assay diluent tube and add the suspension into a sample well of the device. however, we were capable of determining the viral load dependent effect on its sensitivity. j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o foffering density specificity that enables a rapid assessment of lung lesions and the latter offering better spatial specificity as it allows clinicians to directly evaluate transverse lung sections, as well as surrounding tissues and vasculature 51 .chest radiography is generally the first test to be ordered in patients suspected to be suffering from sars, mers, or covid-19. with the advancing technology, artificial intelligence (ai) system could surve as a reliable support 52 . in such radiographs, 72% of sars patients were found to exhibit abnormalities (78% consolidation, 33% ground-glass opacity [ggo]) 35 49 53-57 . similarly, 86% of mers patients exhibit radiographic abnormalities (65% ggo, 18% consolidation, 17% bronchovascular markings, 11% air bronchogram, 4% diffuse reticulonodular patterning) [58] [59] [60] [61] [62] [63] [64] [65] [66] . in covid-19 patients, chest radiographic abnormalities have been observed in 62% of patients (27% ggo, 47% consolidation, and 1% pneumothorax) 12 45 46 67-71 . there were no significant differences in rates of radiographic abnormalities among these three coronavirus infections (p = 0.1827).the spatial location of lesions in coronavirus pneumonia patients is also an important diagnostic and prognostic consideration. sars patients exhibited unilateral and bilateral involvement in 61% and 39% of cases, respectively, with 55% and 45% of patients exhibiting single and multiple infiltration, respectively, and with the lower lung being more susceptible to infection (74% of patients) 35 56 57 . unilateral and bilateral involvement was observed in 40% and 60% of mers patients, respectively, with 40% and 60% of patients similarly exhibiting single and multiple infiltration, respectively, and with interstitial infiltration having been detected in 67% of patients 64 65 72 . unilateral and bilateral involvement has been detected in 29% and 71% of covid-19 patients, respectively, with these patients exhibiting single, multiple, and interstitial infiltration in 48%, 52%, and 7% of cases, respectively, and with the lower lung being susceptible to infection (50% of patients) 45 68 69 . these results suggest that covid-19 and mers are more commonly associated with bilateral lung involvement relative to sars, whereas sars and mers are associated with similar infiltration rates.overall, extant radiographic data suggest that chest radiography can aid in the diagnosis of coronavirus pneumonia, although there is still potential for misdiagnosis. as such, further ct scans are important in affected patients. (table 3) ct scans are increasingly common diagnostic tools owing to recent advances in lowdose and high-resolution imaging techniques, with, similar to chest radiography, ai system involving 46 73 . in ct scans, 98% of sars patients were found to exhibit abnormalities, with 81% exhibiting ggo, 49% exhibiting consolidation, 87% exhibiting interlobular septal thickening, 74% exhibiting crazy paving pattern, and 4% exhibiting parapneumonic effusion 56 57 74 . in contrast, 100% of mers patients were found to exhibit ct abnormalities (86% ggo, 65% consolidation, 38% pleural effusion, 35% interlobular septal thickening) 65 as ct scans offer excellent spatial specificity, they can be more effectively used to assess lesion variability than can radiographic scans. ct scans of sars patients identified 61% and 39% of lesions as being unifocal and multifocal, respectively, with 74% and 26% being unilobar and multilobar, respectively, 48% being unilateral, 52% being bilateral, 71% exhibiting lower lobe involvement, and 84% exhibiting peripheral or subpleural involvement 56 57 74 . in contrast, just 14% of mers lesions were found to be unilateral, with the remaining 86% being bilateral, and with 14% exhibiting lower lobe involvement and 71% being peripheral or subpleural 65 75 . unifocal and multifocal lung lesions were observed in 31% and 69% of covid-19 patients, respectively, with unilobar and multilobar lesions being detected in 25% and 75% of patients, respectively, and with 21% and 79% exhibiting unilateral and bilateral involvement, respectively, in addition to 56% exhibiting lower lobe involvement, 79% exhibiting peripheral or subpleural involvement, and 71% exhibiting central involvement 45 78-84 90 . in line with chest radiographic findings, these results suggest that mers and covid-19 are associated with more diffuse disease than is sars, potentially due to underlying differences in the pathological mechanisms of these diseases. overall, data suggest that ct scans offer markedly higher diagnostic efficacy relative to chest radiography (p = 0.0100). however, ct scans cannot reliably identify infections this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.associated with a specific virus, nor can they reliably differentiate between viruses 88 . even so, owing to their excellent diagnostic utility, ct scans should be the primary mode of imaging examination in patients with suspected coronavirus pneumonia.present guidelines indicate that formal sars-cov-2 diagnosis is dependent upon the results of laboratory examinations such as swab test qpcr analyses 97 . however, such laboratory testing is both time-and resource-intensive, with test kits and swabs not being available in sufficient quantities in some areas of rapid viral spread. these diagnostic approaches are also hampered by the potential for false-negative results due to laboratory errors or a lack of a sufficiently highquality sample for analysis 42 98 .in order to aid in the more precise diagnostic evaluation of patients with coronavirus pneumonia, we herein compared extant data pertaining to abnormal ct findings and qpcr results in this disease context. while no significant differences between ct and qpcr findings were observed for mers patients owing to the relatively limited literature surrounding this emerging virus (p = 0.3516), significant differences between ct and qpcr results were observed for both sars and covid-19 cases (p = 0.0302, p = 0.0041) ( table 4 ). while qpcr analyses can achieve 100% specificity 22 44 47 , in order to do so they require access to a sufficient viral specimen. while bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (balf) samples were associated with a 100% viral positivity rate in one study, sputum samples were associated with a lower positivity rate (74.4 -88.9%), while nasal swab detection rates were lower still (53.6 -73.3%) 44 . this may be a consequence of a number of different factors pertaining to sample collection methodology, timing, sample transport, and sample testing parameters. lower respiratory samples have the potential to offer greater diagnostic sensitivity even when nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal qpcr tests yield negative results, and serological testing should also be used as a follow-up approach in those with clinically suspected disease 17 . it is also vital that clinicians implement appropriate infection control strategies for all patients with suspected disease, including patients that exhibit negative qpcr findings but that exhibit imaging signs consistent with coronavirus pneumonia 17 . a single swab-based test is also not sufficient to reliably rule out the possibility of infection. in a study of mers patients, while only 89% of patients were found to be positive after a single swab test, 96.5% were found to be positive following two consecutive swabs, and 97.6% were positive following three consecutive swab tests 39 . initial negative test results have a high risk of being false-negative findings, and repeated testing is therefore essential in order to ensure appropriate patient quarantine and management.with respect to ct scans, the relatively low rates of covid-19 misdiagnosis (3.9%) suggest that radiologic diagnoses may be a reliable means of quickly detecting cases of coronavirus pneumonia so as to facilitate rapid and effective patient quarantine and management 88 . an ai study related to ct scan achieved a test accuracy of 96% (95% ci: 90-98%), sensitivity 95% (95% ci: 83-100%) and specificity of 96% (95% ci: 88-99%) with receiver operating characteristic accepted article (roc) auc of 0.95 and precision-recall (pr) auc of 0.90, which concluded that ai assistance improved radiologists' performance in distinguishing covid-19 from non-covid-19 pneumonia on chest ct 99 . these scans may also be of value in patients that initially exhibit negative pcr findings. for example, xie et al. 42 reported on five patients that were negative for sars-cov-2 in initial qpcr tests, but that exhibited typical covid-19 ct findings including ggo and consolidation. these patients were isolated, and subsequent repeated qpcr testing eventually confirmed all five of these patients to be infected with sars-cov-2 42 . similarly, research conducted by ai et al. 43 revealed that positive chest ct findings were detected in 75% of symptomatic patients with negative qpcr findings. serial rt-pcr and ct scans in these patients suggested a mean interval of 5.1 ± 1.5 days between initial negative qpcr and positive qpcr findings 43 . the comprehensive strategy reached a higher sensitivity of 94% in a retrospective study (table 4 ) 46 .while ct scans expose patients to higher radiation doses, the relative risks and benefits of such exposure must be determined by radiologists and clinicians. in the context of severe pandemic disease, ct scans are a valuable tool and may be essential in order to accurately and quickly identify and isolate covid-19 patients. however, a combination of both laboratory testing and imaging is essential in order to accurately identify covid-19 patients with confidence, and ct scans should be ordered in patients with negative qpcr results that are nonetheless suspected to be suffering from coronavirus pneumonia. when patients test positive for sars-cov-2 infection, while there is a small risk of false-positive diagnosis, it is essential that they be strictly isolated from other individuals in order to limit the ability of this virus to spread through vulnerable communities.in summary, in the present review we surveyed the results of prior studies of sars, mers, and covid-19 patients in an effort to establish which diagnostic approaches are most efficacious in those with coronavirus pneumonia. while we found that ct scans are associated with higher detection rates than are qpcr tests, it is nonetheless important that clinicians utilize a combination of imaging and laboratory findings to inform their diagnostic process such that patients can be rapidly identified and quarantined, thus stemming the spread of these deadly pandemic viruses. this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. rt-pcr = reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. qpcr = real-time quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.# there was only one study related the serological test of mers.*lack of data. the disease has since spread rapidly around the world, with cases currently reported from 25 countries on five continents. 2 the disease has features that give rise to great concern, including poorly understood epidemiology and pathogenesis, absence of definitive diagnostic tests and specific treatments, an incubation period that allows rapid spread along international air-travel routes, an incompletely understood pattern of nosocomial transmission, mounting evidence that certain source cases make a special contribution to rapid spread of infection, a disturbing concentration of cases in previously healthy hospital staff, an initial case fatality of 3-4%, and an initially unclear causal agent. [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] in developing emergency plans to contain the outbreak and prevent further international spread, who worked on the principle that the unidentified causal agent could lead to an exceptionally dangerous outbreak. rapid development of scientific knowledge would be needed to reduce opportunities for sars to establish endemicity. identification of the causal agent and the development of a diagnostic test were given paramount importance in the overall containment strategy. 8, 9 in the view of who epidemiologists and virologists, as long as the causal agent remained unknown, and no specific interventions against the agent were available, specialists in infectious disease control would be forced to resort to the control tools of isolation and quarantine.members of the who global influenza surveillance network (112 national influenza centres in 83 countries and four who collaborating centres) had already increased their vigilance for a novel influenza virus after reports received in early february, 2003, from guangdong province, china, of 305 cases and five deaths caused by atypical pneumonia of unknown cause. 10 laboratory analyses for influenza viruses were reported as negative. 11 on feb 19, who and its influenza network activated emergency pandemic response plans after receiving a report from the department of health in hong kong confirming the presence of avian influenza virus a, subtype h5n1, in a boy aged 9 years whose family had travelled to fujian province, china, in january. 12 laboratories in the influenza network ruled out all influenza virus strains and other known causes of pneumonia from samples taken in hanoi, singapore, and hong kong. sars looked increasingly like a new disease. epidemiological evidence suggested person-toperson transmission as the major route. 13 if the causative agent maintained its pathogenicity and transmissibility, sars could become the first severe new disease of the 21st century, with global epidemic potential.with the exception of aids, most new diseases that emerged in the past two decades or that established endemicity in new geographical areas have features that limit their capacity to pose a major threat to international public health. for example, avian influenza, nipah virus, hendra virus, and hanta virus did not establish efficient human-to-human transmission. [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] other diseases, such as escherichia coli o157:h7 and variant creutzfeldt-jakob disease, depend on food as a vehicle of transmission. 19, 20 diseases such as west nile fever and rift valley fever that have spread to new geographical areas require a vector as part of the transmission cycle and are associated with low mortality, although they frequently occur in high-risk groups, such as the elderly, the immunocompromised, or people with comorbidity. 21, 22 still others, such as neisseria meningitidis w135, and the ebola, marburg, and crimean-congo haemorrhagic fevers, have strong geographical foci. 23, 24 although outbreaks of ebola haemorrhagic fever have been associated with case fatalities of 53% in uganda, up to 88% in democratic republic of the congo, person-to-person transmission requires close physical exposure to infected blood and other bodily fluids. 25 severe acute respiratory syndrome is a new disease in human beings, first recognised in late february, 2003, in hanoi, vietnam. the severity of the disease, combined with its rapid spread along international air-travel routes, prompted who to set up a network of scientists from 11 laboratories around the world to try to identify the causal agent and develop a diagnostic test. the network unites laboratories with different methods and capacities to rapidly fulfil all postulates for establishing a virus as the cause of a disease. results are shared in real time via a secure website, on which microscopy pictures, protocols for testing, and pcr primer sequences are also posted. findings are discussed in daily teleconferences. progress is further facilitated through sharing between laboratories of samples and test materials. the network has identified a new coronavirus, consistently detected in samples of sars patients from several countries, and conclusively named it as the causative agent of sars; the strain is unlike any other known member of the genus coronavirus. three diagnostic tests are now available, but all have limitations.on march 15, 2003 , the day who issued emergency travel advice in response to sars, it set up a network of scientists from 11 leading laboratories around the world to expedite identification of the causative agent of sars and rapidly develop a robust and reliable diagnostic test. the network was modelled partly on the global influenza network. however, the urgency of what was increasingly being seen as a public-health emergency called for rapid adaptation to meet unique needs and ensure virtual collaboration. laboratories were approached by telephone throughout the weekend of march 15-16, 2003 . the objective was to secure the participation of laboratories with outstanding experience in the detection of a wide range of viruses and other micro-organisms, a history of collaboration in international investigations coordinated by who, access to sars samples, and capacity to fulfil the six criteria of koch's postulates required to establish a virus as the cause of a disease. 28 all laboratories asked to join agreed to do so and to work according to a set of rules on confidentiality of data. these rules specified that data and information shared among the members of the research project would be used only to advance the project in a collaborative way. specific scientific data could be shared outside the network with the approval of the laboratory from which the data or other information originated. to avoid discrepancies between official national case notification and laboratory information, data on cases and samples were treated separately from epidemiological information. such open sharing among academic competitors required trust and willingness to work together.the collaboration is continued through daily teleconferences and use of a secure who website to post electron microscopy pictures of candidate viruses, protocols for testing, phylogenetic trees, pcr primer sequences, and results of various diagnostic tests. these arrangements allow the simultaneous analyses of samples from the same patient in several laboratories with different approaches, and real-time sharing of results. laboratories in areas with sars cases, including canada, germany, france, hong kong, the uk, the usa, and singapore, regularly exchange samples with each other and despatch materials to laboratories in the netherlands and japan, which were initially spared sars cases. in early april, laboratories from beijing and guangdong province, china, joined the network.on march 17, 2003 , the network laboratories reported on available samples, reviewed past and planned intervention strategies, and catalogued available laboratory experience and capacities. initially, bacterial, viral, rickettsia, and chlamydia pathogens primarily associated with respiratory disease, and pathogens for which respiratory symptoms might be secondary, were targeted for detection. methods used include light and electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry, animal inoculation, bacterial and cell-culture isolation techniques, serology, and pcr analyses.on march 18, participating laboratories in germany reported paramyxovirus of singaporean origin on electron microscopy isolated in respiratory samples from a sars patient in frankfurt and directly linked to singapore's index case. simultaneously, the chinese university of hong kong shared equivocal results from generic and more specific human metapneumovirus pcr primers in samples from patients who had developed sars after contact with hong kong's index case. pcr primers were tested in three additional patients and the findings were positive for human metapneumovirus. sequences of all primers were shared electronically on the network's secure website.the next day, the singapore laboratory noted a pleiomorphic virus on electron microscopy in respiratory samples from sars patients. the rotterdam laboratory, where human metapneumovirus was first discovered, sent a car to frankfurt overnight to obtain samples from sars patients. 29 the japanese laboratory reported negative results of pcr for bronchoalveolar lavage and of serum antibody obtained from the index case in hanoi. the laboratory found no evidence for influenza a and b viruses, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza viruses, human metapneumovirus, nipah virus, hendra virus, hanta virus, and lassa, ebola, marburg, and crimean-congo haemorrhagic fever viruses.on march 20, human metapneumovirus primers were tested in four additional laboratories. the chinese university of hong kong found paramyxovirus-like particles in respiratory samples. the rotterdam laboratory detected no human metapneumovirus in samples from frankfurt. the rotterdam laboratory sent test kits for human metapneumovirus to singapore and hong kong laboratories and shared, via the website, the phylogenetic tree of the isolated paramyxovirus. the laboratory in canada shipped convalescent sera to rotterdam for further testing of isolates. during the daily conference call, the singapore laboratory reported round pleomorphic structures in samples, and scientists in germany and hong kong described similar findings.during the march 21 teleconference, the laboratory in rotterdam established that all respiratory samples from the cluster tested in germany (singapore patients) were negative for human metapneumovirus on pcr. the laboratory also isolated an agent that caused a cytopathogenic effect in vero and monkey kidney cell lines. laboratories in the uk also detected h3n2 influenza virus in two suspected sars cases. the laboratory in canada detected human metapneumovirus by pcr in samples from two patients and provided an electron-microscopy picture of small virus particles (around 20 nm) seen in bronchoalveolar lavage. at the same time, a german laboratory isolated the agent in vero cells and in the murine cell line l929. the laboratories also ruled out the presence of respiratory pathogens, such as influenza a and b viruses, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza viruses type 1, 2, and 3, adenovirus, rhinovirus, enterovirus, human metapneumovirus, mycoplasma pneumoniae, and chlamydia pneumoniae.later in the day, the scientists at hong kong university sent an e-mail indicating that they had isolated an agent from two patients with sars. the agent, isolated in continuous rhesus monkey kidney cells, produced a cytopathogenic effect, indicating growth of a virus. in addition, in an immunofluorescence assay of virusinfected cells, done in a blinded trial, sera from sars patients had rising antibody titres to the new virus isolate. by contrast, sera from blood donors taken long before the disease emerged in hong kong had no antibody to this virus. furthermore, virus-like particles in the cytoplasm and at the cell membrane were seen in thin electron microscopic sections from infected cells. these findings proved to be the turning point in the search for the sars causative agent.on march 22, the laboratory in the usa isolated a virus that caused a cytopathogenic effect in vero e6 cells from a patient from thailand, and showed the presence of coronavirus-like particles on electron microscopy (size 70-100 nm). in samples from the same patient, the us laboratory found positive pcr signals with primers for picornavirus, which was later identified as rhinovirus. the government virus unit in hong kong and the us laboratory sent electron microscopy pictures of the coronavirus-like particles to be posted on the website simoultaneously. laboratories in canada, paris, and at the chinese university detected paramyxovirus, human metapneumovirus, or both on electron microscopy or pcr in various samples. the singapore laboratory detected human metapneumovirus with a test kit supplied by the rotterdam scientists. the government virus unit in hong kong provided the laboratory in the usa with convalescent sera. the laboratory in canada found more particles of 20 nm size on electron microscopy and posted the phylogenetic tree of human metapneumovirus sequences on the secure website.on march 23, the laboratory in the usa confirmed the classification as a coronavirus based on a coronavirus-like sequence of the pcr-amplified product, and posted initial primers for amplification on the website. the government virus unit in hong kong tested in-house coronavirus primers and found coronavirus rna in two of eight samples. the usa laboratory reported the presence of coronavirus in postmortem kidney samples from hong kong. it also developed an immunofluorescence assay for detection of seroconversion. trials in non-human primates were started by intratracheal infection with nasopharyngeal swabs taken in singapore and hong kong. the laboratories in paris and canada found a coronavirus in respiratory samples on electron microscopy and pcr, respectively. suckling mice and hamsters inoculated 3 days previously at the pasteur unit in lyon with samples from frankfurt and hanoi were described as still healthy and have remained so. laboratories in germany, japan, and singapore isolated a cytopathogenic-effect-causing agent in vero cells. the laboratories in the uk detected with specific pcr four pneumovirus sequences in respiratory samples from probable and suspected cases consistent with human metapneumovirus.from march 24 to 26, a coronavirus was detected on pcr and electron microscopy in more laboratories. laboratories in germany and hong kong developed and shared refined primers that detected the new coronavirus. in a german laboratory, pcr products were sequenced, two of which matched, at the protein level, the polymerase gene of known coronaviruses. several laboratories reported coronavirus particles on electron microscopy in respiratory samples and faeces. sequencing of the new coronavirus began at laboratories in germany, rotterdam, and hong kong. a german laboratory and the hong kong university laboratory posted on the website the first phylogenetic trees of what the group collectively had discovered: a new coronavirus. 30 from march 27 to 31, hong kong university made available their virus isolate to members of the network. monkey trials continued and the first coronavirus isolates were obtained. hong kong university and the us laboratory reported negative results for antibodies to the new coronavirus in large numbers of blood-donor serum samples. virus, antibodies, and rna on pcr were, however, consistently detected in increasing numbers of sars patients in many of the network laboratories. the laboratory in japan received samples from singapore and hong kong and identified the new coronavirus, which was also confirmed by seroconversions. they also developed pcr primers and an immunofluorescence assay system for igm. hong kong university reported that 27 of 27 paired sera from patients with clinically typical sars showed rising titres of antibody to the new coronavirus, and detected rna in faeces in five of ten sars patients. the government virus unit in hong kong reported consistently positive pcr for the new coronavirus in faeces from sars patients between days 6 and 16 after onset of clinical signs. a laboratory in germany found rna of the new coronavirus in conjunctival liquid of one patient on the day of onset of clinical symptoms. human metapneumovirus continued to be detected in samples from sars cases in various countries, which suggests that sars might be caused by co-infection with two viruses. coronavirus-primers were used in various laboratories, resulting in an increasing number of positive samples. in parallel, human metapneumovirus was isolated and found on pcr in various samples from patients in canadafrom april 1 to 9, in the netherlands laboratory, monkeys were infected with the new coronavirus, the human metapneumovirus, or both-first with coronavirus followed by metapneumovirus. animals infected with the coronavirus alone developed full-blown disease. animals infected with the human metapneumovirus developed only mild rhinitis. the monkeys infected with coronavirus and metapneumovirus did not develop more serious disease than monkeys infected with metapneumovirus alone. on the basis of these findings, the network scientists collectively agreed that the coronavirus alone can cause the symptoms of sars seen in human beings. however, co-infection with other agents, including chlamydia and human metapneumovirus, could result in a more severe clinical course.elisa tests developed by the laboratory in the usa detected antibodies from day 20 after onset of clinical signs. the hong kong university laboratory reported, on indirect fluorescence, detection of antibodies (igm) from day 10. additional mice and hamster infection trials were started at the pasteur unit in lyon. in-vitro ribavirin efficacy trials began in rotterdam and germany, and the laboratory in japan began human interferon efficacy trials. the chinese laboratory in beijing continued to report chlamydia in postmortem samples from sars patients. on april 16, 1 month after the network began to function, participating laboratories collectively announced conclusive identification of the new coronavirus as the causative agent of sars. the announcement was made based on the results from the monkey studies done in the netherlands laboratory. this virus was found in many sars patients from several countries. the virus causes a cytopathogenic effect in two cell lines (vero cells and fetal rhesus kidney cells). electron microscopy of cell culture and respiratory samples from sars patients show coronavirus-like particles. immunofluorescent assays with serum from convalescent patients detect cells infected with the virus in cell culture. reactivity with this new coronavirus could not be detected in serum from several hundreds of non-sars individuals in the usa, canada and hong kong. generic coronavirus primers can detect the new coronavirus rna in cell culture and in samples from sars patients. specific primers have been developed in several laboratories and are currently being compared for sensitivity. hyperimmune sera against transmissible gastroenteritis virus, feline infectious peritonitis virus, and 229e human coronavirus react with the virus antigen in cell culture. partial sequencing of the new coronavirus in several laboratories has confirmed its affiliation to the genus coronavirus but shown dissimilarities with known members belonging to each of the three existing groups of this genus.three diagnostic tests are now available, but all have limitations. since the elisa detects antibodies reliably only from about day 20 after the onset of clinical symptoms, it cannot be used to detect cases before they potentially spread the infection to others. the second test, an immunofluorescence assay, detects antibodies reliably after day 10 of infection. various versions of real-time and block-based pcr tests are currently being developed to improve their low sensitivity and reduce the number of false-negative test results. all existing tests, used individually or in combination, can only confirm the disease in suspected or probable sars cases. more work is needed before reliable, easy-to-use and sensitive tests become available in all countries. work towards this objective is continuing and is proceeding at a rapid pace. each laboratory has contributed substantially to the rapid identification and characterisation of the new coronavirus associated with sars. [31] [32] [33] lower respiratory tract infections (lrtis) cause significant hospitalization among children under 5 years old [1, 2] . although these infections are usually relatively mild, some children develop respiratory failure, necessitating mechanical ventilation and admission to the paediatric intensive care unit (picu). the aetiology of (severe) lrti is often difficult to establish. however, the majority of lrtis in this young age group is believed to be caused by respiratory viruses. for the detection of respiratory viruses two conventional methods are commonly used: viral culture and direct immunofluorescence (dif) assays. in addition, a third method based on molecular techniques has now become available, namely (real-time) pcr. specifically, the real-time pcr format provides rapid results, within a clinically relevant period of time. it allows quantitative virus detection, and no post-pcr processing needs to be performed. moreover, compared with standard format pcr, the risk for contamination is strongly reduced with real-time pcr, rendering false-positive results with real-time pcr highly unlikely [3] .currently, there are no guidelines regarding which viral tests are appropriate for young children with lrti in the picu [4] . conventional detection methods have several disadvantages dif = direct immunofluorescence; hmpv = human metapneumovirus; lrti = lower respiratory tract infection; pcr = polymerase chain reaction; picu = paediatric intensive care unit; piv = parainfluenzavirus; rsv = respiratory syncytial virus; rt = reverse transcriptase. compared with (real-time) pcr. viral culture has been considered the gold standard for the detection of respiratory viruses, but its limitation is that it can only detect a small number. furthermore, the yield of viral culture depends on the quality of sampling, the correct transport and storage of samples, and the type of cells used. in addition, the technique has a turnaround time of several days to weeks, and is therefore unable to guide initial patient management. the results of dif assays are available more rapidly, and this has been shown to improve patient outcome with less antibiotic use and shorter hospital stay [5] [6] [7] . unfortunately, the dif assay is less sensitive than culture for the detection of certain pathogens.pcr has been shown to be more sensitive than conventional techniques and is fast [8] [9] [10] [11] . additional advantages of pcr include its ability to identify multiple viruses simultaneously, and to detect viral and atypical pathogens that cannot be cultured or for which no dif is commercially available (for example, coronaviruses, human metapneumovirus [hmpv], chlamydia pneumoniae and mycoplasma pneumoniae). rapid and sensitive testing for a broad range of respiratory viruses is vital in the picu, and it can improve our understanding of severe viral respiratory infections. furthermore, it can be used to guide cohorting strategies that may protect other critically ill children and to guide initial therapy. finally, evaluation of viral tests may be of future importance, when antiviral therapy becomes more widely available.in the present study conventional methods (viral culture and dif) were compared with real-time pcr for their ability to detect respiratory viruses in young children with lrti admitted to the picu. secondary objectives were to describe the presence of viral pathogens and bacterial infection in lrti patients in the picu.children aged under 5 years admitted to the picu of the wilhelmina children's hospital with lrti were enrolled during one winter season from december 2004 to may 2005. wilhelmina children's hospital is a tertiary university hospital with a 14 bed picu facility, and serves as a referral centre for the central part of the netherlands.patients were eligible if they had an admission diagnosis of (probable) bronchiolitis, (probable) pneumonia, or respiratory failure. exclusion criteria were a primary cardiac or central origin of respiratory failure, and overt sepsis at the time of admission. the study described here was conducted as part of normal patient care; therefore, according to the medical ethical research council of our institution, there was no need for patient consent/ethical approval.sputa and/or nasopharyngeal aspirates were obtained from all eligible patients for viral testing by viral culture, dif and realtime pcr assays. in addition, sputum and blood samples (when available) were cultured and processed in accordance with standard microbiological procedures. sputum samples were taken in a standardized manner, through sterile transtracheal aspiration in intubated children.some of the material obtained was used for immediate viral culture of rsv, influenzaviruses, parainfluenzaviruses (pivs) 1-3, picornaviruses, adenoviruses and herpesviruses on llc-mk2, rd, r-hela and hep-2c cells. cultures were examined twice weekly for the development of a cytopathological effect. in positive cultures, virus was identified by immunofluorescence with monoclonal antibodies to rsv types a and b, influenzaviruses a and b, piv 1-3 and adenoviruses (dako, glostrup, denmark). rhinoviruses were identified using acid lability tests.some of the material was subjected to dif assays to detect respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), influenzaviruses, piv 1-3 and adenoviruses using imagen kits (dako), in accordance with the manufacturer's recommended protocol. the remaining material was used for real-time pcr testing.nucleic acids were extracted using the total nucleic acid protocol with the magna pure lc nucleic acid isolation system (roche diagnostics, basel, switzerland). each sample was eluted in 200 µl buffer, which was sufficient for all real-time pcr analyses. cdna was synthesized by using multiscribe reverse transcriptase (rt) and random hexamers (both from applied biosystems, foster city, ca, usa). each 200 µl reaction mixture contained 80 µl of eluted rna, 20 µl of 10 × rt buffer, 5.5 mmol/l mgcl 2 , 500 µmol/l of each deoxynucleoside triphosphate, 2.5 µmol/l random hexamer and 0.4 u of rnase inhibitor per microlitre (all from applied biosystems). after incubation for 10 minutes at 25°c, rt was carried out for 30 minutes at 48°c, followed by rt inactivation for 5 minutes at 95°c.detection of viral and atypical pathogens was performed in parallel, using real-time pcr assays specific for the following: rsv a and b, influenzavirus a and b, piv 1-4, rhinoviruses, adenoviruses, human coronavirus oc43, nl63 and 229e, hmpv, mycoplasma pneumoniae and chlamydia pneumoniae. real-time pcr procedures were performed as described previously [12] [13] [14] .briefly, samples were assayed in duplicate in a 25 µl reaction mixture containing 10 µl (c)dna, 12.5 µl 2 × taqman universal pcr master mix (applied biosystems), 300-900 nmol/l of the forward and reverse primers and 75-200 nmol/l of each of the probes. all samples had been spiked before extraction with an internal control virus (murine encephalomyocarditis virus [rna virus] and phocine herpes virus [dna virus]) to monitor for efficient extraction and amplification, essentially as described previously [15] .each patient's medical records were reviewed for clinical data. demographic data and the following clinical characteristics/ outcomes were extracted and entered into standardized forms: gestational age, underlying disease, length of picu stay, need for mechanical ventilation and death. five criteria were used to classify the presence of bacterial infection at admission or during the picu stay: new infiltrate on the chest radiograph, increased need for supplemental oxygen, fever (temperature of 38.5°c or greater), increased infectious parameters (c-reactive protein >40 mg/l and/or white blood cell count >15 × 10 9 /l) and positive bacterial culture (blood or sputum). for the purpose of this study, 'no bacterial infection', 'possible bacterial infection' and 'proven bacterial infection' were defined as the presence of fewer than two, two to three, and more than three of the above criteria, respectively.for the analysis of continuous variables, an unpaired t test was used to compare means. categorical variables were analyzed using a two-tailed fisher's exact test.twenty-six picu patients met the inclusion criteria. one patient was admitted with a positive rsv test result from an outside hospital, and no further testing was performed at our institution. another patient diagnosed with a bacterial pneumonia was subjected to no virus tests, and insufficient material was obtained from a third patient to perform all respiratory tests. consequently, 23 patients were included in the subsequent analysis. the median age of the patients was 2.6 months, and the majority were referred from an outside hospital (table 1 ). the picu patients formed a heterogeneous group, with many patients having underlying conditions resulting from preterm birth or birth defects. patients stayed in the picu for a median of 10 days; 20 (87%) patients needed mechanical ventilation. two patients in the study group died. one child suffered from bronchiolitis with progressive bronchospasms, which in the end could not be controlled. the second child had complex underlying conditions; after eliminating all treatable causes (including lrti) the patient died from central hypoventilation.viral culture identified a respiratory virus in six picu patients; rsv and adenovirus were detected in four and two patients, respectively ( table 2 ). the dif assay appeared to be more sensitive to detect respiratory viruses than viral culture in our population, identifying a virus in 11 (48%) patients, including the six patients diagnosed by viral culture.real-time pcr detected a total of 33 respiratory viruses in 22 (96%) patients. all positive results found by conventional techniques were confirmed by real-time pcr. rsv was the single most common respiratory virus found and was detected in 16 (70%) patients. in addition, rhinovirus was found in six (26%) patients, and influenzavirus, adenovirus and coronavirus were each detected in three (13%) children. piv-3 and hmpv were both found in one patient (4%). piv-2 and piv-4 and the atypical pathogens mycoplasma pneumoniae and chlamydia pneumoniae could not be detected in any of the lrti patients.in eight (35%) children more than one virus was detected. six children had a dual infection, one had a triple, and one had a quadruple respiratory virus infection. rsv was detected in seven of the eight children infected with multiple viruses, including all three patients infected with a coronavirus. of the 14 children with a single infection, nine had rsv. the other five patients had an infection with rhinovirus (n = 2), influenzavirus (n = 1), adenovirus (n = 1), or hmpv (n = 1). in the present study conventional methods (viral culture and dif) were compared with real-time pcr for their ability to detect respiratory viruses in young children admitted to the picu with lrti. the use of real-time pcr increased the diagnostic yield from 48% to 96%, and all viruses found by conventional methods were confirmed by real-time pcr. whereas with conventional methods no double infections were found, real-time pcr revealed multiple virus infections in 35% of patients.the high diagnostic yield of pcr compared with conventional techniques is in agreement with the findings of others. when conducting a medline search (1966 to september 2005) with the search terms lrti, pcr, and rsv or respiratory viruses, we identified 11 hospital-based paediatric studies that compared pcr with conventional techniques for more than two respiratory viruses [8] [9] [10] [11] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] . pcr was found to have excellent sensitivity in all studies, if conventional methods were considered the reference standard (0.91-1.00). in summary, these studies showed that pcr increased the diagnostic yield by by up to 25% as compared with conventional techniques. however, most studies selected patients on the basis of respiratory test results, rather than selecting patients by admission diagnosis. exceptions include the studies conducted by weinberg and coworkers [22] and jennings and colleagues [9] . weinberg and coworkers [22] tested samples from 668 hospitalized children and selected patients on admission diagnoses by the new vaccine surveillance network. pcr assays were used to test for rsv, influenzaviruses and piv 1-3. with viral culture 89 (13%) specimens were positive, as compared with 185 (28%) positive specimens with pcr. jennings and colleagues [9] enrolled 75 hospitalized children using a case definition of acute respiratory infection, and performed viral diagnostics for a broad range of viruses. pcr identified 39 additional viruses, adding up to a total of 87 viruses found in 65 (87%) children [9] .the clinical relevance of detection of respiratory viruses such as rhinovirus and coronavirus is a matter of debate. rhinovirus [23] and coronavirus [14] are well recognized as causes of the common cold. on the other hand, there is increasing evidence that they are also important causes of severe lower respiratory disease. rhinovirus infections have been reported in elderly adults with lrti or pneumonia [24, 25] and in immunocompromised patients [26, 27] . coronavirus infection has also been reported in cases of lrti [14, 25, 28, 29] . real-time pcr will provide insight into the role played by such viruses in the aetiology of lrti.the high yield of pcr compared with conventional techniques could theoretically be the result of contamination. however, with using real-time pcr the likelihood of false-positive results caused by carry-over contamination is reduced to a minimum. this is achieved by the use of modified nucleotides (dutp) and uracil-dna glycosylase (ung) for control of contamination in the pcr-based amplification of (c)dna as well as the closed-tube detection system [3] . in addition, during the procedures of dna/rna isolation and amplification, several negative controls are included to monitor for possible falsepositive findings.an additional advantage of real-time pcr over standard-format pcr is that it allows high-throughput screening of patient samples for the presence of many different pathogens. our real-time pcr assays included testing not only for rsv, influenzaviruses and pivs, but also for rhinoviruses, adenoviruses, the recently discovered hmpv [30] , coronaviruses (oc43, 229e and the newly identified coronavirus nl63 [31] ) and the atypical pathogens mycoplasma pneumoniae and chlamydia pneumoniae. thus, real-time pcr allows for maximal detection of multiple viral and atypical infections in children with lrti, with a negligible risk for false-positive results.in the picu patients studied, we found a high prevalence of multiple viral infections (35%), including triple and even quadruple infections. in previous studies the detection of multiple infections varied considerably, ranging from 0.6% to 27%. a low prevalence was found in studies using pcr for rsv, influenzaviruses and pivs only [18, 22] . in contrast, a high prevalence was found in studies that included a broad range of respiratory viruses (including rhinovirus, adenovirus, coronavirus and hmpv) [9] . interestingly, in the latter study most coronaviruses were identified as part of multiple virus infections (three out of four), which is in accordance with our findings.the prevalence of possible or proven bacterial infection in our study group was high (74%). the fact that almost half of the children were diagnosed with a possible bacterial infection indicates the difficulty of precluding this diagnosis. in addition, previous studies showed that viral infection may pave the way for bacterial infection [32] . the only study that compared viral diagnostic methods in a similar population of picu patients did not report on the prevalence of bacterial infections, and so we can not compare this finding with those from other studies [16] . in contrast to the high prevalence of possible or proven bacterial infection found in our study group, we did not demonstrate infections with atypical pathogens such as mycoplasma pneumoniae and chlamydia pneumoniae. it can be speculated that atypical pathogens do not play an important role in children with severe lrti.the small study group included in our study represents a limitation; it did not allow us to find an association between clinical characteristics and multiple infections. furthermore, the samples that were negative by conventional methods and positive by real-time pcr could not be confirmed using a true gold standard because such a standard for respiratory viruses does not exist. this is a problem encountered in all studies of respiratory viruses.the finding that real-time pcr increases the yield of viral diagnoses for picu patients with lrti has implications for clinical practice. the rapidity and sensitivity of real-time pcr test results can help the clinician to initiate appropriate cohorting strategies to prevent other critically ill children from nosocomial viral infections. a reliable and rapid viral test result can also be taken into account when prescribing or discontinuing antibiotic treatment. our study was not designed to determine when antibiotic treatment for lrti in the picu is warranted. the high percentage of possible or proven bacterial infections in our viral lrti patients indicates that antibiotic treatment poses a dilemma in the picu. the clinical impact of the high prevalence of multiple virus infections detected in our picu remains unclear because they were not associated with different clinical characteristics. further research with larger numbers of patients and age-matched control groups is needed to determine the real clinical impact of multiple infections and to determine whether the use of real-time pcr prevents unnecessary antibiotic treatment. however, real-time pcr offers a rapid, sensitive and highly reliable new technique that may improve our understanding of the epidemiology of severe lrtis.real-time pcr for a broad range of respiratory viruses was found to be highly sensitive in children with severe lower respiratory tract infection in the picu. in addition, real-time pcr increased the diagnostic yield of positive samples by twofold compared with conventional methods (viral culture and dif). whereas conventional methods identified no multiple infections, real-time pcr found the prevalence of multiple infections to be 35%. because real-time pcr is a rapid and sensitive technique, it is able to guide initial patient cohorting strategies and therapy in the picu.• real-time pcr for the detection of respiratory viruses is a sensitive and reliable method in picu patients with lrti, and it increases the diagnostic yield compared with conventional methods.• real-time pcr allows detection of multiple viral infections (found in 35% of patients in this study) that are not identified using conventional methods.• the rapidity and sensitivity of real-time pcr test results can help the clinician to initiate appropriate cohorting strategies to prevent other critically ill children from acquiring nosocomial viral infections.there is an urgent need for rapid diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infected covid-19 patients even before an immune response can occur and for asymptomatic carriers. this is critical in making decisions on public health measures, such as movement restrictions, and quarantine duration. nucleic acid testing, that is detecting the viral rna, is a feasible and practical method. currently, the most common method for nucleic acid diagnosis is based on real time rt-pcr (drosten et al., 2002; mackay et al., 2002; espy et al., 2006) . for example, bgi in china (https://www.bgi.com/kit) and the us cdc (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/ 2019-ncov/about/testing.html) provide reagents, primers and probes to support rt-pcr diagnosis for sars-cov-2. although real-time rt-pcr is sensitive and reliable, it is time-consuming (~2 h) and requires a specific detection device or instrument, which limits its broad application to current huge demand for the global pandemic of to address this challenge, a fast and simple-to-operate test kit would be highly desirable. with such a test, virus infected patients could be identified at an early stage and quarantined to prevent the spread of the infection, whilst the non-infected individuals could carry on with their life as usual. ideally, the test kit is mobile without the need of any complicated instrument and the test result can be read by the naked eye. hence, it can be used at airports, railway stations and hospitals, particularly regional hospitals and medical centres in rural areas.loop-mediated isothermal amplification (lamp) is a rapid technology of dna amplification (notomi et al., 2000; tomita et al., 2008) , which has been applied to pathogen detection such as virus, bacteria and malaria (thai et al., 2004; boehme et al., 2007; mori and notomi, 2009; law et al., 2015; reboud et al., 2019) . the lamp reaction generally takes place in a constant temperature, and the target dna can be amplified in 30 min (tomita et al., 2008) . the lamp method employs 4 or 6 primers to bind six regions of a target dna, and the specificity is extremely high (notomi et al., 2000; tomita et al., 2008) . since the lamp method only needs one constant temperature (usually 65°c), the device can be simple. initially, the lamp uses 4 primers (notomi et al., 2000; tomita et al., 2008) , later it is found that the addition of two loop primers can shorten half of the time required for the original lamp reaction (nagamine et al., 2002) . the availability of warmstart rtx reverse transcriptase (new england biolabs, uk) makes it possible to combine both reverse transcription and lamp in one reaction. since sars-cov-2 is a rna virus with the length about 30 kb (wang et al., 2020) , the single reaction of reverse transcription (rt) and lamp together can significantly shorten the reaction time without the dna purification step from rt, thus a rapid detection of sars-cov-2 can be achieved.in this work, we developed a covid-19 diagnosis kit for the rapid detection of sars-cov-2, using one-step reverse transcription and loop-mediated isothermal amplification (rt-lamp). the whole reaction can be as short as 20 min at a constant 65°c. the detection limit is 80 copies of viral rna per ml sample. a simple colour change indication can be visualized by the naked eye to confirm the result of viral rna amplification. the kits were validated by 16 clinical covid-19 samples. this new technique can also provide a rapid and feasible approach for the detection of various virus.specificity of o117, s17, n1 and n15 primers to amplify synthesized dna of sars-cov-2we designed four sets of lamp primers o117, s17, n1 and n15, which target rna encoding orf1ab, spike glycoprotein and two regions in nucleocapsid protein of sars-cov-2 respectively (fig. s1 ). each set has 6 primers (table 1) . sars-cov-2 is a single stranded rna virus with the length of about 30 kb. orf1ab is about 21kb long, encoding the replicase polyprotein (woo et al., 2010) . o117 primers were designed to cover the conversed region of 5'-end of the viral rna in orf1ab (fig. s1 ). s17 primers target the s gene, which encodes spike glycoprotein, a key for this sars-cov-2 virus to bind human ace2 protein and to invade human cells (menachery et al., 2015; cui et al., 2019; walls et al., 2020) . the n gene for nucleocapsid protein is at the 3ʹ-end of the viral rna, conserved to sars-like coronavirus (cui et al., 2019) . during sampling and rna extraction processes, the viral rna might be attacked by rnase, degrading from 5ʹ-to 3ʹ-, so we designed n1 and n15 to ensure the detection of 3ʹ-end of the viral rna of sars-cov-2, even though it is partially degraded. the targeted sars-cov-2 rna fragments of these four sets of primers ( fig. s1 and table 1 ) are about 240-260 bp, long enough to be targeted by 6 primers and short enough to achieve a rapid amplification.in all experiments of lamp and rt-lamp, the experiments were carried out with more than three biological replicates and the results were consistent.to verify their specificity, we first tested these primers using synthetic target dna of sars-cov-2. n1 and n15 primers were able to amplify dna fragments of the n gene, but not human genomic dna ( fig. 1a and b). by adding the fluorescent dye provided by neb (new england biolabs, uk), positive results can be visualized directly from the pcr tubes under uv exposure. the fluorescent intensity in the amplificationpositive tubes was stronger than that in the amplification-negative tubes, although fluorescence background was also present in the negative tubes ( fig. 1a and b) . the fluorescent read-outs are consistent to the results by electrophoresis gel. however, the fluorescent signal background might cause ambiguous reading and it requires fluorescent sensitive instrument to analyse the result. so we changed it to colorimetric reading later in this study.similarly, o117 and s17 primers can also specifically amplify the synthesized dna fragments of orf1ab gene and s gene, respectively, but they were unable to amplify human genomic dna ( fig. 1c and d) . the addition of human genomic dna to the viral dna in the reaction mixture did not interfere with the amplification performance (lane 4 in fig. 1a and b, lane 5 in fig. 1c and d), which is essential for using rt-lamp to detect viral rna in a human sample. the lamp reaction time for all experiments was 30 min. positive amplification products were obtained even for 2 copies of the synthetic viral dna fragment template in 30 min when using the s17 primers (lane 4 in fig. 1d ), demonstrating that the lamp reaction was rapid and sensitive.rt-lamp and sensitivity to amplify synthesized rna of sars-cov-2to assess the potential of rt-lamp in detecting rna virus of sars-cov-2, we then tested the performance of these primers with synthesized rna fragments of the n gene, s gene and orf1ab gene obtained from in vitro transcription (appendix s1). it shows that reverse transcription and lamp can be integrated into one single rt-lamp reaction to specifically amplify viral rna fragments (fig. 2) .we evaluated the sensitivity of rt-lamp by diluting the copy number of rna target from 200 to 2 copies per reaction (in total 25 ll reaction solution) and examined the efficiency by sampling the reaction mixture at 15, 20 and 30 min after the reaction started. it shows that 2 copies of target rna can be amplified to detectable level using n1 primers within 20 min, whilst it requires 30 min using n15 primers ( fig. 2a-c) . the sensitivity and efficiency of rt-lamp were also tested on s17 and o117 primers. as shown in figure 2 , 2 copies of s gene rna can be detected using s17 primers in 30 min, whilst the detection limit using o117 primers is 20 copies of orf1ab gene rna in 30 min. the results suggest that rt-lamp is sensitive enough to detect viral rna within a 30-min reaction and the sensitivity can be 2 copies in 25 ll reaction (80 copies viral rna per ml) by employing primers n1 and s17.it is also observed that the higher copies of rna, the shorter time is needed to obtain the products (fig. 2) .when the copy number of rna is 200 per reaction, the amplification result can be observed as short as 15 min (fig. 2) .since result-reporting using fluorescent dye requires a specific instrument (fig. 1) , we also tried to read the results using the naked eye. since the nucleic acid amplification releases pyrophosphate and hydrogen ion, which decreases the ph of reaction solution, a sensitive ph indicator can be used to show the positive or negative result of rt-lamp (tanner et al., 2015; poole et al., 2017) . hence, rt-lamp result can (fig. 3) . we show that the colorimetric rt-lamp assay can reliably detect n genes of sars-cov-2 viral rna, and the colour change could indicate the number of target sequence semi-quantitatively ( fig. 3) .colorimetric reading is dependent on ph change during rt-lamp. however, in clinical application, many factors might interfere ph change. for example, patient sample conditions can be different, introducing uncertain factors to ph change in the rt-lamp reaction. in addition, viral rna of sars-cov-2 might be eluted by various buffers, which might be compatible to rt-lamp reaction but could significantly affect the colorimetric reading (fig. s2) . to overcome the uncertainty and ensure the reliability of the diagnosis results, we also designed another set of fip primers, which 5ʹ-end was conjugated with fluorescent fam (6-carboxyfluorescein; table 1 ). figure 4 shows that the application of 5ʹ-fam-fip primers was able to display both colorimetric and fluorescent readings, and both results were consistent. comparing the results between rt-qpcr and rt-lamp, it shows that the rt-lamp was able to detect viral rna with c t = 36 by rt-qpcr (table 2) , suggesting that rt-lamp with visually colour change reading is very sensitive.one-step process of nucleic acid detection using rt-lamp cell samples can be processed in one single step to obtain nucleic acid amplification. heating cells at the same temperature of rt-lamp 65°c should lyse cells or virus and release rna. in this study, we tested the onestep process using human episomal induced pluripotent stem cells (ipscs), which were suspended in 0.85% saline. figure 6 shows that the nucleic acids of b-actin gene in ipsc cells can be directly amplified using rt-lamp within 40 min. after 30 min, only the purified human rna can be amplified, showing the colour change (fig. 6a) . however, after 40 min, the tube with human cells changed the colour, whilst the tube without human cells and blank water control remained unchanged pink colour (fig. 6b) . the one-step process is sensitive enough to detect human 10 cells per 25-ll reaction. this one-step process took 10 min longer than rt-lamp to rna, because it takes about 5-10 min time to lyse cells and release nucleic acids. the result suggests that it should be possible to use one single step to achieve the detection of specific nucleic acids in cells. further test is needed to validate its practical feasibility on clinical swab samples containing sars-cov-2.here, we described a fast and simple-to-operate method to diagnose covid-19. we applied rt-lamp to achieve a rapid testing of sars-cov-2, using different primers (o117, s17, n1 and n15) to target orf1ab gene, s gene and n gene. we showed that a 30 min reaction could detect down to 2 copies of target rna per 25 ll reaction (80 copies per ml; figs 1 and 2). however, this extreme sensitivity is also a double-edged sword: carry-over contamination was common in lamp reactions, which usually cause false positive results (hsieh et al., 2014; ma et al., 2017) . we also observed carry-over contamination after the rt-lamp reactions were performed several times in the laboratory. we suspect the aerosol formed from the rt-lamp products were able to spread everywhere in the laboratory, contaminating lab-coats, pipettes, reagents, materials and equipment used for the next reaction, thus for clinical use all components required in the rt-lamp reaction need to be prepared in a separate laboratory space with good practice of molecular biology. the colorimetric display of the testing outcome is easy without the need of expensive or complicated instrument. however, the colour change of rt-lamp reaction is based on ph indicator phenol red (tanner et al., 2015; poole et al., 2017) . the elution buffers of the various rna extraction kits will significantly affect the result. hence, in all of our experiments including the clinical tests, the rna samples were eluted in dnase/rnasefree water to ensure the rna elution buffer has a minimal impact of ph indication in rt-lamp reactions. the viral rna clinical tests work well to match the results of rt-qpcr. to tube #3, all samples were negative, suggesting that rna of human b-actin gene transcript was not amplified in the samples (fig. 5) . the four-primer design for human b-actin (poon et al., 2005) might require a longer reaction time than 30 min in rt-lamp assay. in the future, the better human control should be applied. for example, the primers for human rnase gene can be used as a positive control. the ultimate aim is to develop an enclosed device that integrates rna extraction, purification, reverse transcription (rt) and loop-mediated isothermal amplification (lamp) to detect the sars-cov-2 virus directly from a throat swab sample. it has been well-known that colony pcr can be done directly using cells (huang et al., 2005) . heating cells can cause cell lysis and nucleic acid release, which can be used as template for the amplification of nucleic acids. we tested one-step rt-lamp for nucleic acid amplification and it worked well (fig. 6) . the advantage is that the same temperature 65°c for rt-lamp was able to lyse cells and the cell lysis in pure water (or with low salt) did not affect the reaction of rt-lamp. this preliminary work suggests that it is possible to combine rna extraction, rt and lamp in one single step, which will significantly simplify the detection process and shorten the detection time. current criteria of the test in china are 300 copies ml à1 ; the preliminary results of one-step rt-lamp should meet this requirement.proving the practicability of rt-lamp in diagnosing covid-19 is the first step towards developing a more accessible diagnostic kit. testing is crucial not just for getting treatment to those in need, but also to curb the spread of disease within a region. as we face a global shortage of testing kits amid this global pandemic, our work will be vital to address this need in clinical practice as well as to extend towards a home-based or personal diagnostic system.with this proof-of-concept work, it is possible to develop a simple, low cost and one-step testing kit which can be used to screen individuals for sars-cov-2 virus (table 2) , and eight positive samples were labelled 'p', and eight negative samples were labelled 'n'. the components of each test kit are listed in experimental procedures. three tubes in each rt-lamp assay are #1, #2, #3 in order from left to right. tube #1 and #2 separately contain o117 and n15 primers targeting the orf1ab gene and n gene of sars-cov-2. tube #3 contain human b-actin primers. to tube #1 and 2, all positive samples turned yellow, whilst all negative samples remained pink after 30-minute reaction. the results of rt-lamp method are consistent to the results of conventional rt-pcr (table 2 and fig. s1 ).at the point-of-care testing (poct). there is a need for an on-site rapid test for the infection which can be operated easily with minimal training and without the risk of getting infected. existing methods to detect sars-cov-2 are either based on detecting the virus rna itself using reverse transcription real-time polymerase chain reaction (rt-qpcr) technologies, or based on specific igm and igg from patients' blood generated several days after the infection. currently, these tests would require a laboratory with specific machines operated by skilled scientists and technicians that take at least 2 h to perform. the ultimate goal will be development of a rapid (30-45 min) enclosed test device with one-step operation for the detection of sars-cov-2 virus. multiple sites on the viral rna are detected to ensure specificity and sensitivity, and an internal control is embedded to prevent false positives and false negatives. this study will pave the way to move forward for rapid and large-scale screening and diagnosis, where patients exhibiting suspected symptoms can all be tested in the early stages.human episomal ipsc line was purchased from thermo fisher (uk) and used as the source of human genomic dna and rna.shenzhen luohu people's hospital is authorized by chinese cdc for the detection of clinical samples for sars-cov-2 virus. all clinical samples were sampled by clinical throat swab, stored and transported by virus transport media (vtm). virus deactivation steps were done following the standard guidelines for detection of nucleic acid of sars-cov-2 in clinical samples. the research on rapid diagnostic technique for covid-19 using clinical samples has been approved by the ethical committee at shenzhen luohu people's hospital.four sets of lamp primers were designed targeting the orf1ab, s and n genes of sars-cov-2 published at ncbi ---26.11 à à ct, cycle threshold; e, e gene for envelop protein; ic, rnase gene as internal control; n, n gene for nucleocapsid protein; orf1ab, orf1ab gene. (genbank nc_045512.2). primers were designed using lamp primer designing software, primerexplorer (http:// primerexplorer.jp/e/; tomita et al., 2008) . six primers including forward primer f3, backward primer b3, forward inner primer fip, backward inner primer bip, forward loop primer lf and backward loop primer lb were designed to accelerate the lamp reaction (nagamine et al., 2002) . table 1 shows all the primer sequences used in this work. in some experiments, 5ʹ-end of fip primers were labelled by fam.to carry out mock experiment, we also designed four dna fragments, each containing a t7 promoter for in vitro transcription (appendix s1). all designed primers and dna fragments, as well as a 2019-ncov_n_positive control plasmid, were ordered from integrated dna technologies (idt, uk).the dna fragments of n, s and orf1ab target genes were synthesized by idt and reconstituted to 50 ng µl à1 according to the manufacturer's instruction. the copy number of each target gene was determined from their molecular weight and diluted into 200 000, 200, 20 and 2 copies µl à1 for subsequent experiments. t7_n, t7_s, and t7_o dna synthesized by idt were reconstituted to 50 ng µl à1 according to the manufacturer's instruction. these dna sequences were subjected to in vitro transcription using hiscribe tm t7 high yield rna synthesis kit (new england biolabs, uk). transcription products were purified using rneasy mini kit (qiagen, uk), and the concentration and quality of rna were measured using nanodrop. the copy number of each target rna was determined from their molecular weight and diluted into 200 000, 200, 20 and 2 copies µl à1 for subsequent experiments.human whole-genome was purified from human ipsc cells using fast dna tm spin kit from mp biomedicals followed by followed by dna cleanup kit (new england biolabs, uk). human whole-rna was purified from human ipscs using rneasy mini kit (qiagen, uk).all equipment, laminar-flow cabinet and working bench were sprayed with rnasezap tm prior to experimental work. filtered pipette tips were used to prevent crosscontamination. all experiments of lamp and rt-lamp were run for at least three replicates.a 10x primer mix (fip, 16 µm; bip, 16 µm; f3, 2 µm; b3, 2 µm; lf, 4 µm; lb, 4 µm) was made before the reactions. both lamp and rt-lamp reactions were carried out using warmstart tm a 25 µl reaction mixture (29 mastermix, 12.5 µl; 109 primer mix, 2.5 µl; dna/rna target, 1 µl; dnase & rnase-free molecular grade water, 9 µl) was mixed homogeneously and centrifuged for 1 s. lamp or rt-lamp was performed in a thermocycler at 65°c for 30 min. colour change can be observed directly by the naked eye, and gel electrophoresis was performed to confirm the result.lamp and rt-lamp for human cells. all equipment, laminar-flow cabinet and working bench were sprayed with rnasezap tm prior to experimental work. filtered pipette tips were used to prevent cross-contamination.human episomal ipscs obtained from thermo fisher scientific (uk) were dissociated with 0.5 mm edta (ph 8.0; thermo fisher scientific) in sterile pbs. the cells were then counted, resuspended and diluted into 100, 50, and 10 cells µl à1 in sterile 0.85% nacl (sigma-aldrich) solution.a 109 b-actin primer mix (fip, 16 µm; bip, 16 µm; f3, 2 µm; b3, 2 µm) was made before the reactions, and lamp and rt-lamp were carried out using warmstart tm colorimetric lamp 29 master mix (dna & rna) from new england biolabs (neb). for the onestep amplification of nucleic acids, cells in 200 µl 0.85% nacl were first heated at 65°c for 10 min and a 25-µl reaction mixture (29 mastermix, 12.5 µl; 109 primer mix, 2.5 µl; the boiled cell sample, 1 µl; dnase & rnase-free molecular grade water, 9 µl) was prepared. on the other hand, for the cell in lamp experiments, cells were directly added into the lamp reaction reagents, where a 25-µl reaction mixture (29 mastermix, 12.5 µl; 109 primer mix, 2.5 µl; 0.85% nacl solution with or without ipscs , 1 µl; dnase & rnase-free molecular grade water, 9 µl) was prepared. lamp/rt-lamp was performed in a thermocycler at 65°c for 30 or 40 min. colour change was observed directly by the naked eye.respiratory specimens (throat swabs) collected from patients were immediately placed into sterile tubes containing 3 ml of vtm (health gene technologies, ningbo, china). in total, 16 clinic samples were collected from patients. the swab samples were deactivated by heating at 56°c for 30 min in a biosafety level 2 (bsl 2) medical laboratory of shenzhen luohu people's hospital in china. rna was extracted from swab samples using rna extraction kit (health biomed, china) on a smart labassist-32 platform (taiwan advanced nanotech inc, taoyuan, china). to avoid the interference of te buffer to rt-lamp reaction, rna was eluted by rnase-free and dnase water here.conventional rt-qpcr for sars-cov-2 a commercial 2019-ncov rt-pcr kit (shanghai zj bio-tech, china) was used to determine if the samples are positive or negative to sars-cov-2 virus. in an abi 7500 real-time pcr system (thermo fisher scientific inc., waltham, usa) according to the manufacturer's instructions. a 25 ll reaction mixture contained 5 ll of rna as the template, 19 ll of 2019-ncov rt -pcr buffer, 1 ll of rt-qpcr enzyme mix. the thermal cycling condition was 10 min at 45°c for reverse transcription, 3 min at 95°c for pcr initial activation and 45 cycles of 15 s at 95°c and 30 s at 58°c.rt-lamp assays on clinical samples were performed in pre-mixed test kits. each test kit consists of three tubes #1, #2 and #3, which contain o-117, n-15 and human bactin primers respectively (table 1 ). the three tubes were first filled up with 5 ll of rnase-free water (sigma-aldrich), 12.5 ll of warmstart colorimetric lamp 29 master mix (new england biolabs, uk), and 2.5 ll of 10x primer mix. the test kits were first prepared in oscar and delivered to shenzhen luohu people's hospital in an ice box. for the detection of sars-cov-2 virus, 5 ll of extracted rna from each patient sample was added into tube #1, #2 and #3 respectively. the test kit was incubated at 65°c for 30 min. sequences and simple visual detection of products. nat protoc 3: 877-882. walls, a.c., park, y., tortorici, m.a., wall, a., mcguire, a.t., and veesler, d. (2020) structure, function, and antigenicity of the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein. cell 180: 1-12. wang, c., horby, p.w., hayden, f.g., and gao, g.f.(2020) a novel coronavirus outbreak of global health concern. lancet 395: 470-473. woo, p.c.y., huang, y., lau, s.k.p., and yuen, k.y. (2010) coronavirus genomics and bioinformatics analysis. viruses-basel 2: 1804-1820.additional supporting information may be found online in the supporting information section at the end of the article.appendix s1. synthesised dna with t7 promoter. fig. s1 . the rna map of sars-cov-2 and the locations of four sets of primers: o-117, s-17, n1 and n-15, which target the regions encoding orf1ab, spike protein, and n protein. fig. s2 . the impact of virus transport media to the reading of rt-lamp results. all tubes contain n15 primers and warmstart colorimetric lamp master mix. the tubes were incubated at 65°c for 30 min. sensitivity and specificity. we computed for all possible combinations of 2 of the 13 rdts (13c 2) that were evaluated in parallel algorithm.the individual sensitives of the rdts ranged between 74% and 18% and there was a general increasing trend across the categories with days since pcr confirmation. a total of 78 possible combinations of the rdts to be used in parallel was computated. the combinations of the 2 rdts improved the sensitivities to 90%.we demonstrate that use of rdts in combinations can improve their overall sensitivity. this approach when used on a wider range of combination of rdts may yield combinations that can give sensitivities that are of diagnostics relevance in mass testing and low resource setting.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is a novel coronavirus that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), the respiratory illness responsible for the covid-19 pandemic(1). sars-cov-2 specific antibodies are produced over days to weeks after infection with the virus. the strength of antibody response depends on several factors, including age, nutritional status, severity of disease, and certain medications or infections like hiv that suppress the immune system (2) . antibody responses have been demonstrated in sars-cov-2 with a prevalence of 40% of patients in the first 7 days of illness, and then rapidly increased to 100.0%, 94.3% and 79.8% for total ab, igm and igg respectively since day 15 after onset(3).evidence of early acquisition of sars cov-2 antibodies strengthen the idea of use of rdts for mid, late, convalescent, and post-recovery phases of disease.rapid diagnostic tests do not require any testing equipment, may be stored at room temperature are easy to operate and are cheap. they also have rapid screening time of approximately 10-15 minutes. these attributes make rdts a very attractive for mass testing.because of the poor performance of the currently available sars cov-2 antibody rdts, world health organization (who) recommends the use of rdt tests only in research and surveillance settings. in our study, we aimed at using 2 rdts in a test algorithm to determine if it can improve their performance in terms of sensitivity and specificity.in a prospective study, a total of 86 samples were tested on each covid -19 rapid diagnostic kit.negative samples were retrieved from sample archives in the january 2018 inventory at the national biorepository. positive samples were obtained from confirmed positive patients by genexpert admitted at masaka and mbarara regional referral hospitals and these were categorized from day when confirmed positive as follows; category a (0-3 days) 10 samples, category b (4-7 days) 20 samples, category c (8-17 days) 11 samples and category d (18-28 days) 20 samples.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140806 doi: medrxiv preprintwhole blood was collected in commercially available anti-coagulant edta tubes. the samples were transported to cphl for testing as per cphl standard operating procedures. plasma was separated, aliquoted into 4 vials and stored according to cphl standard operating proceduresin this study we included 13 rdts that were provided by different laboratory suppliers who wanted to have their product evaluated .testing of the rapid diagnostic test kits was carried out at the central public health laboratories (cphl). this is a lateral flow immune chromatographic assay. all the 13 covid-19 kits use anti human igm antibody (test line igm), anti-human igg (test line igg) and igg (control line) immobilized on a nitrocellulose strip. the burgundy colored conjugate pad contains colloidal gold conjugated to recombinant covid-19 antigen conjugated with colloid gold (covid-19 conjugate). when a specimen followed by a buffer is added, igm and or igg if present will bind to covid-19 conjugates making antigen antibody complex. this complex migrates through nitrocellulose membrane by capillary action.a total of 13 rapid diagnostic kits were verified. 10 μ l aliquot of plasma was used on each of the rapid diagnostic test kits and results read between 10-20 minutes following each manufacturer's instructions on the kit inserts. results were recorded on a paper-based study record form (srf), dated and initiated by a laboratory technologist and reviewed by another laboratory technologistall data was entered into microsoft excel from the paper-based study record form (srf). a 2 by 2 table was used to compute for sensitivity, specificity, negative and positive predictive values. . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140806 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. table 3 below . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140806 doi: medrxiv preprint 8 table 3: table showing computed sensitives from the 78 combinations   1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12   85  85  77  87  90  82  85  90  79  77  77  74  1   82  77  82  84  72  79  80  74  77  75 two (2) combinations of rdts with sensitivities above 85% and 100% specificity tested in parallel were selected.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140806 doi: medrxiv preprintwe observed the sensitivity of the individual kits ranging from 18%-74%. however the sensitivity improved with time since confirmed by pcr similar to other findings(3).when we used these kits in combinations of 2 the overall sensitivity improved up to 90% for the best combination. we provide evidence that use of rdts in an algorithm may improve their performance in diagnosis for covid-19.further work is required to explore additional rdts and combinations tested in parallel or series.objectives: virus infection is underevaluated in older adults with severe acute respiratory infections (saris). we aimed to evaluate the clinical impact of combining point-of-care molecular viral test and serum procalcitonin (pct) level for antibiotic stewardship in the emergency department (ed). design: a prospective twin-center cohort study was conducted between january 2017 and march 2018. setting and participants: older adult patients who presented to the ed with saris received a rapid molecular test for 17 respiratory viruses and a pct test. measures: to evaluate the clinical impact, we compared the outcomes of sari patients between the experimental cohort and a propensity scoreematched historical cohort. the primary outcome was the proportion of antibiotics discontinuation or de-escalation in the ed. the secondary outcomes included duration of intravenous antibiotics, length of hospital stay, and mortality. results: a total of 676 patients were included, of which 169 patients were in the experimental group and 507 patients were in the control group. more than one-fourth (27.9%) of the patients in the experimental group tested positive for virus. compared with controls, the experimental group had a significantly higher proportion of antibiotics discontinuation or de-escalation in the ed (26.0% vs 16.1%, p ¼ .007), neuraminidase inhibitor uses (8.9% vs 0.6%, p < .001), and shorter duration of intravenous antibiotics (10.0 vs 14.5 days, p < .001). conclusions and implications: combining rapid viral surveillance and pct test is a useful strategy for early detection of potential viral epidemics and antibiotic stewardship. clustered viral respiratory infections in a nursing home is common. patients transferred from nursing homes to ed may benefit from this approach.ó 2019 amda e the society for post-acute and long-term care medicine.community-acquired respiratory tract infections are among the most common reasons for emergency department (ed) visits and can be caused by both viral and bacterial pathogens. identification of the pathogen causing symptoms is critical for rapid institution of adequate antiviral or antibiotic therapy. because of the challenges in differentiating between viral and bacterial pathogens, patients with viral respiratory infections are usually underdetected, and unnecessary antibacterial agents are more likely to be administered. therefore, laboratory tests providing accurate and timely determination of the infectious agents associated with viral respiratory diseases are important. a broad array of tests is available to detect viral respiratory agents. rapid antigen tests are available for influenza a and b and respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), but these tests have low sensitivity and specificity. 1, 2 the authors declare no conflicts of interest. molecular diagnostic tests using the polymerase chain reaction (pcr) method to detect the rna or dna of the infectious agents show high sensitivity and specificity, but they are technically challenging and time consuming. the advent of sensitive point-of-care (poc) molecular detection methods has made rapid diagnosis of respiratory virus infections possible. the filmarray system (biofire diagnostics, inc, salt lake city, ut) is a desktop automated real-time pcr system that integrates sample preparation, amplification, detection, and analysis into 1 complete process that delivers results in 1 hour. the respiratory panel can detect 17 respiratory viruses and 3 bacterial targets in a single reaction. 3 initial studies demonstrated that such poc multiplex pcr systems identified previously under-evaluated viral or atypical infections in ed dyspneic patients, and the additional information on rapid respiratory infection testing may also change the physician's antibiotic-prescribing behavior, enabling more timely and appropriate treatment. 4e6 the hospital length of stay and direct medical cost for patients with the identified respiratory pathogens decreased. 7e16 despite the availability of highly accurate viral testing results, the discontinuation or the de-escalation of antibiotics still raises concerns because mixed virus-bacteria coinfection, especially influenza with pneumococcus, is common in older adults. 17 in this study, we proposed a diagnostic approach that combines the multiplex pcr respiratory panel with procalcitonin (pct) tests to better guide the antibiotic treatment. pct is a precursor of calcitonin that is constitutively secreted by c cells of the thyroid gland and k cells of the lungs. in healthy individuals, pct is normally undetectable (<0.01 ng/ml). when stimulated by endotoxin, pct is rapidly produced by parenchymal tissue throughout the body. unlike c-reactive protein, pct does not respond to sterile inflammation or viral infection. 18 this distinctive characteristic makes pct a valuable diagnostic marker.multiple randomized controlled trials have demonstrated that pct levels of <0.25 mg/l can guide the decision to withhold antibiotics or stop therapy early. 19, 20 since the approval of filmarray respiratory panel tests, only a few studies have evaluated the clinical impact after implementation of the multiplex pcr respiratory panel on patients with less severe acute reparatory illness. 8,13e15 to date, no study has focused on older adults with severe acute respiratory illness. older adults are more vulnerable to respiratory virus infection. because of undifferentiated clinical manifestation between bacterial and viral infection, antibiotic overuse in this population is common. in this study, we aimed to assess the impact of implementing a diagnostic algorithm that combines rapid respiratory viral surveillance and pct tests on older patients presenting to the ed with severe acute respiratory illness. we conducted a prospective cohort study in the ed of 2 urban medical centers. clinical impact was evaluated through a comparison of the experimental cohort with a propensity score (ps)ematched historical cohort.we conducted a prospective, multicenter, observational study of a sample of ed patients presenting with acute severe respiratory illness. the eds of 2 urban medical centers participated in this project. the annual ed census is around 100,000 for one medical center and 80,000 for the other. the study period included january 2017 through march 2018. we defined the preerespiratory panel system implementation period as january 2016 through december 2016 (12 months) and the posterespiratory panel system implementation period as january 2017 through march 2018. we had 200 multiplex pcr kits, of which 22 were used for rapid pcr respiratory panel system calibration; the remaining 178 kits were aimed for use among the study patients. however, at the planned end date of the study, we could not reach the target sample size. therefore, a 3-month extension in the experimental group was made to collect sufficient samples. the trial was approved by the institutional review board for human research at each participating center.patients aged 65 years or older presenting to the ed with acute severe respiratory illness were eligible for inclusion. we defined a case of severe acute respiratory illness according to the world health organization's case definition. we defined severe acute respiratory illness in adults as physician-diagnosed lower respiratory tract infection with a pulse oxygen saturation (spo 2 ) on presentation of less than 90% or a respiratory rate >20 breaths/min or the requirement of intubation and mechanical ventilation. basic demographic and clinical information and specimens were collected on the day of admission. an episode of lower respiratory tract infection was defined as acute pulmonary disease with or without acute respiratory failure, including pneumonia, influenza-like illness, or an acute exacerbation of a chronic respiratory illness (including an exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, or bronchiectasis). the exclusion criteria included if the patient was receiving palliative care or declined nasopharyngeal swabbing. all participants provided written informed consent.the filmarray respiratory panel (biofire diagnostics, inc) detects 17 viruses (rsv, influenza a h1, h1-2009, h3, influenza b, adenovirus, parainfluenza virus 1e4, rhinovirus/enterovirus, human metapneumovirus, human coronavirus oc43, 229e, nl63, and hku1), and 3 atypical bacteria (bordetella pertussis, mycoplasma pneumoniae, and chlamydia pneumoniae). we collected a nasopharyngeal swab using a nylon flocked swab that was immediately placed in universal transport media (utm). the study nurse collected all samples and specimens in utm, and they were tested according to the manufacturer's instructions. blood samples were collected within 24 hours of admission. pct concentrations were measured using an immunoluminometric assay with a detection limit of 0.06 ng/ml (brahms pctsensitive kryptor, thermo fisher scientific, brahms gmbh). respiratory swab and blood samples were tested as soon as they were received in the laboratory.during the study period, the study nurse identified eligible patients and explained the study protocol to the treating physicians and patients. eligible patients received a rapid molecular test with 17 respiratory viruses and a pct test. the results of the respiratory panel or pct tests were communicated to the treating physicians directly by the study nurse as soon as they were available and were kept in the medical records. the study nurse reminded the treating physician of the recommendation of antibiotic treatment based on different viral and pct testing results. the detection of influenza initiates isolation or neuraminidase inhibitor use. the detection of a virus with an elevated serum pct level (!0.25 ng/ml) may indicate the possibility of a superimposed bacterial infection and justify the continual use of antibacterial treatment in patients with noneinfluenza virus infection and combined antiviral and antibacterial treatment in patients with influenza infection. a positive result for respiratory virus with a low serum pct level and stable clinical manifestation may allow early discontinuation or de-escalation of empiric antibiotics. de-escalation was defined as changing to a narrower-spectrum antibiotic or shifting the intravenous antibiotics to oral form. a negative respiratory virus test result with a low serum level of pct (<0.25 ng/ml) would prompt clinicians to consider noninfectious causes of respiratory distress, such as acute exacerbation of obstructive airway disease, acute decompensated heart failure, or fluid overload.information regarding laboratory tests, antibiotic or antiviral therapy administration, duration of intravenous antibiotic treatment, length of intensive care unit stays, length of hospital stay, and 30-day mortality was obtained from electronic health records. we compared the outcome and duration of intravenous antibiotic use with a historical cohort with similar baseline characteristics and clinical presentations. the clinical impact was measured via the proportion of stopping or de-escalating antibiotics, neuraminidase inhibitor uses in the ed, duration of intravenous antibiotics treatment, length of hospital stay, length of intensive care unit stays, 30-day mortality, and overall all-cause mortality.to evaluate the clinical impact of combining the respiratory panel and pct testing on the outcomes of patients with severe acute respiratory illness, we established a historical cohort, including all patients presenting to the ed with severe acute respiratory illness from january 1, 2016 to december 31, 2016. the database included the following: demographics, clinical presentations, presenting viral signs, laboratory data, image results, ed and admission, medications used in the ed and hospitalization course, and discharge status. we then used a ps-matching technique to select a group of patients with similar demographics, comorbidities, diagnoses, vital signs, and laboratory results to the experimental cohort that received the respiratory panel and pct test. to increase the statistical power for analysis, we performed a 1-to-3 matching. the final cohort includes 169 older adult severe acute respiratory illness patients who received the respiratory panel and pct test and 507 ps-matched control patients. this composite cohort was used to assess the clinical impact of the rapid respiratory viral surveillance and pct tests.baseline characteristics were summarized using appropriate descriptive statistics. the categorical variables were presented as frequency and percentage and compared using the chi-squared test. the continuous variables were presented by median with interquartile range and compared by nonparametric mann-whitney u tests. the numbers of different respiratory viral isolates and mean serum level of pct for different viral infections were shown by bar graph. to select control patients, we built a ps for matching. ps was defined as the conditional probability of being tested with respiratory panel and pct, which was derived from the logistic regression model that included the following potential predictors: demographics, comorbidity, presenting vital signs, laboratory results, and admission diagnoses. to verify the balancing of baseline covariates after ps matching, we made a standardized difference plot to ensure minimum differences in the baseline covariates between 2 groups of patients (supplementary figure 1 ). in the ps-matched cohort, we compared the outcome between the current cohort and the ps-matched historical cohort using the logistic regression model, adjusting for the residual difference in the baseline covariates. all statistical analyses were performed by sas 9.4 (sas inc, cary, nc), and a p value of < .05 was deemed significant.a total of 178 patients enrolled in the study, of which 9 were excluded because of missing data or loss of follow-up. finally, 169 older adult patients with severe acute respiratory illness were included in the study analysis, of which 36 (21.3%) patients tested positive for respiratory virus. these patients were sick, so they were all hospitalized.the demographics, presenting vital signs, laboratory test results, and underlying comorbidity of the experimental and control cohorts are shown in table 1 . in the experimental cohort, the mean age was 81.2 years and 69.8% were males. diabetes, cancer, and chronic pulmonary disease were the leading 3 comorbidities, and pneumonia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with acute exacerbation, and acute respiratory failure were the most prevalent diagnoses. the control cohort had a comparable distribution on the aforementioned characteristics, except for including fewer patients with dementia or chronic liver disease.in the experimental group, 36 patients tested positive for respiratory virus, including 13 influenza a or b virus (7.7%), 9 rsv (5.3%), 9 human rhinovirus/enterovirus (5.3%), 2 coronavirus (1.2%), 2 parainfluenza virus type 3 (1.2%), and 1 human metapneumovirus (0.6%). in the control group, 20 patients (3.3%) were diagnosed with influenza, which was significantly lower than in the experimental group (p ¼ .049) ( table 2) . of the 36 patients who tested positive for virus, 14 (38.9%) had a pct level lower than 0.25 ng/ml. coronavirus, influenza a, and human rhinovirus/enterovirus infections had higher serum levels of pct (figure 1 ). compared with the control group, the patients in the experimental group had more antibiotics de-escalation (21.9% vs 13.2%, p ¼ .007), received more neuraminidase inhibitor in the ed (8.9% vs 0.6%, p < .001), had a shorter duration of intravenous antibiotics use (me- although the patients in the experimental group had a trend of more antibiotic discontinuation, the small number of patients prevents meaningful comparison. neither 30-day nor in-hospital mortality was significantly different between the 2 groups. to further account for the residual covariate difference after ps matching, we performed logistic or linear regression adjusting for age, temperature, chronic liver disease, and dementia. the results revealed that rapid pcr respiratory panel and pct testing were associated with increased odds of discontinuing or de-escalating antibiotics [odds ratio (or) 1.97, 95% confidence interval (ci) 1.28, 3.02], increased odds of neuraminidase inhibitor prescription (or 17.9, 95% ci 5.02, 63.98), and shorter duration of intravenous antibiotics (-e4.44, 95% ci e2.08, à2.79). there was no difference in length of hospital stay and 30-day mortality (table 3) .this prospective cohort study reports the clinical impact of rapid molecular diagnosis of respiratory pathogens in conjunction with pct testing on older adult patients presenting to the ed with severe acute respiratory illness. the results showed 21.3% of older adult severe acute respiratory illness patients to be having respiratory virus infection, with influenza, rsv, and human rhinovirus/enterovirus being the 3 leading pathogens. we demonstrated that the new diagnostic approach was associated with increased discontinuation or deescalation of antibiotics, reduced length of intravenous antibiotics treatment, and improved influenza detection and antiviral use.these findings are consistent with those of previous studies. brendish et al 8 showed that patients receiving respiratory panel testing were more likely to undergo single doses or brief courses of antibiotics treatment. respiratory panel testing was also associated with a reduced length of stay and improved influenza detection and antiviral use. however, they did not find that routine use of respiratory panel testing could reduce the proportion of patients treated with antibiotics, which they ascribed to the initiation of antibiotics before the results of pct in many patients. a pre-post study showed that the use of the respiratory panel decreased the time to diagnosis of respiratory viruses, hospital admission rate, length of stay, number of chest radiographs, and duration of antimicrobial use. 13 gelfer et al 21 combined the respiratory panel and pct tests, but found no significant differences in overall antibiotic exposure between the experimental and standard-of-care groups. nevertheless, they found significantly fewer patients discharged on antibiotics and a shorter duration of therapy in a subgroup of patients with positive viral and negative pct testing results. they stressed the importance of proactive communication between the antibiotics stewardship team and physicians.our results showed that the proposed diagnostic approach could reduce intravenous antibiotics treatment duration by 4.44 days without compromising patient outcomes. historically, it has been advised to complete the course of intravenous antibiotics treatment despite the resolution of clinical symptoms. however, there is little evidence to support this practice. 22, 23 overuse of antibiotics was associated with increased risk of clostridioides difficile infection, and a prolonged course of intravenous antibiotics may increase the risk of adverse drug events, organ dysfunction, or mortality. 24 it is noteworthy that the identification of respiratory virus alone may not be sufficient to reduce antibiotic use because of the concerns regarding mixed virus-bacteria coinfection, especially influenza with pneumococcus infection. 25 low serum level of pct may help alleviate the concerns of mixed infection. in addition, communicating the results to the treating physicians is important. 13, 16 although we did not have a formal antibiotic stewardship team, the study nurse communicated the results to the treating physicians and promoted antibiotics stewardship. another finding is the underdiagnosis of influenza in older adult patients. older adult patients were less likely to undergo a provider-ordered influenza test. they usually lack the typical presentation of influenza-like illness and may present with respiratory distress or confusion. 26 a recent study showed that the diagnosis of influenza based on clinical grounds alone was associated with a suboptimal sensitivity of 36% and a specificity of 78%. 27 effect estimates for dichotomous outcomes were calculated by logistic regression whereas those for continuous outcomes were calculated using quantile regression. both models were adjusted for covariates not balanced after ps matching, including age, temperature, chronic liver disease, dementia, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with acute exacerbation.the proposed algorithm for respiratory virus infection diagnosis and antibiotic stewardship may also have implications for nursing home (nh) residents. acute respiratory virus infection outbreaks are a common problem in nhs. 28, 29 a recent systematic review reported a 1.21% to 85.2% annual incidence of influenza or rsv infection in long-term care facilities. 28 other than influenza and rsv, human metapneumovirus is the third most common causative pathogen for nh respiratory infection outbreaks. 30 nhs often do not have on-site equipment to evaluate suspected infection; therefore, a lower threshold for antibiotic prescription is common. it is estimated that approximately two-thirds of nh residents received antibiotics each year, and up to 75% of the treatment is inappropriate. nhs become the reservoirs for resistant bacteria within a community. 31 although the present protocol cannot be implemented in nhs, it can be used among severe nh patients who are transferred to the ed. in a less severe outbreak, the nasopharyngeal samples of nh residents can be collected and sent to contracted laboratories for respiratory panel testing. the early detection of acute respiratory infection enables early isolation of infected patients and early antiviral drug administration, which can prevent or contain a respiratory virus infection outbreak.cost is an important consideration for the large-scale clinical implementation of rapid multiplex pcr testing. previous analyses showed that rapid multiplex pcr testing was the most cost-effective testing strategy for the detection of influenza in children. 12, 32 the cost-effectiveness of respiratory panel testing is highly influenced by the prevalence of influenza and the proportion of patients treated with antivirals. the significant improvement in influenza diagnosis and antiviral treatment in our study suggests that a combination of respiratory panel and pct testing may be cost-effective in our study setting. such speculation, however, requires future validation.our results have to be interpreted in light of several limitations. first, pct tests were not used in the comparison cohort. we cannot determine the impact of the viral panel and pct tests separately. second, the study nurse only enrolled patients during working hours of weekdays. selection or spectrum bias is less likely because we did not find significant difference in the outcomes of patients presenting to the ed on different time shifts. third, the postdischarge follow-up data of the historical comparison cohort cannot be retrieved. we therefore could not compare the duration of oral antibiotics between the 2 cohorts. the reduction of intravenous antibiotic duration alone is important because it has been shown to be a strong risk factor for the development of resistant bacteria strains. fourth, the generalization of the results to other settings should be taken into consideration. the long hospitalization duration in our study was due to old age, severe illness, and low hospitalization cost. 33, 34 lastly, the incidence of various respiratory viruses may have varied across the 2 seasons of the study period. the strengths of our study include the older adult population, the twin-center prospective cohort design, the simple antibiotic stewardship algorithm, and the comparison to a ps-matched cohort.the findings of our study support the use of rapid multiplex pcr respiratory panels in conjunction with the pct test for early diagnosis of respiratory viral infection and to inform optimizing antibiotic use in older adult patients presenting to the ed with severe acute respiratory illness. respiratory viral infection outbreak is common in nursing homes. performing the proposed diagnostic approach on patients transferred from nhs may enable early detection of the causative pathogens and early isolation of infected patients. as the cost per test is still high, institutions should develop a protocol to prevent indiscriminate testing with multiplex pcr and provide proactive real-time feedback to treating physicians for antimicrobial stewardship. further studies are needed to assess the incremental value of multiplex pcr viral testing compared with pct testing alone in the management of patients with severe acute respiratory infection in the ed.concerns. in december 2019, china reported the first disease case in its hubei province. based 48 on the phylogenetic analysis, the identified novel coronavirus is named as severe acute 49respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), and the disease spread by sars-cov-2 50 is known as "covid-19", declared as a pandemic by world health organization (who).(1) 51despite global massive efforts to control the outbreak of covid-19, this pandemic is still on the 52 rise. to date, lack of approved medicine or vaccine impede escalated the management of the 53 covid-19 epidemic. in the absence of an effective treatment strategy, developing affordable 54 screening for rapid diagnosis is critically required in the management of (2) according 55 to the who, the immediate priority is the development of point-of-care tests for the detection of 56 sars-cov-2 at an early stage with improved sensitivity.(3) 57currently, the covid-19 diagnostic test falls into two categories: antibody and nucleic acid-58 based detection systems. the developed immunoassay is rapid but inefficient for the detection 59 of the pathogen at an early stage of infection.(2) besides, who does not currently recommend 60 the use of antigen-based rapid diagnostic tests for patient care, but encourages the related 61 research to improve their performance and potential diagnostic utility. ( among the nucleic acid-based detection systems, the who considered a real-time polymerase 63 chain reaction (rt-pcr) based method as a gold standard for covid-19 testing. (4) the 64 sample-to-result time of the quantitative rt-pcr (qrt-pcr) was initially >4 hrs; however, 65 constant efforts are underway to improve the turn-around time through automation. besides, 66 time-consuming process pcr based tests are expensive; they require sophisticated instruments 67 and expertise.(2) thus, other technologies, such as reverse transcription-loop-mediated 68 isothermal amplification (rt-lamp) (5) and genome-editing (6), are being explored. these are promising technologies; however, the expected turn-around time would still be around 1 hour 70 and may not be economical for mass screening, especially for the developing countries. 71nanomaterials based sensing platforms hold promise to develop rapid disease diagnostics. 72however, their limited use in the clinical setting is due to the need for sophisticated 73 equipment.(7, 8) a recent attempt to use antisense-nucleotide capped gold nanoparticles for n-74 gene based, covid-19 detection could be a game changer.(9) whereas, who suggested that 75 n-gene has a relatively weak analytical capability, compared to the rdrp gene, to detect 76 covid-19 infection.(10) moreover, the authors have demonstrated covid-19 detection in a 77 cellular-model system, and application in human samples has yet to be shown. 78in this study, we report for the first time gold nanoparticles (aunps) based rapid colorimetric 79 assay for visual eye detection of covid-19 rna in human samples designed to target rdrp 80 specific gene target in very cost-effective manner with wide application of mass screening in 81 field. we utilized the surface plasmon resonance property of aunps to detect unamplified 82 covid-19 rna in human samples. the ability of aunps to preferentially adsorb ssrna/ssdna 83 over dsdna/dsrna is the crucial concept of this assay. the single and double-stranded 84 oligonucleotides have different electrostatic properties, which provide stability (via retaining 85 natural color) and aggregation (which causes color change) of aunps in solution, 86 respectively.(11) 87chemicals: citrate buffer stabilized aunps (10 nm diameter) was purchased from alfa aesar 89 (thermo fisher scientific india private limited). phosphate buffer saline (pbs ph 7.0) and 90 nacl were procured from sigma aldrich. 91clinical samples: nasopharyngeal rna sample from covid-negative (n=6) and positive 92 subjects (n=7) were used. the covid-19 testing of these subjects were done in the indian was used to specifically detect the presence of sars-cov-2 rna in the assay. in parallel, to 114 measure the specificity of the assay, input genomes from different source such nasopharyngeal 115 rna from covid negative subjects and hpv dna from cervical cancer positive samples were 116 used as negative controls. similarly, non-template control (ntc) was also included to measure 117 the background reactivity. in addition, to confirm the working principle of the assay, a different rna template (isolated from pancreas) and pancreas specific reg-3 (regenerating islet-119 derived protein 3) gene oligo probe (5'-gtgcctatggctcctattgct-3') were used 120the final reaction mixture with above combinations was then denatured at 95°c for 30 122 seconds, annealed at 60°c for 60 seconds and then cooled to room temperature for 10 minutes. 123subsequently, 10 nm colloidal aunps (~10 nm) were added to the assay mixture and allowed to 124 develop color for 1-2 minute. 125spectral studies and measurement of sensitivity: absorption spectrum of the assay mixture 126 was recorded in the range of 300 -700 nm. the peak shift from 520 nm (known as red-shift) and 127 peak broadening after 520 nm were measured as a characteristic feature of the salt induced 128 aggregation. using various combinations of positive and negative controls (as discussed in the 129 previous section) the specificity of reaction and aggregation were compared. assay sensitivity 130 was determined by serially diluting the input sars-cov-2 rna from both the ivt synthesized 131 and, synthetic sars-cov-2 control (ncov19 control kit by applied biosystems) ranging from 5-132 0.1ng and 1-0.1ng concentrations respectively. 133result and discussion 135in this study, we report for the first time the development of a rapid and affordable rna-based 136 assay for the visual detection of the sars-cov-2 genome in human samples. in this assay, we 137 use surface plasmon resonance property of gold nanoparticles/colloids (aunp) and targeted the 138rdrp specific gene sequence of sars-cov-2. rdrp is essential for viral replication and has 139 higher analytical power than e (envelope protein) and n (nucleocapsid protein) genes of sars-140cov-2. (10) our current established assay, salt-induced aggregation and color change of the 141 gold colloids occurs after rdrp oligo probe hybridizes with its specific target rna of sars-cov-2. with the current escalated demand of cost effective, easy and sensitive diagnostic for 143 covid-19, the test was developed using commercially available ncov19 synthetic dna and 144 validated further using clinical samples from covid-19 subjects (as confirmed using taqman 145 based rt-pcr method, table s1 ). in our study, we demonstrated a visual change in gold 146 colloid color from pink to blue when rna samples from subjects with clinically diagnosed 147 covid-19 infection hybridize with rdrp oligo probe (n=7). simultaneously, the color remained 148 pink in sars-cov-2 negative samples due to the absence of hybridization (n=6). 149 in this assay, sars-cov-2 rna from human patients or ivt synthesized rna was added into 168 hybridization buffer (containing oligo probe), followed by denaturation and annealing at 95°c 169 (30s) and 60°c (60s), respectively. after cooling at room temperature, the gold colloid was 170 added into the above reaction mixture. the colloid color changes in visible range from pink to 171 blue, indicate the formation of hybridized product (figure 2b -c, and figure 3 ). broadening of the 172 peak with red-shift (~30 nm) was observed in the spectrum of aggregated colloids than non-173 aggregated, confirms the success of developed assay for detection of an unamplified target with 174 unmodified colloids in a quick and facile way. the principle of binding oligo probe to its specific 175 target leading to change in color of the solution was independently verified using a different 176 template rna (isolated from pancreas tissue) and pancreas specific gene reg3 oligo probe in 177 a separate assay. this assay also resulted in a similar change in color and absorption spectra 178 as optimized earlier for sars-cov-2 rna and rdrp oligo probe. it established the working 179 principle and specificity of the test ( figure s1 ). to ntc (fig. 4d) . a similar recent approach utilizes thiol capped gold nanoparticles to detect n-203 gene of the sars-cov-2 gene in a cellular system.(9) however, for the detection of sars-204cov-2 rna in human samples, the n-gene has reportedly inferior analytical power than the 205 rdrp gene.(10) thus, it would be essential to know the assay's performance, developed by 206we have successfully developed an affordable gold nanoparticles-based colorimetric test for the 209 rapid detection of sars-cov-2 rna in humans. the assay can detect up to 0.5 ng of sars-210cov-2 rna. the turnaround time of our assay is less than 30 minutes. moreover, the 211 developed test will be helpful for mass screening, as it does not require sophisticated 212 equipment. validation of the developed assay using a large number of clinical samples is 213 underway to determine the diagnostic accuracy, including sensitivity, specificity, false-positive 214 and negative rate. was mixed with rna sample. the reaction mixture was denatured at 95°c for 30 seconds, followed by annealing at 60° c for 60 seconds. after annealing, the tube was kept at room temperature for 10 minutes before colloidal aunps were added. a pure colloid is pink in color. it turns blue in the vial containing rna sample from positive control due to salt-induced aggregation upon successful hybridization between oligo probe and target rna. the color remained pink in the absence of target rna, or the presence of a non-specific target. table s1. the table shows the clinical diagnosis of the subjects based on taqman rt-pcr analysis.rna extracted from the nasopharyngeal samples were analyzed in the study. r espiratory tract infections are a significant contributor to the global burden of respiratory tract illnesses, with up to 4 million deaths worldwide in 2013 (1) . several pathogens, including viruses and bacteria, can cause respiratory tract infections. as clinical presentations often overlap, identification of the underlying pathogen based solely on clinical criteria is challenging (2) . even though most respiratory tract infections are self-limited in immunocompetent hosts, many are treated, as shown in a recent study highlighting the increase in unnecessary antibiotic use in this group (3) . in other patient groups, including immunocompromised patients, elderly patients, and critically ill patients, complications from respiratory tract infections often occur, with poor outcomes including increased morbidity and mortality (4) (5) (6) . thus, the ability to rapidly and accurately diagnose respiratory tract infections is critical for optimal patient care. additionally, rapid and accurate diagnosis is essential for the timely administration of antiviral therapy, when available, and the institution of contact and droplet precautions to prevent health care-associated transmission (7, 8) . several instruments and multiplexed molecular panels are currently approved by the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) for the rapid and sensitive detection of viral and bacterial respiratory pathogens in nasopharyngeal swab (nps) specimens. these methods differ based on several criteria, including the degree of multiplexing (4 to 22 targets), complexity of the method (moderate to high), throughput (low to high), and turnaround time (tat) (ϳ1 h to 8 h) (9) . in general, performance characteristics of these multiplex panels are significantly better than those of conventional methods, including viral culture and antigen tests, and have replaced these methods in many laboratories. on the other hand, the increased cost of multiplexed molecular panels compared to the cost of conventional methods has raised questions on their cost/benefit ratio, particularly as many viral targets on these panels have no specific treatments. however, given their utility in the rapid diagnosis of infections (especially in immunocompromised patients), infection control and prevention practices, and antibiotic stewardship, the interest in multiplexed pcrs remains high.the genmark respiratory pathogen (rp) panel is a qualitative nucleic acid multiplex test that recently received u.s. fda clearance for use on genmark's new eplex instrument. the eplex rp panel detects 21 of the most common respiratory pathogens in nps specimens. viral targets identified are adenovirus, coronavirus (229e, hku1, nl63, and oc43), human metapneumovirus (hmpv), human rhinovirus/enterovirus (hrv/ev), influenza a virus, influenza a h1 virus, influenza a 2009 h1 virus, influenza a h3 virus, influenza b virus, parainfluenza virus 1 (piv1), piv2, piv3, piv4, respiratory syncytial virus subtype a (rsv-a), and rsv-b. bacterial targets identified are chlamydia pneumoniae and mycoplasma pneumoniae (10) . the eplex rp panel is a sample-to-answer multiplex assay that runs on a single-use cartridge that automates all aspects of nucleic acid testing, including extraction, amplification, and detection. it combines electrowetting microfluidics and genmark's esensor technology, which is based on the principles of competitive dna hybridization and electrochemical detection, as previously described for the genmark xt-8 respiratory viral panel (11) .in this multicenter clinical trial study, the performance characteristics of the investigational-use-only (iuo) eplex rp panel were evaluated by using nps specimens collected at 13 sites across the united states and canada. reproducibility was evaluated at 3 sites. in addition to assay performance, other characteristics, including assay workflow and turnaround time, were evaluated.study population. the study population included patients of all ages and both genders presenting with signs and/or symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection at 13 clinical sites located in the united states and canada. residual nps specimens were prospectively collected from march 2013 through august 2014 from 5 sites and frozen at ϫ80°c for future testing and were prospectively collected from september through october 2016 from 4 sites and tested fresh. to supplement the results of the prospective collection, nps samples positive for low-prevalence pathogens were retrospectively collected and frozen. frozen samples were thawed, pipetted into separate aliquots, and frozen at ϫ80°c until they were tested by eplex rp, the biofire rp, and/or target-specific pcr/bidirectional sequencing as needed. also, for low-prevalence pathogens, additional contrived samples were used to evaluate assay performance.overall study design. nps specimens were prospectively and retrospectively collected in viral transport medium, handled, and processed according to the nps kit manufacturer's instructions. either samples were collected specifically for this study, separately from a standard-of-care (soc) purpose, or the residual sample was deidentified and provided after soc was completed. the study was approved by a central quorum review institutional review board and/or individual clinical testing site institutional review board.samples were tested with the eplex rp panel at 1 of 5 sites and compared to results of testing with biofire filmarray respiratory panel version 1.7 (biomérieux, durham, nc) and an analytically validated pcr amplification assay(s) followed by bidirectional sequencing, if necessary (e.g., for resolution of discordant results or virus subtyping) (laboratory corporation of america, morrisville, nc).genmark eplex rp panel testing. testing with the eplex rp panel was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions, using the materials in the kit. briefly, after vortexing, 200 l of the primary nps sample was aspirated into the sample delivery device (sdd) provided with the eplex rp panel kit and vortexed. the entire volume of the sdd was dispensed into the sample loading port of the eplex rp panel cartridge, and the cap was depressed to close the port. each cartridge was bar-coded and scanned with the eplex instrument and inserted into an available bay (fig. 1) . upon the completion of the assay run, the eplex instrument ejected the cartridge for disposal, and an eplex rp panel report was generated.comparator method and method for resolution of discordant results. the comparator method was biofire filmarray respiratory panel version 1.7. all collected samples were tested with the biofire rp, which detects all the respiratory viral and bacterial targets included on the eplex rp panel but does not differentiate between rsv subtypes a and b (12) . samples with rsv detected by the biofire rp were additionally tested with an analytically validated pcr amplification assay(s) followed by confirmation by bidirectional sequencing to determine the subtype (laboratory corporation of america, morrisville, nc).results from collected samples that were discordant between the eplex rp panel and the comparator method (i.e., false negative [fn] or false positive [fp]) were tested with an analytically validated pcr amplification assay(s) followed by bidirectional sequencing as described above. for coronaviruses, additional repeat testing by the biofire rp and eplex rp panel was also conducted as part of discordantresult resolution.reproducibility study. three reproducibility panels, each with 6 pathogens (influenza a h3 virus, rsv-a, piv1, hmpv, coronavirus oc43, and adenovirus species b) at 3 different concentrations (moderate [3ϫ the limit of detection {lod}]), low [1ϫ lod], and negative) in nps specimens, were tested at 3 sites. lod studies were performed by the manufacturer (data not shown). reproducibility testing was performed by 2 operators at each of 3 sites, and each operator tested the reproducibility panels in triplicate over 6 days (including 5 nonconsecutive days) by using 3 different cartridge lots, resulting in 2 days of testing for each of the 3 lots. statistical methods. positive percent agreement (ppa), negative percent agreement (npa), and overall percent agreement (opa) with the comparator method results or expected results were determined for each target detected by the eplex rp panel. the ppa was calculated as 100 ϫ no. of tp/(no. of tp ϩ no. of fn), the npa was calculated as 100 ϫ no. of tn/(no. of tn ϩ no. of fp), and opa was calculated as 100 ϫ (no. of tp ϩ no. of tn)/(no. of tp ϩ no. of tn ϩ no. of fp ϩ no. of fn), where tp is true-positive results, fn is false-negative results, tn is true-negative results, and fp is false-positive results. the two-sided 95% score confidence interval (ci) was calculated for ppa, npa, and opa. statistical analysis was performed by using sas version 9.4. workflow and turnaround time study. a time study was performed to determine the time needed to perform the eplex rp panel test. data were averaged from 20 samples tested by 2 operators. each step of the process from sample preparation to unloading of the instrument was recorded and timed, and an average tat was determined.patient demographics. a total of 2,462 prospectively collected, 446 retrospectively collected, and 327 contrived samples were eligible for testing with the eplex rp panel. approximately 67% of samples were collected with copan-manufactured utm (universal transport medium), and 33% were collected with remel m4 or m5 medium. demographic information for the evaluable prospectively and retrospectively collected subject samples is provided in table 1 . approximately 50% of the subjects were male, with median ages of 33 years for subjects with prospectively collected samples and 5 years for subjects with retrospectively collected samples. the prevalences of eplex rp panel targets by age group during the two phases of prospective collection are provided in tables s1 and s2 in the supplemental material.assay performance. (i) accuracy. of the 3,235 samples eligible for testing with the eplex rp panel, 154 had invalid results (4.8%). after repeat testing, 8 samples were not evaluable due to final, invalid results (7 prospective samples and 1 contrived sample). the final validity rate was 99.8% (95% ci, 99.5% to 99.9%). the eplex rp panel detected a potential respiratory pathogen in 1,212 of 2,462 prospectively collected nps specimens tested, for a positivity rate of 49%. the ppas and npas with 95% cis of the eplex rp panel targets with comparator methods are provided in tables 2 to 4 separately for retrospectively collected samples and prospectively collected samples and with all samples combined. additional data for fresh and frozen prospectively collected samples are presented in table s3 in the supplemental material.the overall percent agreement between the eplex rp and biofire rp results was ͼ95% for all targets tested. target but positive for either the 2009 h1 (n ϭ 5) or h3 (n ϭ 1) subtype, and 9 samples were positive for the influenza a virus target without a subtype being identified. of note, influenza a h1 virus was not detected, and very few chlamydia pneumoniae (n ϭ 4) isolates were detected during the study period. for these targets, at least 50 specimens with the pathogen spiked into negative nps specimens were contrived; all were detected by eplex rp (data not shown). discordance resolution results (table 5 ) demonstrate that while eplex rp had a high level of agreement with the biofire rp and detected the same targets in nearly all samples, each assay detected targets that the other did not. in table 5 , samples with targets that were detected by eplex rp but not detected by biofire rp (fp) are counted as true-positive samples if the target was detected by discordance testing (tpd). samples with targets not detected by eplex rp but detected by the biofire rp (fn) are counted as true-negative samples if the target was not detected by discordance testing (tnd). given the number of discordant samples between the two panels for coronavirus detection, additional repeat testing by both the biofire rp and eplex rp was performed as part of the discordance analysis. this additional testing demonstrated evidence of of the 2,462 prospectively collected samples, 164 had codetections by at least one of the assays (data not shown). the eplex rp panel identified a total of 135 prospective samples with multiple pathogens detected, or 5.5% of all prospectively collected samples, while the biofire rp detected a total of 116 samples with multiple pathogens, or 4.7% of all prospectively collected samples. of the 135 samples with multiple pathogens detected by eplex rp, 118 (4.8%) had two pathogens, 14 (0.6%) had three pathogens, and 3 (0.1%) had four pathogens detected. of the 135 samples with codetections, 57 samples (2.3%) included one or more pathogens that were not detected by the biofire rp method. the comparator method identified a total of 32 (1.3%) codetections with one or more pathogens not identified by the eplex rp panel. discordance resolution results are included in the analysis presented in table 5 .(ii) reproducibility. each of 3 sites performing the reproducibility study collected 35 to 36 results for each target at each concentration, for a total of 107 to 108 samples per site. for the moderately positive and the negative panels, the percent agreement was 100% (95% ci, 96.6% to 100%) for all 7 panel targets. for the low-positive panel, the percent agreement was 100% (95% ci, 96.5% to 100%) for 6 of the 7 panel targets. for the remaining adenovirus panel target, the percent agreement in the low-positive panel was 91.6% (95% ci, 84.8% to 95.5%). agreement results are shown in table 6 . a total of 315/324 (97.2%) samples yielded a valid result upon initial testing. upon repeat testing, all but one specimen yielded a valid result, for a final validity rate of 99.7% (95% ci: 98.3% to 99.9%). no significant sources of variability were found for any of the targets on the panel across cartridge lots, operation days, technologists/operators, or sites (data not shown).workflow and turnaround time study. the time to identification from receipt to result was determined to be 1 h 45 min and 57 s, with hands-on times (hots) per sample of 1 min and 35 s.in this multicenter clinical study, the performance characteristics of the new eplex respiratory pathogen panel on the genmark eplex instrument were estimated by measuring agreement with the results of the biofire rp, a commercially available multiplex respiratory panel. the eplex rp panel was recently fda cleared and expands the available options for laboratories interested in the rapid diagnosis of respiratory tract infections using broadly multiplexed molecular assay on nps specimens. similar to the biofire rp, eplex rp offers a large panel of both viral and bacterial respiratory pathogens in a simple, sample-to-answer format with minimal hands-on time and a rapid turnaround time to results.as with all molecular diagnostic test methods, both the biofire rp and eplex rp have the potential to generate false-positive and false-negative results, as confirmed in this study by additional testing with target-specific pcrs with bidirectional sequencing. the unavailability of an established gold standard prevents a true measure of correctness, requiring the use of agreement measures with a nonreference standard instead to establish the performance characteristics of a new test (13) . thus, data presented in this study reflect only the agreement between the results of the two platforms. in spite of these limitations, the overall performance of eplex rp was comparable to that of the biofire rp, with an overall percent agreement (true-positive and true-negative results) of ͼ95% for all available targets tested. in line with our results, a recent study by nijhuis and colleagues evaluating the performance of the eplex research-use-only (ruo) rp panel compared to laboratory-developed assays found an overall agreement of 97.4%, with discordant results occurring primarily for samples with low pathogen loads, as estimated by using cycle threshold (c t ) values (i.e., high c t value, ͼ35) (10).the highest numbers of discordant results were observed for adenovirus, coronavirus, and rhinovirus/enterovirus targets. this finding may be explained by the large diversity of genotypes present within each of these groups of pathogens or the prevalence of these pathogens in the population tested. for adenovirus, the performance of diagnostic tests is particularly important for young children and immuno- compromised hosts. however, the detection of adenovirus can be challenging. in this study, eplex rp detected more adenoviruses than did the biofire rp. a recent report on the performance of biofire rp v1.7 for the detection of adenovirus highlighted the decreased sensitivity of the assay for samples with low viral loads or those positive for species a, d, and f (14) . although the eplex rp panel detects 4 genotypes of coronaviruses (hku1, oc43, 229e, and nl63), results are reported without the genotyping information. there are currently no treatments for coronaviruses, and the utility of the genotyping information may lie in its value for epidemiological studies. reports of severe coronavirus infections have been reported for immunocompromised hosts, but there has not been any indication that severity is associated with a particular genotype (15) .similar to the biofire rp, eplex rp detects a wide range of rhinovirus and enteroviruses genotypes, but given their high degree of genetic similarity, it does not reliably differentiate between these two species. based on discordance analysis performed by pcr and bidirectional sequencing, most samples were positive for rhinovirus, a trend that is expected given that rhinoviruses are the most common cause of the common cold (16) .the overall agreement for influenza viruses was high. as the prospective collection periods for this clinical study occurred during the 2013 and 2016 respiratory seasons, there was an expected lack of clinical specimens positive for influenza a h1 virus (17) . most of the influenza virus infections during that time period were due to the 2009 h1 and h3 viruses. hence, the evaluation of the influenza virus a h1 target was performed entirely by using contrived nps samples. similar to the biofire rp results, instances of samples positive for influenza a virus without subtypes or positive for an influenza a virus subtype only were identified. such results may be caused by low virus titers or a novel influenza virus subtype and thus require additional testing.only a limited number of samples were positive for chlamydia pneumoniae, and the evaluation was conducted primarily with contrived samples. the performance for c. pneumoniae was similar to that reported in the biofire rp clinical study, which was also conducted by using primarily contrived samples (12) . both chlamydia pneumoniae and mycoplasma pneumoniae are associated with atypical, community-acquired pneumonia (cap), with no seasonality and nonspecific symptoms (18) . therefore, the inclusion of both bacteria in large multiplex panels has the potential to significantly improve the diagnosis of cap.a notable difference between the eplex rp panel and the biofire rp is the absence of bordetella pertussis-bordetella parapertussis targets among the bacterial targets. it is noteworthy that unlike other bacterial targets on the panel, infection with bordetella pertussis-b. parapertussis has a relatively specific epidemiology, with higher incidences typically being reported for children less than 2 months old and, more recently, for unvaccinated populations or vaccinated patients with waning immunity (19) . thus, exclusion from a highly multiplexed respiratory panel may be warranted. in addition, the utilization of the single-copy pertussis toxin promoter target (ptxp) in some multiplex panels has been shown to be less sensitive for the detection of b. pertussis than pcr tests targeted to the multicopy is481 insertion sequence (20) . as a result, when b. pertussis infection is suspected, an fda-cleared b. pertussis molecular test may be more appropriate.similar to other broadly multiplexed respiratory panels, the eplex rp panel allows the detection of coinfections. in this study, coinfections were identified in 5.5% of samples, with human rhinovirus/enterovirus being the most common virus detected in coinfected specimens. the importance of detecting coinfections was highlighted in a recent study showing that viral-bacterial coinfection during severe cap in adults resulted in a more complicated disease course and was associated with complications (21) . in other studies, human rhinoviruses were frequently detected in association with bacterial pathogens in a hematopoietic stem cell transplant population, suggesting that this commonly detected virus may be a significant cause of severe pneumonia in immunocompromised patients (22, 23) .the initial rate of invalid results with eplex rp was 4.8%, with repeat testing resulting in a final rate of invalid results of 0.2%. this value falls in the range of rates of invalid results reported for other multiplexed respiratory panels, including nanosphere verigene rv (9.7%), xtag rvp (1 to 2%), and the biofire rp (1 to 3%) (24) (25) (26) (27) .the eplex instrument consists of a stand-alone system, with no additional accessories (e.g., computer) and a touch screen, making it a great option for space-constrained laboratories. the eplex instrument is available in configurations ranging from one to four towers, with each tower containing six random-access testing bays. this supports single-shift (8 h) testing volumes ranging from 24 samples to 96 samples, with a tat of less than 2 h and an hot of less than 2 min, providing a flexible capacity for laboratories of all sizes. additional features available on the system include the ability to generate customized reports (e.g., statistical and trending reports) and the potential for a bidirectional interface with laboratory information systems.in conclusion, the eplex rp panel provides a rapid, sensitive, broadly multiplexed, sample-to-results option with minimal hands-on time. the assay performance was equivalent to that of the biofire filmarray rp for all targets. this new, fully integrated instrument is easily expandable and offers a great option for the implementation of a multiplex assay in larger-volume laboratories.supplemental material for this article may be found at https://doi.org/10.1128/jcm .01658-17.supplemental file 1, pdf file, 0.1 mb.the rapid spread of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) in many countries causes citizens of daily inconvenience and even life-threat for elderly population. the invasion of the main pathogen, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2; 2019 novel coronavirus [2019-ncov]), into human body causes different levels of impact to various patients. one of the most important issues for covid-19 is how to defend this virus with the ability to foresee the infected targets. thus, we maintain the quarantined essentially as for as others saved from covid-19. so far, the routine laboratory test to confirm whether infected by sars-cov-2/2019-ncov or not is through real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr; quantitative polymerase chain reaction [qpcr]) with certain sequence regions that recognize sars-cov-2/2019-ncov rna genome. the heavy loading of rrt-pcr (qpcr) machine and handling labor have tight-packed the instruments as well as the manpower almost in every country. therefore, the alternative approaches are eagerly waiting to be developed. in this review article, we sort out some state-of-the-art novel approaches that might be applied for a fast, sensitive, and precise detection of sars-cov-2/2019-ncov not only to help the routine laboratory testing but also to improve effective quarantine.hunting severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (2019 novel coronavirus): from laboratory testing back to basic research.the rapid spread of coronavirus disease covid-19 in many countries causes citizens of daily inconvenience, and even life-threat for elderly population the invasion of the main pathogen, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2;2019-ncov), into human body causes different levels of impact to various patients one of the most important issues for covid-19 is how to defend this virus with the ability to foresee the infected targets thus, we maintain the quarantined essentially as for as others saved from covid-19 so far, the routine laboratory test to confirm whether infected by sars-cov-2/2019-ncov or not is through rrt-pcr (qpcr) with certain sequence regions that recognize sars-cov-2/2019-ncov rna genome the heavy loading of rrt-pcr (qpcr) machine and handling labor have tight-packed the instruments as well as the man power almost in every country therefore, the alternative approaches are eagerly waiting to be developed in this review article, we sort out some state-of-the-art novel approaches that might be applied for a fast, sensitive and precise detection of sars-cov-2/2019-ncov not only to help the routine laboratory testing but also to improve effective quarantinehunting coronavirus sars-cov-2 (2019-ncov): from laboratory testing back to basic researchthe coronavirus-induced respiratory disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by a severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2; 2019 novel coronavirus [2019-ncov]) outbreak at the end of 2019 in wuhan, china. 1 it soon continuously impacts our daily life in all aspects worldwide. alone the increasing infected numbers, the death rates (death person versus confirmed cases within selected area) seem to be less than 3% but much higher in new burst out countries. most of the aged people are in dangerous status especially the one also has served medical history. the clinical symptoms of covid-19 may be found, but not all, in infected patients include fever (infrared thermo-sensor can be used to detect high temperature persons), coughing, myalgia, fatigue, some with productive cough, headache, hemoptysis, and even diarrhea. some patients will have severe pneumonia with difficulty in respiration (18% calculated from record in china). 1 more recently, some patients were found to be with a disability to distinguish smell and/or tests (neurological disorder). so far, there is no effective way to distinguish healthy one from infected targets, even they do have some flu-like symptoms.abstract: the rapid spread of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) in many countries causes citizens of daily inconvenience and even life-threat for elderly population. the invasion of the main pathogen, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2; 2019 novel coronavirus [2019-ncov]), into human body causes different levels of impact to various patients. one of the most important issues for covid-19 is how to defend this virus with the ability to foresee the infected targets. thus, we maintain the quarantined essentially as for as others saved from covid-19. so far, the routine laboratory test to confirm whether infected by sars-cov-2/2019-ncov or not is through real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr; quantitative polymerase chain reaction [qpcr]) with certain sequence regions that recognize sars-cov-2/2019-ncov rna genome. the heavy loading of rrt-pcr (qpcr) machine and handling labor have tight-packed the instruments as well as the manpower almost in every country. therefore, the alternative approaches are eagerly waiting to be developed. in this review article, we sort out some state-of-the-art novel approaches that might be applied for a fast, sensitive, and precise detection of sars-cov-2/2019-ncov not only to help the routine laboratory testing but also to improve effective quarantine.keywords: clusters of regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats; fluorescence resonance energy transfer biosensing; rapid diagnostic tests; real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction/quantitative polymerase chain reaction; routine laboratory tests; severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2/2019 novel coronavirus; virus detection moreover, lots of sars-cov-2 infected patients are found asymptomatic. since no one knows who has already been infected and becomes infectious to others, they are at the same time freely to go out for their daily activities which, unfortunately, easily causes covid-19 transmission. this situation causes a serious problem during the establishment of prevention network in every country. in taiwan, to avoid the false-negative case, it requires at least three sequential negative tests of the sars-cov-2 before the case can be confirmed negative (combined with the positive or negative result to influenza virus). according to the taiwan model, to quarantine any suspicious individuals for a period time according to the activities and contact history of the confirmed cases can efficiently slow down the transmission of covid-19. however, it could profoundly disturb the daily life of a large population if related cases are confirmed positive for sars-cov-2. in general, for personal epidemic prevention of covid-19, avoiding contact from hands, nose, and eyes and droplets is the primary task. how to foresee the sars-cov-2 infected targets and to just isolate selected population for advanced treatments while keeping others healthy (and free from quarantine) is one of the important goals during this global war against sars-cov-2.to develop a sars-cov-2 detection system that can accurately identify viral macromolecules (either the rna genome or viral proteins), the full understanding on the specific infection process of this virus is the first step (also will benefit to the development of anti-sars-cov-2 drugs). according to the current data, the sars-cov-2 virus has similar infection route to the sars-cov. [2] [3] [4] both viruses utilize the surface protein angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), which expresses in certain types of human cells such as type 2 alveolar cells, as a receptor for its spike protein to attach to the host cells. 3 the entry of the attached virus requires endocytosis through priming the s protein by host tmprss2 serine protease, 4 and is regulated by the ap2-associated protein kinase 1 (aak1). disruption of aak1 might interrupt the entry of the virus into host cells and the intracellular assembly of virus particles. 5 the structures of several sars-cov related proteins, including the spike proteins, main protease of sars-cov-2, and ace2, [6] [7] [8] have been resolved to provide valuable information for the following development of new detection sensors or even the design of anti-sars-cov-2 drugs.in this review article, we present available approaches that can identify sars-cov-2, from the routine laboratory tests to the rapid diagnostic tests with great application potential to help reducing the labor of routine laboratory test. hopefully with proper applications of these tools, we can finally stop the fast transmission of covid-19 in the whole world.the major laboratory assay to confirm whether patients are infected with sars-cov-2 or not is through the nucleic acid amplification tests (naats), that is, the real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr) method carried out in the hospital or disease control center of the government. in taiwan, such method is relatively mature since the breakout of sars in 2003. however, it still takes around 4 hours to get the results, including 2 to 3 hours of reaction and around 1 hour of medical consultations and sampling. moreover, to carefully confirm the infection, three regions of the sars-cov-2 rna sequences are selected for the assay: coding region for spike protein, orf1, and orf8. to shorten the reaction time, some company tried to develop new instruments and related kits for this purpose, for example, the taqpath covid-19 combo kit (thermo fisher scientific, inc.), xpert xpress sars-cov-2 test (cepheid), and autosat with related kit, etc. these improvements may shorten the examination reaction within 1.5 hours.at protein level, the detection time might be shortened since there is no excess time needed to amplify the detected signal. on the other hand, such protein level detection needs precise recognition and high sensitivity. at least two groups claimed that they can detect the sars-cov-2 within 15 minutes. 9 one group from guangzhou medical university, china developed the test for patient's serum to check if the patients have the specific antibody against sars-cov-2's antigen. since this method is not a direct detection of sars-cov-2 virus, there could exist blind spot when the samples are found to be negative. two possible situations should be clarified, one is that the case is not infected, the other is that the case has not produced antibody against sars-cov-2 yet.the other group from genomics research center, academia sinica, taiwan developed a novel sensitive test with a specific monoclonal antibody (mab, immunoglobulin g) against the nucleocapsid protein of sars-cov-2. the mab does not cross react with other sars related proteins from sars-cov or middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov). this method can be quickly developed for application by applying the specific mab onto current commercially available test kit (such as replacing the anti-flu antibody with the specific mab in flu test kit). thus, a rapid diagnostic test kit for sars-cov-2 will be soon produced for large demands. nevertheless, these new methods still need to be through clinical trials with real samples from suspected populations and infected cases through sampling from nasopharyngeal swab, sputum or lower respiratory track aspirate.in the meantime, scientists around the world continuously introduced alternative methods for the detection of sars-cov-2. [10] [11] [12] for example, a new powerful gene-editing tool clusters of regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (crisprs) technique has been applied to successfully detect synthetic sars-cov-2 rna sequences. 11, 12 as described in the latest reports, the testing reaction can be restricted within 60 minutes with relatively low cost. 12 such proof of concept idea has been emerged and will also be tested in the real samples to confirm its detection efficacy.more recently, a unique idea that combines a modified rna amplification (reverse transcription enzymatic recombinase amplification [rt-era]) and a fluorescence resonance energy transfer (fret)-based probe was proposed. 13 the key to this new method is to use fam and bhq1 as a fret quenching pair, which means that bhq1 will quench the fluorescence of fam when they are located close together. a specific exonuclease ii (recognizing thf site) will be utilized to cut the double-strand status due to targeted rna sensed the rna of sars-cov-2 (such exo fret probe is designed to be located within the targeted amplicon). once this cut happens, it allows the restore of the fam fluorescence since the quencher bhq1 leaves. the authors claim that the sensing limit of this ultrasensitive detection method can be as low as 0.32 am (0.32 × 10 -18 m) of rna. 13 from the above descriptions on various types of detection methods for sars-cov-2, rrt-pcr is still taking the heavy works corresponding for the official confirmation. however, the increased susceptive populations nearly exhaust the routine test special invitation. (2020) xxx:xxx j chin med assoc procedure in many countries. indeed, some of the new emerged approaches has potential for the future rapid diagnostics to release the heavy loading of rrt-pcr test, if their specificity and efficacy can be proved through clinical trial. for example, the antibody-based test developed by academia sinica has a great potential for fast exam since it can be adapted in the commercial flu-like test. the challenge will be the amplification of mab, which is the rate-limit stage for large production of this kit. on the other hand, another novel method combining a modified rna amplification technique with fret quenching concept provide convincing results for future usage. finally, in addition to the above example, the fret-based strategy can also be applied to detect the binding of sars-cov-2 spike protein to human ace2 receptor, or the activity of sars-cov-2 protease using specific peptide sequence as substrate between the fret pair fluorescent proteins.on march 10, 2020, the world health organization declared a global pandemic due to widespread infection with novel coronavirus covid-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). initial testing protocols from the us centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) for covid-19 for detection in patients with possible infection recommend that samples also should be first sent for influenza viruses along with respiratory panels for detection of parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, human rhinovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, bordetella pertussis, chlamydia pneumoniae, and mycoplasma pneumoniae. 1 the problem with testing for coinfections in suspected patients is that the presence of a positive upper respiratory pathogen nucleic acid detection (rpna) test for viruses other than sars-cov-2 may suggest to the clinicians alternate explanations for the patients' symptoms. the cdc continues to strongly encourage to test for other causes of respiratory illness. 1 therefore, a positive rpna test could potentially lead to failure to test for covid-19, thereby increasing exposure risks if a patient has a coinfection.initial investigations of patients with covid-19 in wuhan, china, showed a low to non-existent rate of coinfection with other respiratory viral pathogens. 2,3 however, a more recent study, in presumably cooler climates, have shown an increasing presence of coinfections (up to 50%), typically influenza or rhinovirus. 4 because of the large variations in data, and the lack of experience with comprehensive testing for covid-19 along with other respiratory pathogens, we elected to look retrospectively at our own experience with testing. such data could help in weighing the pros and cons of strategies or algorithms that involve respiratory pathogen panels or flu testing as a decision point for covid-19 testing.this study is a retrospective analysis of data from an academic medical center with 2 hospitals and 2 urgent care centers in san diego, california, during the initial 2 weeks of sars-cov-2 testing, march 10, 2020 covid-19 testing was targeted toward high-risk patients with the following known criteria as per the cdc guidelines that were consistent during the study period: patients presenting with symptoms concerning for covid-19 infection (fever and cough or shortness of breath), data were queried from the shared electronic medical record (epic) using standard structured query language (sql) queries. data col- a flow diagram of virology testing for patients during the first 2 weeks of covid-19 testing is presented in figure 1 . the main limitation of our study is the small sample size and lack of also, a simple detection of a virus on a pharyngeal swab does not necessarily imply active infection with that virus.covid-19 initially causes non-specific symptoms with most being mild with cough, myalgia, and fever. 3 in published series so far, for adults, influenza is the most common coinfection seen in sars-cov-2-positive patients, as was seen in our single case. a recent series of 116 sars-cov-2-positive samples from northern california showed an astounding rate of 7.5% (24) with 1 or more non-sars-cov-2 pathogens. 8 is not surprising that that sars-cov-2 is being added to the next iteration of the diagnostic testing assay for respiratory pathogens, which will prove most useful as this pandemic unfolds.therefore, based on our experience and review of the literature in patients with respiratory illness who need testing for sars-cov-2 oranother respiratory virus, one should consider testing for both sars-cov-2, regardless of preliminary testing, if done, and for flu or other respiratory pathogens. as this new virus continues to be a common cause of respiratory infection, any patient with cough, dyspnea, and/or fever should be suspect for covid-19 regardless of the preliminary testing results for other respiratory pathogens.over the course of just a few months, coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) developed into a global pandemic, causing over 370,000 deaths by beginning of june 2020 1 . etiological investigation and gene sequencing identified a novel rna coronavirus, provisionally named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) 2, 3 . sars-cov-2 is highly infectious, with a basic reproductive number (r0) of approximately 3.7 4 . sars-cov-2 spreads through human-to-human mediated by droplets, contact or high-concentration aerosols in closed environment 5 . sars-cov-2 mainly infects through the upper respiratory tract and causes symptoms, such as fever, dry cough, fatigue or progressive dyspnea. one major concern for healthcare systems is discovering the early infections in incubation period and asymptomatic carriers, making a reliable test critical for successful control of the pandemic. currently, there is no effective targeted drugs or available vaccine for covid-19. early diagnosis and early quarantine to cutting off the source of infection are the most effective control means of the pandemic.clinical features, epidemiological history, imageology and pathogenic index play a vital role in diagnosis of covid-2019. at present, nucleic acid test based on fluorescence pcr or isothermal nucleic acid amplification are primarily employed in early diagnosis of covid-19 6, 7 . however, nucleic acid testing requires biosafety laboratory, facility and skilled personnel, and is therefore unsuitable for field screening and out of reach for many less well-endowed communities or health care systems in developing countries. furthermore, nucleic acid test needs rna extraction, reverse transcription, gene amplification and result analysis, these complicated operations take at least 1~2 h. a second major challenge associated with nucleic acid detection is the high false negative rates 8 , a potentially dangerous characteristic given the epidemiological consequences of unidentified carriers. while pcr nucleic acid testing is highly sensitive for the early diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infection, it is not suitable for field rapid screenings.antibody testing is another approach assisting nucleic acid diagnosis 9 . colloidal gold test paper, traditional chemiluminesence immunoassay (clia) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa) reagents have been rapidly developed 10 . currently available antibody tests detect igm or/and igg antibodies against nucleocapsid or spike antigen of sars-cov-2 present in blood samples 11, 12 . while colloidal gold paper tests are rapid and easy-to-use 13 , the sensitivity of colloidal gold antibody test is relatively low compared with pcr-based testing. critically, antibodies are generated only 10~15 days past virus exposure 14 , and therefore it is not suitable for early screening and diagnosis of covid-19, rendering early isolation and disrupting transmission impossible.in our previous study, we reported a nanozyme colorimetric strip test for ebola virus detection, which is based on fe3o4 nanozyme-catalyzed chromogenic reaction 15 .nanozymes are nanomaterials endowed with intrinsic enzyme-mimicking activity 16 , which can be used for enzyme-labeled probes. enzymatic chemiluminescence is widely used in in vitro diagnosis (ivd) due to its higher sensitivity and wider linear range compared with elisa. traditional clia is based on a natural protease, such as natural horseradish peroxidase (hrp) or alkaline phosphatase (alp), all of which are characterized by poor stability. moreover, traditional chemiluminescence detection depends on large instruments, which are expensive and not readily available to individuals.here, we developed a nanozyme-based chemiluminescence paper test for rapid, highsensitive and portable detection of sars-cov-2 spike antigen. we used co-fe@hemin nanozyme as a suitable alternative to hrp, thus combining traditional clia with lateral flow assay. as a novel point-of-care approach, this nanozyme-based chemiluminescence paper test will be of considerable benefit to early screening of suspected sars-cov-2 infections, and should greatly assist in minimizing the impact of large-scale screening on national healthcare systems, especially those in emerging and lower-income economies. inc. (beijing, china). pseudo-sars-cov-2 expressing spike s1 protein, spike s1 elisa reagent, sars-cov s-rbd, mers-cov s-rbd, hcov-hku1 and hcov-oc43 spike protein were purchased from sino biological inc.firstly, co-fe nanoparticles (co-fe nps) with carboxyl modification were synthesized through hydrothermal method. in brief, fecl3.6h2o and cocl2.6h2o (with a molar ratio of 3:1 to 1:1) were dissolved in 400 ml ployethylene glycol. next, 30 g sodium acetate (naac) and 3 g poly (acrylic acid) were added under vigorous stirring.the solution was transferred into the high-temperature autoclave and heated at 200℃ for 12~14 h. the synthesized nanoparticles were then gathered by magnetic separation and washed with ethyl alcohol and deionized water. subsequently, co-fe nps prepared above were added into naac solution. next, hemin (with a mass concentration ratio of 2.5:1) was dropwise added into the reaction system. after continuous stirring for 2 h at room temperature, the co-fe@hemin nanocomposites were purified by magnetic separation and washed as described above.transmission electron microscopy (tem) images were obtained using a tecnai sprit microscope instrument operating at 120 kv (fei inc., america). the scanning electron microscopy (sem) images were taken on a su8020 microscope instrument (hitachi, japan). the hydrate particle size of co-fe@hemin nanozyme was measured using a 271-dpn dynamic light scattering (dls) instrument. the uv-vis absorbance spectra were scanned using a u-3900 absorption spectrophotometer (hitachi, japan) in a wavelength range of 200~600 nm. surface carboxyl group modification was characterized using thermo gravimetric-differential scanning calorimeter (tg-dsc) analysis using sta449f3 jupiter (netzsch, german) at a heating rate of 10℃/min under n2 protection. the elemental analysis was performed using energy dispersive spectroscopy (eds) equipped in a sem microscope instrument.the peroxidase activity of co-fe@hemin nanozyme was measured according to a previously published procedure 17 . in brief, nanoparticles of different concentrations were added to 2 ml hac/naac buffer (0.2 m, ph 3.6), then 100 µl tmb and 100 µl h2o2 (30% wt/vol) were added to the cuvette. the absorbance at 652 nm was measured for 1 min at the temperature of 37℃, and the rection-time curve was plotted. the specific activity (sa, u/mg) of nanozyme was calculated. the chemiluminescence catalytic activity was assessed by envision multilabel plate reader (perkinelmer) using a liquid auto-injection system and luminol substrate. the maximum chemiluminescent intensities catalyzed by co-fe@hemin nanozyme were measured at different ph, temperature pretreatment and different concentrations of h2o2, with hrp as positive control. moreover, the intermediate reactive oxygen species in the reaction system were monitored by using electron spin resonance (esr) spectroscopy and the spin trap agent,the recombinant antigen is a receptor binding domain of the sars-cov-2 spike protein (s-rbd, located in the s1 subunit) 18 . a cdna sequence encoding s-rbd was expressed containing both n-terminal natural signal peptide as well as a 6×his tag at the c-terminus, after transfection into hek293 cells. after 3 days, supernatants were collected and soluble protein was sequentially purified using histrap hp column and superdex 200 column. the concentration of s-rbd protein was determined using a bca assay kit (pierce). the purity of recombinant protein was analyzed by sds-page.aliquoted protein was stored at -20℃~-80℃ until further use.anti-spike antibodies were generated by sorting single memory b cells as previously reported 19 . briefly, peripheral blood mononuclear cells from convalescent covid-19 patients were incubated with his-tagged s-rbd at 100 nm before staining with anti-cd3, anti-cd16, anti-cd235a, anti-cd19, anti-cd38, anti-cd27 and anti-his antibodies. antigen-specific memory b cells were identified by the following markers:cd3 -, cd16 -, cd235a -, cd38 -, cd19 + , cd27 + , higg + and his + , and sorted into 96well pcr plates with single cell per/well. the genes encoding ig vh and vl chains were amplified by 5'race and nested pcr. the variable regions of these genes were then cloned into the human igg1 constant region to generate full-length monoclonal antibodies, which were then expressed and purified by conventional methods. the antibody binding affinity for s-rbd was evaluated by biacore 8k.anti-s-rbd antibody pairs were screening using elisa method and nanozymebased colorimetric strips 15 . the preparation of nanozyme-based chemiluminescence test paper resembles the colloidal gold strip with further modifications. the nanozymebased chemiluminescence test paper was constituted of a pvc backing plate, an absorbing pad, a sample pad, a nitrocellulose membrane and a conjugate pad. first, the detection antibody of s-rbd (s-dab) conjugated nanozyme chemiluminescent probes were prepared by chemical coupling of carboxyl group using edc/nhs agents. the labeled nanozyme probes were stored in modified tb buffer containing 5% bsa. the nanozyme probes were dispensed on the pretreated conjugate pad using a biodot dispensing equipment. the paired capture antibody of s-rbd (s-cab) was immobilized on a nitrocellulose membrane at 1 mg/ml to form the test line (t-line), as well as the anti-human igg antibody as the control line (c-line). next, the above conjugate pad, nitrocellulose membrane, sample pad and absorbing pad were assembled on the pvc backing plate and followed by complete drying at 37℃ for 1~2 h. the paper boards were cut into 4 mm-wide strips. finally, the strips were packed into clamp slots and stored at room temperature. the solid chemiluminescence substrate, excitant and dissolve buffer were stored in plastic ampoule bottles at room temperature.in this study, rapid nanozyme-based chemiluminescence paper test of sars-cov-2 spike antigen was developed. recombinant s-rbd protein of sars-cov-2 was used to evaluate the sensitivity of nanozyme-based chemiluminescence paper test. 100 µl of the sample containing s-rbd protein in dilution buffer was loaded onto the sample pad. the pseudo-sars-cov-2 were packaged by transfecting 293t cells with a hiv-1based retroviral vector coding sars-cov-2 spike s1 protein and luciferase reporter gene. the pseudovirus titer was determined as 10 10 virus copies/ml. the spike s1 protein expressed by pseudovirus was quantified as 860 ng/ml. the serially diluted pseudovirus was detected by nanozyme-based chemiluminescence test paper according to the method described above. all virus-related operations were carried out inside a class ⅱ biological safety cabinet.co-fe@hemin nanozyme is a type of nanomaterial that possesses peroxidasemimicking activity. to characterize the morphology and microstructure of co-fe@hemin nanozyme, we used both tem and sem analysis. as shown in fig. 1a and b, the co-fe@hemin nanozymes resemble spherical particles, with a mean diameter of approximately 80nm. dls analysis showed that the mean hydrated diameter of our nanozyme spheres was approximately 100 nm (fig. 1c ). in the uv-vis spectrum, we detected two absorption peaks for nanozyme spheres, which are corresponding to the characteristic peaks of co-fe nanoparticles and hemin molecules (fig. 1d ). using the absorption spectrum, we verified that the hemin modification was present on the surface of co-fe@hemin nanozyme. we then analyzed the surface carboxyl group modification of co-fe@hemin nanozyme using tg-dsc (fig. 1e) . furthermore, element composition and content analysis by eds indicated that the atomic ratio of fe to co in the nanozyme particle is 13:1 (fig. 1f ).peroxidase activity of our co-fe@hemin nanozyme was determined by the specific activity (sa, u/mg) according to the established procedures in literature 17 . tmb is one of chromogenic substrates for hrp. as shown in fig. 2a , the catalytic activity of co-fe@hemin in tmb chromogenic reaction was 69.915 u/mg, which is higher than co-fe nps (9.836 u/mg) and fe3o4 nps (5.40 u/mg, data not shown). next, we evaluated the chemiluminescence catalytic properties of co-fe@hemin nanozyme for luminol substrate using a envision multilabel plate reader. the chemiluminescence signals of 1 µg co-fe@hemin and hrp were captured in the presence of excitant h2o2. as shown in fig. 2b , the maximum chemiluminescent intensity of co-fe@hemin was comparable to that of hrp, while showing a three-fold increase over than that of co-fe nps. in comparison, the catalytic chemiluminescence activity of fe3o4 nps was found to be lower than expected.our co-fe@hemin nanozyme displayed high chemiluminescent catalytic activity (the maximum intensity exceeds 8e+7) at the ph range of 9 to 14, demonstrating that our nanozyme tolerate alkaline conditions (fig. 2c) . in comparison, natural hrp only achieved its maximum catalytic activity for luminol substrate at ph 8.5, and significantly decreased as the ph increased. as shown in fig. 2d , temperature pretreatment at 4 ℃~100 ℃ for 2 h failed to affect the catalytic activity of co-fe@hemin nanozyme. in contrast, hrp was inactivated after heat pretreatment above 80℃. together, these results clearly showed that our nanozyme is more robust than hrp, especially under extreme ph and temperature conditions. next, we investigated the reaction parameters of excitant h2o2 in co-fe@heminluminol catalytic system. as shown in fig. 2e , the maximum chemiluminescent intensity increased with the concentration of h2o2 at the range of 0.2 µm to 2 mm, reaching the plateau phase above a concentration of 1 mm. moreover, we monitored superoxide anions (o2• − ) signal in co-fe@hemin-h2o2 system under alkaline conditions using the esr technique (fig. 2f) . together, these findings indicated that luminol was oxidated by o2• − radicals derived from the reaction of co-fe@hemin with h2o2, suggesting a possible mechanism of nanozyme-catalyzed chemiluminescence.after successfully validating the different core parts of our novel testing platform, we next designed the nanozyme-based chemiluminescence paper test. 20 , it is unlikely that crossreactivity will occur for non-target antigen.to identify the best paired antibodies against sars-cov-2 s-rbd antigen, we next screened a series of anti-spike antibodies using elisa. among the six antibodies tested, clones gh4, cb6, tp52 and rp01 exhibited high binding activity for recombinant s-rbd protein (fig. 3b) . we then manufactured the nanozyme probes labeled with cb6 and rp01 clones respectively, and combined these probes with strips immobilized with gh4, rp01, tp52 and gh4, tp52 as capture antibodies. as shown in fig. 3c , the cb6 and gh4 pair gave the best performance in s-rbd detection. however, all other clone pairings resulted in problematic combinations, suggesting that these antibodies recognize either identical or crossed antigenic epitopes. thus, we chose cb6 as a detection antibody and gh4 as a capture antibody for our final antibody pairs in nanozyme-based chemiluminescence paper test.using the cb6 and gh4 pair, we manufactured the nanozyme-based chemiluminescence test strips to detect s-rbd antigen. to assess the sensitivity of our test, we prepared a serial dilution of s-rbd protein samples. following a chromatography procedure at room temperature for 15 minutes, the color signals of tline were observed by naked eyes at a concentration higher than 25 ng/ml. next, we added the luminol substrate solution. the chemiluminescent signal was instantly captured using a ccd or smartphone camera in dark environment (fig. 4a) . next, we analyzed the chemiluminescent signal intensity using the image-pro plus software. the calibration curve of antigen test was plotted as shown in fig. 4b . our analysis showed that our test detected as little as 0.1 ng/ml of s-rbd protein. the detection limit for s-rbd was defined as x+3sd (x: mean of the negative control, sd: standard deviation) value. the linearity of our test was identified as ranging from 0.2 to 100 ng/ml, with a correlation coefficient of 0.9855 (fig. 4b) . as the parallel test using elisa, s-rbd antigen was detectable at 0.1 ng/ml, with a linear calibration curve ranging from 0.1 to 1.56 ng/ml (fig. 4c) . the sensitivity of our nanozyme-based chemiluminescence paper test of s-rbd protein was similar to that of elisa, however, at least 32-fold enlargement in linearity range.moreover, the nanozyme-based chemiluminescence paper test specifically recognized the sars-cov-2 s-rbd protein, whereas it failed to detect the spike proteins of other known coronaviruses, such as sars-cov, mers-cov, hcov-hku1 and hcov-oc43 (fig. 4d) . while sars-cov-2 shares more than 60% similarities with sars-cov, mers-cov, hcov-hku1 as well as hcov-oc43 (cause common flu) as identified by genome sequence analysis 20 , we clearly demonstrated here that our paper test is specific for sars-cov-2 spike antigen.to verify the validity of our paper test in actual viral infection, we collected the pseudo-sars-cov-2 expressing spike protein (s1 subunit). the titer of pseudo-sars-cov-2 stock was determined as 1.0e+10 virus copies/ml using real-time rt-pcr.gradient dilution series of pseudovirus were detected by the nanozyme-based chemiluminescence test paper. as shown in fig. 5a , the detection limit of chemiluminescence paper test for pseudo-sars-cov-2 was 7.81e+6 copy/ml (corresponding to 0.671 ng/ml s1 protein). the linearity of our paper test was ranging from 7.81e+6 to 2e+9 copy/ml (r 2 =0.9907) (fig. 5b) . in the parallel test, the sensitivity of elisa reached 7.81e+6 copy/ml, with a relatively narrow linear range (from 3.91e+6 to 6.25e+7 copy/ml) (fig. 5c ).here, we present a novel sars-cov-2 antigen paper test that outperformed traditional paper test and hrp-based immunoassay. in this study, we successfully combined nanozyme-catalyzed chemiluminescence with a lateral immunochromatographic system to achieve ultra-sensitive as well as rapid testing for sars-cov-2 antigen, which should greatly benefit the early screening and diagnosis of covid-19.in this study, we designed and synthesized a type of peroxidase-mimic co- co-fe@hemin nanozyme is key to improving the sensitivity of our paper test. moreover, the synthesis of nanozyme is relies on readily available materials and is easily scaled up without need for expensive equipment, thus, nanozyme material is relatively lowcost compared with nature hrp, which are produced by complex extraction and purification. therefore, the overall cost of nanozyme-based chemiluminescence paper test is relatively low compared with traditional chemiluminescence or nucleic acid testing. this advantage may reduce costs usually incurred by universal screening, and critically, benefit regions of low socio-economic standing.while our study clearly showed that our test is superior to currently available detection procedures, it is critical to further validate the accuracy of our paper test for real clinical samples. theoretically, this paper test will be suitable for multiple sample candidates covering throat swab, sputum, urine, saliva or serum in particular sample preservation buffer. at the time of our investigation, the officially authorized reagents for rapid testing of sars-cov-2 antigen remained unavailable, thus comparisons of commercial kits with our test paper in clinical sample detection require future investigation.lastly, our proof-of-principle study was primarily designed to enable qualitative analysis, which was achieved by means of a readily available smartphone technology.to allow for quantitative analysis of clinical samples, a quantitative test should be developed. a portable handheld device equipped with signal acquisition and data analysis function for our nanozyme-based chemiluminescence paper test is currently being developed.in conclusion, nanozyme-based chemiluminescence paper test combines the highsensitivity of chemiluminescence, high-specificity of immunoassay and short testing time of lateral flow chromatography technique. due to the excellent performance, remarkable portability and low-cost, nanozyme-based chemiluminescence paper test should provide a novel point-of-care approach for early screening of sars-cov-2infections. moreover, as a universal paper-based poct technique, it has promising potential in diagnosis application for emerging infectious diseases of pandemic potential.in pediatric patients, respiratory viruses (rvs) are considered important pathogens in acute respiratory tract infections, resulting in hospitalization and acute care visits [1] [2] [3] for which diagnostic evaluations for rvs are frequently performed [4] . however, diagnostic evalua-tions for rvs are rarely performed in adult patients because such viruses cause only benign respiratory tract infections [4] . recently, with the advent of more sensitive molecular techniques, clinical cases of pneumonia associated with variable rvs have been reported with increasing frequency in adult patients [5, 6] . the importance of rvs in adult patients has also been emphasized www.kjim.org http://dx.doi.org/10.3904/kjim.2015.30. 1.96 with the emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome, avian influenza a (h5n1), and pandemic influenza h1n1 in 2009 [3] . in the near future, rv detection tests may be considered an essential part of the diagnostic work-up for adult patients with acute respiratory tract infections. however, physicians treating adult patients are not yet familiar with rv detection tests. we investigated the current utilization of a multiplex reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) test for rvs in adult patients in clinical practice. the multiplex rt-pcr test allows the detection of a large number of rvs simultaneously with a higher sensitivity than viral culture [7] . we hypothesized that utilization data and results from current multiplex rt-pcr tests would be helpful in identifying the benefits and problems associated with multiplex rt-pcr utilization in adult patients.this study was performed at chung-ang university hospital, an 850-bed, tertiary care teaching hospital in seoul, republic of korea. adult patients (> 16 years of age) who underwent multiplex rt-pcr testing between january 2012 and april 2013 were identified and their electronic medical records and chest radiographs reviewed. demographic characteristics, underlying diseases, multiplex rt-pcr results, the presence of respiratory symptoms, and clinical outcomes were investigated.an upper respiratory infection (uri) was defined as the presence of ≥ 1 of the following respiratory symptoms: cough, sputum production, rhinorrhea, sore throat, and dyspnea. pneumonia was defined as the presence of a new or progressive infiltrate on chest radiography plus two or more of the following symptoms or signs: fever, sputum production, rhinorrhea, sore throat, dyspnea, and the attending physician's diagnosis of pneumonia. a nonrespiratory infection (nri) was defined as neither a uri nor pneumonia. if a patient had an episode of acute infection within 2 days after admission and underwent multiplex rt-pcr testing for the episode, he or she was considered to have received a test for a community-acquired infection. the flu season was defined as between january and april in 2012 and between january and april in 2013. the flu season was determined based on the weekly surveillance reports for influenza and other respiratory viruses of the korea centers for disease control and prevention [8] .during the study period, nasopharyngeal specimens obtained using a flocked swab were submitted in universal transport medium (copan, brescia, italy). nasopharyngeal specimens were submitted for rv7 detection between january 2012 and december 2012 and for rv16 detection between january 2013 and april 2013.nucleic acids were extracted from 300-μl specimens using a viral gene-spin viral dna/rna extraction kit (intron biotechnology, seongnam, korea). cdnas were synthesized from the extracted rnas with cdna synthesis premix (seegene, seoul, korea) and a geneamp pcr system 9700 thermal cycler (applied biomaterials, foster city, ca, usa).rv7 testing was performed to detect the following viruses: adenovirus, influenza viruses a and b, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), human metapneumovirus (hmpv), and human rhinovirus (hrv) a. pcr was performed using a seeplex rv7 detection kit (seegene) according to the manufacturer's instructions with a geneamp pcr system 9700 thermal cycler (applied biomaterials). the products were separated on 2% agarose gels containing 0.5 g of ethidium bromide/ml in tri-borate-edta buffer and were visualized under ultraviolet light. pcr, according to the manufacturer's instructions. an anyplex ii rv16 detection kit (seegene) was used to detect fourteen types of rna viruses and two types of dna viruses, according to the manufacturer's instructions. briefly, the assay was conducted in a final volume of 20 μl containing 8 μl of cdna, 4 μl of 5 × rv primer, 4 μl of 8-methoxypsoralen solution, and 4 μl of 5 × master mix with the cfx96 real-time pcr detection system (bio-rad laboratories inc., hercules, ca, usa).statistical analyses were performed using spss version 18.0 (spss inc., chicago, il, usa). continuous variables were compared using student t test or the mann-whitney u test. categorical variables were compared using a chi-square test or fisher exact test.during the study period, multiplex rt-pcr testing was performed for 291 respiratory samples from 282 adult patients. during the same period, rapid influenza antigen detection tests were performed for 5,890 nasopharyngeal swab samples and bacterial cultures were performed for 38,195 respiratory samples in the study hospital. thus, the frequency of multiplex rt-pcr testing was only 4.9% of rapid influenza antigen detection tests and 0.8% of respiratory bacterial cultures. the mean turnaround time for the 81 positive multiplex rt-pcr tests was 66.1 hours (sd, 24.2; range, 20.4 to 119.7). a turnaround time of < 48 hours was observed in 25.9% (21/81) of the 81 positive tests. the characteristics of the 291 cases are summarized in table 1 . the mean patient age was 59.5 years and more than half were male (176, 60.5%). the most common underlying disease was diabetes mellitus (17.9%), followed by chronic lung disease (7.9%), solid tumor (7.6%), hematologic malignancy (5.2%), and chronic renal failure (3.8%). multiplex rt-pcr testing was performed most frequently in cases of pneumonia (58.4%), followed by uri (21.3%) and nri (20.3%). the majority of multiplex rt-pcr tests were performed for admitted patients (97.9%) with community-acquired infections (84.2%) during the flu season (82.5%). patients who underwent multiplex rt-pcr for an nri had the following diseases: urinary tract infections, acute gastroenteritis, acute hepatitis, febrile neutropenia, meningitis, mediastinitis, pulmonary tuberculosis, mumps, chickenpox, acute cholangitis, escherichia coli bacteremia of unknown origin, enteric fever, clostridium difficile infection, acute appendicitis, cellulitis, cervical lymphadenitis, hemorrhagic cystitis, cerebrovascular accidents, seizure, hyperventilation syndrome, and angina. in patients with an nri, multiplex rt-pcr testing was performed due to the presence of a fever of unknown origin during the flu or nonflu season. the list of detected rvs is presented in table 2 . rvs were identified in 81 of 291 samples (27.8%), with influenza as the most commonly identified (47/81, 58.0%). influenza (27.4% vs. 14.1%, p = 0.02) and human coronavirus (6.4% vs. 1.2%, p = 0.04) were more frequently detected in patients with a uri than in those with pneumonia. the rates of rv positivity were not different between patients with community-and hospital-acquired infections (28.6% vs. 23.9%, p = 0.52). for any individual rv, there was no difference between the rates of rv positivity in community-and hospital-acquired infections. of 59 patients with an nri, 12 (20.3%) had positive multiplex rt-pcr results for influenza (6) , adenovirus (2), parainfluenza virus (2), human enterovirus (2), hrv (1), and rsv (1).the characteristics of the 166 patients with pneumonia (four duplicates excluded) who underwent multiplex rt-pcr testing were compared according to pathogen type (table 3) . approximately one quarter of these patients had an rv infection (26.5%, 44/166) and a bacterial infection (24.1%, 40/166), respectively. nine patients (5.4%, 9/166) had bacterial/viral coinfections. the remaining 91 patients (54.8%) had no identified pathogen. in patients with an rv infection, 20 had rvs other than influenza (20/44, 45.4%). patients with a single rv infection and those without an rv infection did not differ in terms of their baseline characteristics, underlying diseases, symptoms, and in-hospital mortality, except that rhinorrhea was more frequently observed in patients with a single rv infection during the flu season. in pa- tients coinfected with an rv and a bacterium, rsv and hematologic malignancy were more common features than in patients infected with a single rv. the in-hospital mortality rates were higher in patients with a bacterial/viral coinfection (88.9%) than in those without an rv infection (16.4%) and with a single rv infection (11.4%).multiplex rt-pcr testing was performed primarily for adult patients with community-acquired respiratory infections admitted to a tertiary care center during the flu season, and especially for patients with pneumonia. the test was performed infrequently and the test results were often reported late. the rv-positive rate (28.6%) for community-acquired infections was not different from that for hospital-acquired infections (23.9%, p = 0.52). rvs were identified in more than a quarter (26.5%) of the 166 patients with pneumonia. nearly half of the patients with rv-associated pneumonia had rvs other than influenza (20/44, 45.4%). in our hospital, multiplex rt-pcr testing was most frequently performed for adult patients with community-acquired respiratory infections admitted during the flu season. thus, the test was primarily used to diagnose influenza in adult patients, especially those with pneumonia. for clinicians who experienced the influenza a (h1n1) pandemic in 2009, the use of multiplex rt-pcr as a diagnostic test for influenza infection is understandable. at other hospitals, the perception of multiplex rt-pcr testing by physicians may be similar, given the predominance of influenza among rvs and the presence of effective anti-influenza therapies [9] . therefore, the multiplex rt-pcr test should be performed to diagnose influenza during the flu season, especially considering the low sensitivity of rapid influenza antigen detection tests [9] . however, in our hospital, the multiplex rt-pcr test was performed infrequently compared to rapid influenza antigen detection tests. additionally, the test was rarely performed in outpatient departments at the study hospital. these findings are understandable given that the test results are not available on-site, unlike the rapid influenza antigen detection test. moreover, the test is not covered by national health insurance of south korea and is relatively expensive (more than 100,000 krw) compared to the cost of a respiratory bacterial culture (21,619 krw) or the rapid influenza antigen detection test (18,000 to 28,000 krw). consequently, infrequent ordering resulted in less routine pcr testing in the clinical laboratory (not every day, but three times a week at our hospital). this may explain why a turnaround time of < 48 hours was observed in only 25.9% of the positive tests. forty-eight hours is the most appropriate time period for the introduction of anti-influenza drugs after the onset of symptoms [9] . considering these problems and the continuous threat of influenza infection, our current utilization of multiplex rt-pcr testing requires improvement, which may increase the diagnostic sensitivity for influenza and decrease the number of patients who receive delayed thera py.in our study, the rv positivity rate for community-acquired infections did not differ from that for hospital-acquired infections. there were no differences in viral pathogens between community-and hospital-acquired infections. in a recent study of viral infections in patients with severe pneumonia requiring intensive care unit admission, patients with community-acquired pneumonia and healthcare-associated pneumonia had similar rates of rv positivity (40.6% vs. 34.3%) and similar rv pathogens [6] . regarding these findings, experts suggest that rv infections are not directly influenced by previous healthcare interventions or exposure to antimicrobial agents, but rather they mirror circulating viruses in the community [10] . although hospital-acquired infections and healthcare-associated infections are different, a similar explanation may be applied to our findings. considering the frequent detection of rvs in our patients with a hospital-acquired infection, multiplex rt-pcr testing should not be limited to patients with community-acquired respiratory infections. the test may be required for patients with serious hospital-acquired respiratory infections of unknown cause. based on our study findings, the test may be needed for hospital rv infection control [4] , although the turnaround time may not be optimal for that purpose.the causal role of rvs other than influenza has not been determined in adult patients with pneumonia, and effective treatment with antiviral agents is largely unavailable in clinical practice. thus, the detection of rvs other than influenza may be regarded as unnecessary for adult patients with pneumonia, especially during the non-flu season considering the fact that the multiplex rt-pcr test represented only 0.8% of sputum bacterial culture tests. however, clinical studies of pneumonia associated with rvs other than influenza have reported increased infection rates in both immunocompromised and non-immunocompromised patients [3, 5, 6, [11] [12] [13] [14] . additionally, a few antiviral agents are recommended for severe pneumonia caused by rvs other than influenza, especially in immunocompromised patients [3, 15] . in this study, although most of the tests were performed for the diagnosis of influenza infection during the flu season, rvs other than influenza were found in 45.4% (20/44) of the patients with rv-associated pneumonia. furthermore, in more than half (6/9) of the patients with a bacterial/viral coinfection, rvs other than influenza, including rsv, hmpv, and hrv, were detected. this group of coinfected patients had higher rates of mortality than either the group with a single rv infection or the group without an rv infection. although the association with higher mortality may be due to more serious underlying diseases such as hematologic malignancy (22.2%) and the impact of bacterial infections in this group, the significance of rvs other than influenza should not be neglected. the clinical significance of rsv, hmpv, and hrv in adult patients with pneumonia has recently been reported [16] [17] [18] [19] . our study suggests that rvs other than influenza should be considered in adult patients with pneumonia, and that the clinical impact of these rvs should be evaluated in future clinical studies.in our study, 20.3% of patients with an nri had positive multiplex rt-pcr test results. the clinical presentation of an rv infection may vary according either to the pathogenic potential of the rv or the degree of host immunity against rvs, and respiratory symptoms or signs in some patients with an rv infection may be minimal or absent. asymptomatic carriers of rvs are another possible explanation, as suggested in a previous study [11] .this study has several limitations. first, it was not designed to compare the clinical management, outcomes, and medical costs of patients who underwent multiplex rt-pcr testing with patients who did not. thus, our study does not include direct evidence for the clinical usefulness of the multiplex rt-pcr test for rvs. prior studies have shown conflicting results for the cost-effectiveness of the multiplex rt-pcr test [4] . additional studies are required before the multiplex rt-pcr test for rvs can be strongly recommended in south korea. second, the platform for multiplex rt-pcr testing was changed during the study period, which might have affected the multiplex rt-pcr results and the positivity rates. however, the rv7 test was performed only in 24.0% of 291 cases. third, clinical data were retrospectively collected. unrecognized clinical factors may have resulted in biases in the study analysis. fourth, our data cannot be generalized to other centers with different characteristics.in conclusion, the multiplex rt-pcr test was performed most frequently for adult patients admitted for community-acquired respiratory infections during the flu season at a tertiary care center. the test was performed infrequently, and reporting of the test results was often delayed. the utilization of multiplex rt-pcr testing should be encouraged to more effectively diagnose infections with influenza and other rvs, both inside and outside the hospital.influenza virus. influenza viruses have segmented rna genomes and are classified as type a, b, or c. the 2 envelope glycoproteins are important targets of neutralizing antibody [5] . hemagglutinin (h) initiates infectivity by binding to cellular sialic acid residues and neuraminidase (n) protein cleaves newly synthesized virus from sialic acid on cell surfaces allowing spread of virus to adjacent cells. at least 16 antigenically distinct hemagglutinin (h1-h16) and 9 neuraminidase (n1-n9) molecules of influenza a have been identified. h1-h3 viruses cause most cases of human disease, whereas the others generally are pathogens of aquatic birds and other mammals. antigenic variation in h and n contributes to the epidemic nature of influenza by 2 mechanisms. antigenic "drift" is due to minor changes in neutralizing epitopes of h and results in epidemics and necessitates annual adjustment of vaccine formulations. antigenic "shift" occurs when 2 influenza a viruses exchange h or n genes during infection of the same host. shifts with resultant influenza pandemics occurred in 1918 (h1n1 virus), 1957 (h2n2 virus), and 1968 (h3n2 virus).although annual winter epidemics occur predictably, lasting 6-8 weeks in one locale, time of onset and severity are highly variable. influenza is efficiently transmitted via small particle aerosols generated by coughing and sneezing and has a 2-3day incubation period, which facilitates explosive outbreaks in closed settings, such as nursing homes (table 2) . since 1977, the impact of influenza on the elderly population is substantial and is greatest among persons with chronic diseases. it is estimated that at least 63% of the 300,000 influenza-related hospitalizations and 85% of the 36,000 influenza-related deaths in the united states involve persons aged 165 years, a group that constitutes only 10% of the total population [6] .the clinical manifestations of influenza in elderly persons may differ from those of "classic" influenza (i.e., abrupt fever, myalgias, and headache) seen in younger adults, with older persons having a lower frequency of upper respiratory tract symptoms. among elderly outpatients, cough, fever, and acute onset of illness had only a 30% positive predictive value, in contrast to a positive predictive value of 78% for young adults [7] . in a study of older adults hospitalized with documented influenza, cough was nearly universal, and fever (temperature, 138њc) was seen in 70% [8] . fever and altered mental status may be the only signs of influenza pneumonia in older persons with cognitive impairment. gastrointestinal complaints, fever, and myalgias help to distinguish influenza from other winter respiratory viruses, such as respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) (table 3).in the classic description of influenza-associated lower respiratory tract complications during the h2n2 pandemic of 1957-1958, louria et al. [9] described 4 syndromes: (1) no radiographic pneumonia, (2) viral infection followed by bac-terial pneumonia, (3) rapidly progressive diffuse viral pneumonia, and (4) concomitant viral-bacterial pneumonia. today, pure viral pneumonia is uncommon, perhaps because prior infection and vaccination has induced immunity among older persons, as well as the rarity of rheumatic heart disease. we found that 2%-6% of highly vaccinated elderly persons (i.e., 190%) in the community developed influenza each season, of whom 5% had pneumonia. only 30% of hospitalized patients with influenza have radiographic infiltrates, whereas a equal percentage have findings consistent with congestive heart failure or other diseases [10] . the true incidence of secondary bacterial pneumonia during influenza is unknown, largely because there are difficulties involved in accurate diagnosis of bacterial infection. in our recent study [10] , bacterial infection was identified in 10% of hospitalized patients with influenza, with only 1 episode of streptococcus pneumoniae bacteremia. dual viralbacterial infections were more severe than were viral infections alone, as evidence by higher rates of intensive care use and morbidity.rsv. rsv is the second-most commonly identified cause of viral pneumonia in older persons. first isolated in 1956 from a chimpanzee with a cold, it was subsequently shown to be the leading cause of lower respiratory infections in young children. rsv is an rna virus belonging to the paramyxoviridae family, and it causes characteristic syncytia formation in cell culture. two major antigenic groups of rsv (a and b) cause annual winter epidemics of respiratory disease in temperate climates [11] . unlike influenza virus, rsv does not undergo major periodic antigenic changes, and yet, immunity is incomplete. reinfection in young adults usually produces mild illness; however, the likelihood of severe disease and pneumonia increases with advancing age. rsv pneumonia was first described in older adults in the 1960s. however, it was not appreciated as a significant pathogen until outbreaks of infection in nursing homes were reported in the 1980s [12] . rates of pneumonia and death ranged from 5% to 55% and 0% to 53%, respectively. in composite, these studies indicate that ∼10% of nursing home residents develop rsv infection annually, of whom 10% develop pneumonia.rsv infection is also a problem among elderly persons who live in the community. investigators at the centers for disease control and prevention linked viral surveillance data with national death databases and estimated that rsv infection accounts for ∼10,000 deaths among elderly persons each year [13] . in a study of 1200 adults with cap, rsv (4.4% of cases) was the third-most commonly identified pathogen, compared with s. pneumoniae (6.2% of cases), influenza viruses a and b (5.4% of cases), and mycoplasma pneumonia (4.1%) [14] . we found that, during each season, rsv infection occurred in 3%-7% of prospectively monitored healthy elderly persons and in 4%-10% of high-risk adults; pneumonia occurred in 2%-7% of infected persons [10] . in addition, rsv infection accounted for 11% of winter discharge diagnoses for pneumonia.the clinical manifestations of rsv pneumonia are difficult to distinguish from those of other viral or bacterial pneumonias. dyspnea and cough are common (60%-80% of cases) but are not unique to rsv infection. the typical rsv illness begins with nasal congestion, which gradually progresses to wheezing and difficulty breathing. compared with influenza, rsv infection is more often associated with rhinorrhea, sputum production, and wheezing, whereas fever and gastrointestinal complaints are more common with influenza (table 3) [14, 15] .chest radiographs typically show patchy bilateral alveolar infiltrates and interstitial changes. in culture-proven cases of rsv pneumonia, infiltrates tend to be small and ill-defined, although consolidation has been described [14] . seventy percent of patients with rsv pneumonia have a normal wbc count, compared with 55% of patients with atypical pneumonia and 40% of those with bacterial pneumonia. eleven percent to 30% of rsv-infected patients may have evidence of mixed viralbacterial infection.human metapneumovirus (hmpv). hmpv is a newly described respiratory pathogen that was identified by dutch researchers in 2001 in young children with respiratory illnesses resembling rsv bronchiolitis [16] . hmpv is an rna virus belonging to the paramyxoviridae family and metapneumovirus genus, and it has worldwide distribution, with universal infection by the age of 5 years. in temperate climates, the virus circulates predominantly in the winter months, overlapping with other seasonal viruses. several studies suggest there may be significant year-to-year variation in incidence rates [17] .because hmpv is a newly identified virus, clinical data are still relatively limited, and most studies describe children with bronchiolitis and pneumonia. asymptomatic infection, colds, asthma exacerbations, and flulike illnesses have been documented in older children and healthy young adults [18] . comprehensive studies of hmpv as a cause of cap among adults have not yet been published. in a 2-year study of elderly subjects and high-risk adults, hmpv infection was identified in 4.1%, with rt-pcr and serologic testing used for diagnoses [17] . impact was greatest among those with cardiopulmonary diseases, who were ill twice as long as healthy elderly subjects. of the hospitalized persons, 25% had infiltrates noted on chest radiographs. illness may be more severe in frail elderly subjects, as evidenced by a canadian study in which pneumonia was documented in 40% of hmpv-infected nursing home residents [19] .the clinical characteristics of hmpv pneumonia in older adults do not appear to be distinctive from those of illness due to other winter respiratory viruses. hmpv infection may be somewhat less severe than rsv infection and influenza, with lower rates of mechanical ventilation and death noted in one study [17] .parainfluenza viruses (pivs). pivs are paramyxoviruses that cause croup, bronchitis, and pneumonia in young children. piv type 3 infection is endemic year round, and infections due to piv types 1 and 2 tend to peak during the fall months [11] . infection recurs throughout adulthood, accounting for 1%-15% of acute respiratory illnesses, with occasional reports of pneumonia in young adults. in the elderly population, piv has been less well studied than rsv, but pneumonia has been reported [20] . investigators in sweden found that 11% of community-dwelling elderly persons with pneumonia and 7% of those with acute respiratory tract illness had serologic evidence of recent infection due to piv type 1 or 3 [21] . prospective studies in nursing homes have documented piv infection in 4%-14% of respiratory illnesses, and fatal cases of bronchopneumonia have been reported [22] . piv has also been implicated as a precursor to an outbreak of invasive pneumococcal disease in a long-term care facility. clinical syndromes, characterized by fever, rhinorrhea, cough, and sore throat, are not distinctive.coronaviruses. coronaviruses are rna viruses that derive their name from the crown-like appearance of club-shaped surface proteins. they were discovered in 1965 and are second to rhinoviruses as a cause of the common cold. studies of human illness have been limited by the inability to grow the virus under routine conditions. over the past 4 decades, oc43 and 229e strain infections have been diagnosed in all age groups by serologic testing [23] . recently, 2 new human strains (nl63 and hku1) were identified by rt-pcr [24, 25] . interest in coronaviruses intensified in 2002 with the severe acute respiratory syndrome epidemic, which spread quickly from china and was proven to be due to a novel coronavirus, sars-cov.oc43 and 229e most often occur in late winter and early spring, demonstrating 2-3-year periodicity [26] . in healthy adults, infection is characterized by low-grade fever, malaise, and nasal symptoms. pneumonia has been reported in young children, immunocompromised patients, and elderly persons [27, 28] . coronaviruses were identified by rt-pcr in 17% of elderly persons in the community with acute respiratory illnesses in a recent dutch study, and 50% of patients had lower respiratory tract symptoms [28] . most studies to date have not reported radiographic findings; thus, the frequency of coronavirus pneumonia remains unknown.rhinoviruses. rhinoviruses, the most frequent cause of the common cold, circulate throughout the year, but activity peaks in the fall and spring. infections are common among persons of all ages, including elderly persons, and account for ∼25%-50% respiratory illnesses among community-dwelling elderly individuals [29] . outbreaks have also been documented in longterm care facilities and senior daycare centers [30, 31] . prominent nasal congestion, cough, and constitutional symptoms characterize illnesses. the role of rhinoviruses in pneumonia remains somewhat controversial. because replication is restricted at core body temperature, rhinoviruses were once dismissed as a cause of pneumonia. recent evidence indicates that rhinoviruses can be recovered from lower airways after experimental challenge, and cases of pneumonia have been described in very young children and severely immunocompromised patients [32] . comprehensive studies of older adults with cap using new, sensitive molecular techniques have yet to be performed.viral diagnostic methods include culture, rapid antigen detection, rt-pcr, and serologic testing, with availability and sen-sitivity varying on the basis of the specific virus. respiratory secretions appropriate for testing include nasal swab or wash specimens, sputum specimens, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid samples. nasal wash samples, the preferred sample for children, are difficult to obtain in frail or cognitively impaired elderly persons. although they are slightly less sensitive than washes, nasal swab samples are acceptable alternatives.viral culture remains the gold standard for diagnosis and is available in many clinical laboratories, but optimal results require prompt transportation of the specimen on ice for immediate inoculation. influenza is relatively hardy and grows well in culture, but the 2-3 days required for detection is unsatisfactory when one must make decisions regarding antiviral therapy. culture is insensitive for diagnosis of rsv infection, because rsv is labile, and adults typically shed low titers. pivs and rhinoviruses can be detected by culture using standard techniques, but hmpv and coronaviruses have special growth requirements necessitating research facilities for isolation.rapid antigen testing is commercially available for influenza viruses a and b and rsv, offers immediate results, and (in some cases) can be done at the point of care. for diagnosis of influenza in adults, these tests offer a sensitivity of 50%-60% and specificity of у90%. many institutions screen patients with rapid tests and only perform culture if rapid testing is negative. this allows quick identification of many patients while not sacrificing the sensitivity of culture. given the rate of falsenegative results for rapid tests, patients for whom influenza is highly suspected during epidemics should be isolated and treated with antivirals, if appropriate, while awaiting culture results [5] . rapid rsv antigen tests are useful in young children who shed high titers of virus, but results are disappointing in adults. compared with serologic tests and rt-pcr, the sensitivity of commercially available tests is low (0%-20%).rt-pcr is very sensitive and specific for the diagnosis of all the common respiratory viruses and has been pivotal in defining adult disease for rsv, hmpv, rhinoviruses, and coronaviruses. although rapid, these assays are expensive and not widely available outside of major medical centers. however, a multiplex rt-pcr (hexaplex; prodes) is commercially available for the diagnosis of infection due to multiple common respiratory viruses.because infection with respiratory viruses (with the exception of sars-cov) represents reinfection in adults, the presence of preexisting antibody precludes a single serologic test to detect igg antibody. igm assays have generally not been useful. serologic testing provides retrospective diagnosis when a у4-fold increase in a specific antibody is detected by complement fixation or eia. because rhinovirus has 1100 serotypes, serologic testing is impractical for diagnosis, whereas serologic tests for detection of hmpv and coronavirus are only available in research settings. because of overlapping clinical syndromes, diagnosis of viral pneumonia requires laboratory confirmation. this is particularly important for influenza, because treatment is available and infection-control issues arise in hospitals and nursing homes (figure 1). therefore, during the winter months, we recommend screening by rapid antigen tests for patients who are admitted to the hospital and residents of long-term care facilities who have suspicious clinical syndromes. once influenza is active in the community, we recommend screening all patients with pneumonia with rapid tests, followed by influenza culture if the results of the rapid test are negative. full respiratory viral cultures and rt-pcr are desirable to identify other viral pathogens, but if resources are limited, these tests may be restricted to immunocompromised or severely ill patients, for whom use of unproven therapies is sometimes attempted. because of its retrospective nature, serologic testing is more useful for investigation of nursing home outbreaks of respiratory disease rather than for individual patient care.four antivirals (amantadine, rimantadine, zanamivir, and oseltamavir) have been approved for the treatment of influenza (table 4) . amantadine and rimantadine are active against influenza a, whereas zanamivir and oseltamavir are active against both influenza a and b. these agents are 70%-90% effective for prophylaxis and also reduce illness severity, duration of symptoms, and viral shedding when given р48 h after symptom onset in uncomplicated influenza. cns adverse effects limit the utility of amantadine in the elderly population, as does the issue of resistance, which develops quickly for both amantadine and rimantadine. zanamivir and oseltamivir are associated with fewer adverse effects, although zanamivir should be avoided in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and those with asthma because of bronchospasm [5] . the benefit of antiviral agents for influenza pneumonia is unknown, because placebo-controlled trials for pneumonia have not been conducted. although definitive data are lacking, most authorities feel that it is reasonable to administer an antiviral agent to elderly patients who are hospitalized with influenza pneumonia.the treatment of rsv pneumonia in elderly adults is largely supportive. antiviral therapy with aerosolized ribavirin and rsv-specific immunoglobulin have been approved for highrisk infants, but no controlled data are available in adults [11, 12] . although the general use of ribavirin cannot be recommended, use of this agent may be considered in selected cases, such as those involving immunocompromised patients. anecdotal experience suggests that, for adults who are not undergoing intubation, high-dose, short-duration therapy (60 mg/ ml for 2 h given by mask 3 times a day) is better tolerated than tent treatment. ribavirin has in vitro activity against piv and hmpv, but there are no clinical data involving humans. no antivirals are approved for the treatment of coronavirus and rhinovirus infections.immunization remains the most effective means of reducing morbidity and mortality associated with influenza in the elderly population. currently, 2 vaccines are available: standard trivalent inactivated (killed) virus vaccine and the recently introduced live, attenuated virus vaccine [5] . most studies have shown a 30%-50% reduction in influenza hospitalization rates when there is a good antigenic match between the vaccine and circulating strain [33] . in a study of nearly 300,000 communityliving elderly subjects, administration of trivalent inactivated virus vaccine was associated with 48%-50% reduction in the rate of deaths due to all causes and with significant reductions in rates of hospitalization for pneumonia and influenza, cardiac disease, and stroke, compared with rates among nonimmunized persons [34] . in contrast, a recent analysis found no decrease in morbidity and mortality rates among older persons, even as vaccine uptake increased from 20% in 1980 to 65% in 2001, suggesting that better influenza vaccines are still needed [35] . although live, attenuated virus vaccine is efficacious in young children and adults aged !49 years, the vaccine has not been studied in older persons [5] . currently, there are no licensed rsv vaccines for children or adults.transmission of influenza may occur via small particle aerosols, and thus, respiratory isolation of patients with documented or suspected influenza during periods of high influenza activity is appropriate. hand washing is also very important, especially for patients who are receiving amantadine or rimantadine, to prevent nosocomial spread of drug-resistant virus. the other major respiratory viruses are spread via fomites and large particle droplets; therefore, respiratory isolation is not required.in summary, viruses account for a substantial portion of cases of respiratory illness and pneumonia in the elderly population. as diagnostic tests continue to improve, new agents and the relative importance of known agents may change. presently, influenza virus a h3n2 and rsv are the most-commonly identified viral pathogens in older adults with viral pneumonia. because clinical features and periods of peak activity overlap during the winter months, laboratory confirmation of influenza is recommended for seriously ill or institutionalized patients.the fight against infectious diseases caused by viruses remains a challenging and endless task despite the tremendous efforts and significant advances in public healthcare. infectious diseases pose a significant risk to human health and have led to approximately onefourth of deaths worldwide [1, 2] . coronaviruses belong to the family of coronaviridae and may cause respiratory and neurological diseases [3] . until now, six human coronaviruses (hcovs) have been identified, namely, hcov-229e, hcov-hku1, hcov-oc43, hcov-nl63, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) [4] . in particular, sars-cov and mers-cov once caused pandemic [5] .recently, the emergence of novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) in china and its subsequent worldwide spread has been challenging the global public health community to confront a novel infectious disease (coronavirus disease 2019, . as of 22 february 2020, there were 77,816 confirmed cases of covid-19 and 2012 deaths (https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/). in this epidemic, the detections of sars-cov-2 rna were shown to be useful for the early diagnosis of covid-19, which would be beneficial to controling the sources of infection and help patients to prevent the illness progression. the rapid and accurate detection of coronavirus is therefore becoming increasingly important.with the advance in molecular biology technology, nucleic acid detection methods have developed rapidly and become a revolutionary technology for virus detection. especially, the method based on polymerase chain reaction (pcr) is characterized by rapid detection, high sensitivity and specificity, which has been regarded as the "gold standard" for virus detection. novel pcr-based methods also have been reported to enhance both the specificity and sensitivity of the assay. besides, several molecular tests which employ non-pcr-based methods, such as isothermal nucleic acid amplification (loop mediated isothermal amplification (lamp) and nucleic acid sequence-based amplification), were developed for the detection of coronavirus rna. in this work, we reviewed various approaches currently available for detection of coronavirus. it is anticipated that this will assist researchers to develop rapid and accurate detection techniques.pcr is an enzymatic method to produce numerous copies of a gene by separating the two strands of the dna containing the gene segment, marking its location with a primer, and using a dna polymerase to assemble a copy alongside each segment and continuously copy the copies. it is widely used to amplify minute quantities of biologic materials so as to provide adequate specimens for laboratory study. owing to its large range of applications, high sensitivity and high sequence specificity, the pcr-based method has become a routine and reliable technique for detecting coronaviruses [6, 7] . generally, coronavirus rna is transferred into cdna by reverse transcription. afterwards, the pcr is performed and followed by the detection of pcr product through specific detection methods or instruments. among these, gel visualization and sequencing after pcr are the conventional methods for the detection of coronaviruses [8, 9] . however, due to its time-consuming process and high cost, these methods are not commonly used in clinical samples.real-time reverse transcriptase-pcr (rt-pcr) detection is currently favored for the detection of coronavirus because of its advantages as a specific, and simple quantitative assay. moreover, realtime rt-pcr is more sensitive than the conventional rt-pcr assay, which help much for the diagnosis in early infection [10, 11] . therefore, the real-time rt-pcr assay still is a predominant method to be applied for the detection of all kinds of coronaviruses [12, 13] , including sars-cov-2 [14] .even so, massive efforts are invested to improve the real-time rt-pcr assay. since the rt-pcr methods are prone to contamination and require time-consuming sample handling and post-pcr analysis, van elden et al. [15] described a taqman-based real-time rt-pcr that can easily be implemented in the routine diagnostic setting for the detection of hcov. moreover, to further improve the sensitivity, yip et al. [16] designed a real-time quantitative rt-pcr assay for sars-cov with the use of 2 taqman probes, instead of 1 probe. this simple modification using dual taqman probes for quantification has wide applications in areas in which ultrasensitivity is critically required, with the sars-cov detection limit of 1 copy rna per reaction.in clinical detection, the lack of safe and stable external positive controls (epc) could become a serious problem in the diagnosis of coronavirus and plenty of attention has been focused to address this problem. however, such problems could be well avoided in real-time rt-pcr assays where epc is an important component. yu et al. [17] developed a real-time rt-pcr assay in which the armored rna was used as epc to detect the sars-cov, with a detection limit of 10 copies/ml. meanwhile, the rapidly mutating nature of coronaviruses highlights the need for accurate detection of genetically diverse coronaviruses. therefore, to improve the ability to detect coronavirus precisely and reduce the risk of eliciting false-negative results caused by genome sequence variations, researchers have established multiplex real-time rt-pcr methods with favorable sensitivity for multitarget detection of coronavirus. hadjinicolaou et al. [18] developed a real-time rt-pcr assay using mismatch-tolerant molecular beacons to distinguish between pathogenic and nonpathogenic strains. the assay incorporated four beacons, targeting four genes in addition to an internal positive control. it was validated using clinical samples, which exhibited target detection ability and specificity with detection limit of 5 copies per reaction.the lamp is a novel isothermal nucleic acid amplification method with high efficiency. it is commonly used for the amplification of dnas and rnas, which exhibits great sensitivity and high specificity as a result of its exponential amplification feature and 6 different target sequences identified by 4 different primers simultaneously, respectively [19] . the lamp assay is rapid and does not require expensive reagents or instruments. therefore, the application of lamp test might help to reduce the cost for detection of coronavirus [20] . herein, a number of lamp-based coronavirus detection methods have been developed and applied in clinical diagnosis.gel electrophoresis is commonly used to analyze the amplified products for an endpoint detection. poon et al. [21] reported a simple lamp assay for sars diagnosis and demonstrated the feasibility of using this technology for detection of sars-cov. the orf1b region of sars-cov was chosen for sars diagnosis and amplified by lamp reaction in the presence of 6 primers, then the amplified products were analyzed by gel electrophoresis. the detection rates and the sensitivity for sars-cov in the lamp assay are similar to those of conventional pcr-based methods. pyrc et al. [22] successfully applied lamp to the detection of hcov-nl63 which was conducted by agarose gel electrophoresis with favorable sensitivity and specificity in cell cultures and clinical specimens. notably, the detection limit was found to be 1 copy of rna template per reaction.amplification can be detected as the precipitation of magnesium pyrophosphate or fluorescence dye. this enables the methods to be carried out in real time by monitoring the turbidity of the pyrophosphate or fluorescence, which has effectively overcome the limitations of the endpoint detection [23] . a useful rt-lamp assay for the diagnosis and epidemiologic surveillance of human mers-cov was developed in this way by shirato et al. [24] , which is capable of detecting as few as 3.4 copies of mers-cov rna, and is highly specific, with no cross-reaction with other respiratory viruses. thai et al. [25] developed a one-step single-tube accelerated real-time quantitative rt-lamp assay monitored by real-time measurement of turbidity in a photometer for the early and rapid diagnosis of sars-cov. in clinical samples, the assay was found to be 100-fold more sensitive than conventional rt-pcr with a detection limit of 0.01 plaque forming units (pfu).however, if the methods rely on nonspecific signal transduction schemes, such as the fluorescence dyes intercalation into any double-stranded dna amplicons, or solution turbidity due to the release of pyrophosphates during polymerization, the possibility of unexpected signals derived from primer dimer or non-primer reactions cannot be excluded [26] . a sequence-specific and robust method for monitoring lamp and other isothermal amplification reactions that can readily separate true signal from nonspecific noise would address this problem. shirato et al. [27] improved the rt-lamp assay by using a quenching probe (qprobe) to monitor signal, which has the same performance as the standard real-time rt-pcr assay in the detection of mers-cov. additionally, huang et al. [4] established a nucleic acid visualization technique that combines rt-lamp and a vertical flow visualization strip (rt-lamp-vf) to detect mers-cov. as illustrated in fig. 1a , two loop primers (lf and lb) involved in isothermal amplification are labeled with fluorescein isothiocyanate (fitc) and biotin, respectively. after amplification, the amplicons labeled with biotin can bind to colloidal gold particles conjugated with streptavidin to form a complex which is subsequently captured by an anti-fitc antibody coated on the text line of the strip (fig. 1b) , thus presenting a colored line that is visible to the naked eye. in this instance, mers-cov rna can be detected with a detection limit of 10 copies/ml.scientists from ellington's group did plenty of work to both improve the specificity of lamp detection and make readout simpler and more reliable. they replaced the intercalating dye typically used for monitoring in real-time fluorescence with a toehold-mediated strand exchange reaction termed one-step strand displacement (osd) and applied it for real-time sequencespecific verification of lamp amplicons [28e30]. the resulting assays could detect 0.02 to 0.2 pfu (5e50 pfu/ml) of mers-cov in infected cell culture supernatants within 30e50 min and did not cross-react with common human respiratory pathogens [31] . other strand exchange signal transductions were developed to make lamp reaction user-friendly. as shown in fig. 2 , by combining lamp with a thermostable invertase, du et al. can directly transduce mers coronavirus templates into glucose signals, which can be easily read by a commercial glucometer, with a sensitivity as low as 20e100 copies/ml, equating to atto-molar (or low zepto-mole) [32] . the human chorionic gonadotropin (hcg) was also used as the signal as its analyte was already sensitively detected by commercial pregnancy test kits. the hcg was site-specifically conjugated to a dna oligonucleotide, thereby allowing signal transduction via strand exchange into both capture (signal-off) and release (signal-on) of hcg in the lamp based virus assay [33] . the incorporation of an engineered hcg reporter protein led to lampto-hcg signal transduction on low-cost, commercially available pregnancy test strips. this assay reliably detected as few as 20 copies of virus templates in both human serum and saliva.meanwhile, lamp shows optimal performance at around 65 c, which always limits its applications. cai et al. [34] developed a version of lamp that used phosphorothioated primers (ps-lamp) to enable more efficient hairpin formation and extension at the termini of growing concatamers, which therefore worked at much lower temperatures. the sensitivity and selectivity for amplicon detection with ps-lamp at 40 c were comparable with a regular lamp reaction at 65 c.the rolling circle amplification (rca) has attracted considerable attention in nucleic acid determination [35, 36] . in isothermal conditions, rca is capable of a 10 9 -fold signal amplification of each circle within 90 min. an efficient assay for the detection of sars-cov by rca was set up in both liquid and solid phases [37] , and presented preliminary results on a small number of clinical respiratory specimens. the main advantage of rca is that it can be performed under isothermal conditions with minimal reagents and avoids the generation of false-positive results, which is frequently encountered in pcr-based assays.the microarray is a detection method with rapid and high throughput. for this method, the coronavirus rna will first produce cdna labeled with specific probes through reverse transcription. then these labeled cdnas will be loaded into each well and hybridize with solid-phase oligonucleotides fixed on the microarray, followed by a series of washing steps to remove free dnas. finally, the coronavirus rna can be detected by the detection of specific probes. due to its superiority, the microarray assay has been widely used in the detection of coronavirus [38] .shi et al. [39] designed a 60mer oligonucleotide microarray according to the sequence of tor2 and successfully applied it to the detection of sars coronavirus in clinical samples. however, considering the rapid mutation of sars-cov, guo et al. [40] developed a microarray to detect 24 single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) mutations among the spike (s) gene of sars-cov with 100% accuracy in sample detection. since coronavirus may lead to a sudden outbreak, it is of great significance that diagnostic assays are able to detect a wide range of coronaviruses and are be deployable at or near the point of care (poc). therefore, luna et al. [41] designed a nonfluorescent low-cost, low-density oligonucleotide array for detecting the whole coronavirus genus with a sensitivity equal to that of individual real-time rt-pcr, and hardick et al. [42] evaluated a novel, portable, and near-poc diagnostic platform based on the microarray chip, the mobile analysis platform (map), which has a good performance in identifying virus and acceptable detection limit.the rna-targeting crispr associated enzyme cas13 has recently been adapted for rapid and portable sensing of nucleic acids [43, 44] . zhang's group demonstrated that cas13 can be programmed to target and destroy the genomes of diverse mammalian single stranded rna viruses (fig. 3 ) [45] . they developed a platform termed sherlock (specific high-sensitivity enzymatic reporter unlocking) that combined isothermal preamplification with cas13 to detect single molecules of rna or dna [46] . it can detect dengue or zika virus single-stranded rna as well as mutations in patient liquid biopsy samples. their lately protocol for covid-19 entitled "a protocol for detection of covid-19 using crispr diagnostics" has been reported on website (https://broad.io/sherlockprotocol), which may provide some reference points for researchers interested in further advancing this diagnostics system, highlighting its potential as a multiplexable, portable, rapid, and quantitative detection platform of nucleic acids.currently, the diagnosis of covid-19 mainly relies on the detection of the coronavirus rna. it is of great importance to select appropriate detection methods. however, each of the methods described above has its own unique advantages and inevitable disadvantages. pcr is widely used for virus identification with high sensitivity and specificity, but its analysis requires various equipment and educated analysts, which is only possibly accomplished by a well-established laboratory. lamp is an ultrasensitive nucleic acid amplification method that can often detect small numbers of dna or rna templates within roughly an hour, but the requirement for high temperatures still limits its applicability. as for the microarray, the high cost inevitably limits its further application in the detection of coronaviruses. therefore, it is still necessary to develop more effective and practical methods to overcome the shortcomings of the existing methods in the future.to date, considerable efforts have been made to improve the detection of coronavirus and a variety of improved or new approaches have been developed. in practical applications, several methods are usually combined to avoid the drawbacks of using single method as much as possible. in short, with the rapid development of new technologies and methods, we believe that there will be more excellent and efficient detection methods developed in the future, which would provide scientists/clinicians with more choices. at the same time, only by balancing the advantages and disadvantages of various detection assays according to specific purposes can we obtain the most economical and optimal option.the authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.the fight against infectious diseases caused by viruses remains a challenging and endless task despite the tremendous efforts and significant advances in public healthcare. infectious diseases pose a significant risk to human health and have led to approximately onefourth of deaths worldwide [1, 2] . coronaviruses belong to the family of coronaviridae and may cause respiratory and neurological diseases [3] . until now, six human coronaviruses (hcovs) have been identified, namely, hcov-229e, hcov-hku1, hcov-oc43, hcov-nl63, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) [4] . in particular, sars-cov and mers-cov once caused pandemic [5] .recently, the emergence of novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) has been challenging the global public health community to confront a novel infectious disease (coronavirus disease 2019, covid-19). as of 22 february 2020, there were 77,816 confirmed cases of and 2012 deaths (https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/). in this epidemic, the detections of sars-cov-2 rna were shown to be useful for the early diagnosis of covid-19, which would be beneficial to controling the sources of infection and help patients to prevent the illness progression. the rapid and accurate detection of coronavirus is therefore becoming increasingly important.with the advance in molecular biology technology, nucleic acid detection methods have developed rapidly and become a revolutionary technology for virus detection. especially, the method based on polymerase chain reaction (pcr) is characterized by rapid detection, high sensitivity and specificity, which has been regarded as the "gold standard" for virus detection. novel pcr-based methods also have been reported to enhance both the specificity and sensitivity of the assay. besides, several molecular tests which employ non-pcr-based methods, such as isothermal nucleic acid amplification (loop mediated isothermal amplification (lamp) and nucleic acid sequence-based amplification), were developed for the detection of coronavirus rna. in this work, we reviewed various approaches currently available for detection of coronavirus. it is anticipated that this will assist researchers to develop rapid and accurate detection techniques.pcr is an enzymatic method to produce numerous copies of a gene by separating the two strands of the dna containing the gene segment, marking its location with a primer, and using a dna polymerase to assemble a copy alongside each segment and continuously copy the copies. it is widely used to amplify minute quantities of biologic materials so as to provide adequate specimens for laboratory study. owing to its large range of applications, high sensitivity and high sequence specificity, the pcr-based method has become a routine and reliable technique for detecting coronaviruses [6, 7] . generally, coronavirus rna is transferred into cdna by reverse transcription. afterwards, the pcr is performed and followed by the detection of pcr product through specific detection methods or instruments. among these, gel visualization and sequencing after pcr are the conventional methods for the detection of coronaviruses [8, 9] . however, due to its time-consuming process and high cost, these methods are not commonly used in clinical samples.real-time reverse transcriptase-pcr (rt-pcr) detection is currently favored for the detection of coronavirus because of its advantages as a specific, and simple quantitative assay. moreover, realtime rt-pcr is more sensitive than the conventional rt-pcr assay, which helps much for the diagnosis in early infection [10, 11] . therefore, the real-time rt-pcr assay still is a predominant method to be applied for the detection of all kinds of coronaviruses [12, 13] , including sars-cov-2 [14] .even so, massive efforts are invested to improve the real-time rt-pcr assay. since the rt-pcr methods are prone to contamination and require time-consuming sample handling and post-pcr analysis, van elden et al. [15] described a taqman-based real-time rt-pcr that can easily be implemented in the routine diagnostic setting for the detection of hcov. moreover, to further improve the sensitivity, yip et al. [16] designed a real-time quantitative rt-pcr assay for sars-cov with the use of 2 taqman probes, instead of 1 probe. this simple modification using dual taqman probes for quantification has wide applications in areas in which ultrasensitivity is critically required, with the sars-cov detection limit of 1 copy rna per reaction.in clinical detection, the lack of safe and stable external positive controls (epc) could become a serious problem in the diagnosis of coronavirus and plenty of attention has been focused to address this problem. however, such problems could be well avoided in real-time rt-pcr assays where epc is an important component. yu et al. [17] developed a real-time rt-pcr assay in which the armored rna was used as epc to detect the sars-cov, with a detection limit of 10 copies/ml. meanwhile, the rapidly mutating nature of coronaviruses highlights the need for accurate detection of genetically diverse coronaviruses. therefore, to improve the ability to detect coronavirus precisely and reduce the risk of eliciting false-negative results caused by genome sequence variations, researchers have established multiplex real-time rt-pcr methods with favorable sensitivity for multitarget detection of coronavirus. hadjinicolaou et al. [18] developed a real-time rt-pcr assay using mismatch-tolerant molecular beacons to distinguish between pathogenic and nonpathogenic strains. the assay incorporated four beacons, targeting four genes in addition to an internal positive control. it was validated using clinical samples, which exhibited target detection ability and specificity with detection limit of 5 copies per reaction.the lamp is a novel isothermal nucleic acid amplification method with high efficiency. it is commonly used for the amplification of dnas and rnas, which exhibits great sensitivity and high specificity as a result of its exponential amplification feature and 6 different target sequences identified by 4 different primers simultaneously, respectively [19] . the lamp assay is rapid and does not require expensive reagents or instruments. therefore, the application of lamp test might help to reduce the cost for detection of coronavirus [20] . herein, a number of lamp-based coronavirus detection methods have been developed and applied in clinical diagnosis.gel electrophoresis is commonly used to analyze the amplified products for an endpoint detection. poon et al. [21] reported a simple lamp assay for sars diagnosis and demonstrated the feasibility of using this technology for detection of sars-cov. the orf1b region of sars-cov was chosen for sars diagnosis and amplified by lamp reaction in the presence of 6 primers, then the amplified products were analyzed by gel electrophoresis. the detection rates and the sensitivity for sars-cov in the lamp assay are similar to those of conventional pcr-based methods. pyrc et al. [22] successfully applied lamp to the detection of hcov-nl63 which was conducted by agarose gel electrophoresis with favorable sensitivity and specificity in cell cultures and clinical specimens. notably, the detection limit was found to be 1 copy of rna template per reaction.amplification can be detected as the precipitation of magnesium pyrophosphate or fluorescence dye. this enables the methods to be carried out in real time by monitoring the turbidity of the pyrophosphate or fluorescence, which has effectively overcome the limitations of the endpoint detection [23] . a useful rt-lamp assay for the diagnosis and epidemiologic surveillance of human mers-cov was developed in this way by shirato et al. [24] , which is capable of detecting as few as 3.4 copies of mers-cov rna, and is highly specific, with no cross-reaction with other respiratory viruses. thai et al. [25] developed a one-step single-tube accelerated real-time quantitative rt-lamp assay monitored by real-time measurement of turbidity in a photometer for the early and rapid diagnosis of sars-cov. in clinical samples, the assay was found to be 100-fold more sensitive than conventional rt-pcr with a detection limit of 0.01 plaque forming units (pfu).however, if the methods rely on nonspecific signal transduction schemes, such as the fluorescence dyes intercalation into any double-stranded dna amplicons, or solution turbidity due to the release of pyrophosphates during polymerization, the possibility of unexpected signals derived from primer dimer or non-primer reactions cannot be excluded [26] . a sequence-specific and robust method for monitoring lamp and other isothermal amplification reactions that can readily separate true signal from nonspecific noise would address this problem. shirato et al. [27] improved the rt-lamp assay by using a quenching probe (qprobe) to monitor signal, which has the same performance as the standard real-time rt-pcr assay in the detection of mers-cov. additionally, huang et al. [4] established a nucleic acid visualization technique that combines rt-lamp and a vertical flow visualization strip (rt-lamp-vf) to detect mers-cov. as illustrated in fig. 1a , two loop primers (lf and lb) involved in isothermal amplification are labeled with fluorescein isothiocyanate (fitc) and biotin, respectively. after amplification, the amplicons labeled with biotin can bind to colloidal gold particles conjugated with streptavidin to form a complex which is subsequently captured by an anti-fitc antibody coated on the text line of the strip (fig. 1b) , thus presenting a colored line that is visible to the naked eye. in this instance, mers-cov rna can be detected with a detection limit of 10 copies/ml.scientists from ellington's group did plenty of work to both improve the specificity of lamp detection and make readout simpler and more reliable. they replaced the intercalating dye typically used for monitoring in real-time fluorescence with a toehold-mediated strand exchange reaction termed one-step strand displacement (osd) and applied it for real-time sequencespecific verification of lamp amplicons [28e30]. the resulting assays could detect 0.02 to 0.2 pfu (5e50 pfu/ml) of mers-cov in infected cell culture supernatants within 30e50 min and did not cross-react with common human respiratory pathogens [31] . other strand exchange signal transductions were developed to make lamp reaction user-friendly. as shown in fig. 2 , by combining lamp with a thermostable invertase, du et al. can directly transduce mers coronavirus templates into glucose signals, which can be easily read by a commercial glucometer, with a sensitivity as low as 20e100 copies/ml, equating to atto-molar (or low zepto-mole) [32] . the human chorionic gonadotropin (hcg) was also used as the signal as its analyte was already sensitively detected by commercial pregnancy test kits. the hcg was site-specifically conjugated to a dna oligonucleotide, thereby allowing signal transduction via strand exchange into both capture (signal-off) and release (signal-on) of hcg in the lamp based virus assay [33] . the incorporation of an engineered hcg reporter protein led to lampto-hcg signal transduction on low-cost, commercially available pregnancy test strips. this assay reliably detected as few as 20 copies of virus templates in both human serum and saliva.meanwhile, lamp shows optimal performance at around 65 c, which always limits its applications. cai et al. [34] developed a version of lamp that used phosphorothioated primers (ps-lamp) to enable more efficient hairpin formation and extension at the termini of growing concatamers, which therefore worked at much lower temperatures. the sensitivity and selectivity for amplicon detection with ps-lamp at 40 c were comparable with a regular lamp reaction at 65 c.the rolling circle amplification (rca) has attracted considerable attention in nucleic acid determination [35, 36] . in isothermal conditions, rca is capable of a 10 9 -fold signal amplification of each circle within 90 min. an efficient assay for the detection of sars-cov by rca was set up in both liquid and solid phases [37] , and presented preliminary results on a small number of clinical respiratory specimens. the main advantage of rca is that it can be performed under isothermal conditions with minimal reagents and avoid the generation of false-positive results, which is frequently encountered in pcr-based assays.the microarray is a detection method with rapid and high throughput. for this method, the coronavirus rna will first produce cdna labeled with specific probes through reverse transcription. then these labeled cdnas will be loaded into each well and hybridize with solid-phase oligonucleotides fixed on the microarray, followed by a series of washing steps to remove free dnas. finally, the coronavirus rna can be detected by the detection of specific probes. due to its superiority, the microarray assay has been widely used in the detection of coronavirus [38] .shi et al. [39] designed a 60mer oligonucleotide microarray according to the sequence of tor2 and successfully applied it to the detection of sars coronavirus in clinical samples. however, considering the rapid mutation of sars-cov, guo et al. [40] developed a microarray to detect 24 single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) mutations among the spike (s) gene of sars-cov with 100% accuracy in sample detection. since coronavirus may lead to a sudden outbreak, it is of great significance that diagnostic assays are able to detect a wide range of coronaviruses and are be deployable at or near the point of care (poc). therefore, luna et al. [41] designed a nonfluorescent low-cost, low-density oligonucleotide array for detecting the whole coronavirus genus with a sensitivity equal to that of individual real-time rt-pcr, and hardick et al. [42] evaluated a novel, portable, and near-poc diagnostic platform based on the microarray chip, the mobile analysis platform (map), which has a good performance in identifying virus and acceptable detection limit.the rna-targeting crispr associated enzyme cas13 has recently been adapted for rapid and portable sensing of nucleic acids [43, 44] . zhang's group demonstrated that cas13 can be programmed to target and destroy the genomes of diverse mammalian single stranded rna viruses (fig. 3 ) [45] . they developed a platform termed sherlock (specific high-sensitivity enzymatic reporter unlocking) that combined isothermal preamplification with cas13 to detect single molecules of rna or dna [46] . it can detect dengue or zika virus single-stranded rna as well as mutations in patient liquid biopsy samples. their lately protocol for covid-19 entitled "a protocol for detection of covid-19 using crispr diagnostics" has been reported on website (https://broad.io/sherlockprotocol), which may provide some reference points for researchers interested in further advancing this diagnostics system, highlighting its potential as a multiplexable, portable, rapid, and quantitative detection platform of nucleic acids.currently, the diagnosis of covid-19 mainly relies on the detection of the coronavirus rna. it is of great importance to select appropriate detection methods. however, each of the methods described above has its own unique advantages and inevitable disadvantages. pcr is widely used for virus identification with high sensitivity and specificity, but its analysis requires various equipment and educated analysts, which is only possibly accomplished by a well-established laboratory. lamp is an ultrasensitive nucleic acid amplification method that can often detect small numbers of dna or rna templates within roughly an hour, but the requirement for high temperatures still limits its applicability. as for the microarray, the high cost inevitably limits its further application in the detection of coronaviruses. therefore, it is still necessary to develop more effective and practical methods to overcome the shortcomings of the existing methods in the future.to date, considerable efforts have been made to improve the detection of coronavirus and a variety of improved or new approaches have been developed. in practical applications, several methods are usually combined to avoid the drawbacks of using single method as much as possible. in short, with the rapid development of new technologies and methods, we believe that there will be more excellent and efficient detection methods developed in the future, which would provide scientists/clinicians with more choices. at the same time, only by balancing the advantages and disadvantages of various detection assays according to specific purposes can we obtain the most economical and optimal option.the authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. 3 . scheme for detection of rna viruses using cas13. the figure was reproduced with permission from ref. [45] .acute respiratory tract infection is a leading cause of hospital admission of children. this study used a broad capture, rapid and sensitive method (multiplex pcr assay) to detect 20 different respiratory pathogens including influenza a subtypes h1, h3, and h5; influenza b; parainfluenza types 1, 2, 3, and 4; respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) groups a and b; adenoviruses; human rhinoviruses; enteroviruses; human metapneumoviruses; human coronaviruses oc43, 229e, and sars-cov; chlamydophila pneumoniae; legionella pneumophila; and mycoplasma pneumoniae; from respiratory specimens of 475 children hospitalized over a 12-month period for acute respiratory tract infections. the overall positive rate (47%) was about twice higher than previous reports based on conventional methods. influenza a, parainfluenza and rsv accounted for 51%, and non-cultivable viruses accounted for 30% of positive cases. influenza a peaked at march and june. influenza b was detected in january, february, and april. parainfluenza was prevalent throughout the year except from april to june. most rsv infections were found between february and september. adenovirus had multiple peaks, whereas rhinovirus and coronavirus oc43 were detected mainly in winter and early spring. rsv infection was associated with bronchiolitis, and parainfluenza was associated with croup; otherwise the clinical manifestations were largely nonspecific. in general, children infected with influenza a, adenovirus and mixed viruses had higher temperatures. in view of the increasing concern about unexpected outbreaks of severe viral infections, a rapid multiplex pcr assay is aacute respiratory infection is the most common cause of hospitalization of children in hong kong. a review of the standardised discharge data for all hong kong government hospitals from 1997 to 1999 showed that acute respiratory infections accounted for 38% of all paediatric admissions and 63% of those age under 5 years [nelson et al., 2007] . a large spectrum of viruses can cause respiratory tract infection. the routine rapid diagnostic method used currently in government hospitals in hong kong is immunofluorescence test on nasopharyngeal aspirate. this method can cover upto seven common respiratory viruses (influenza a and b; parainfluenzae types 1, 2, and 3; respiratory syncytial virus and adenovirus). by this method alone, an aetiological diagnosis was made in less than 20% of cases [lam et al., 2007] . viral culture, although being carried out routinely in referent laboratories, is less helpful in patient management because of the long turnaround time, and inability to detect fastidious viruses. the lack of a highly sensitive and rapid test to confirm the etiology of acute respiratory infection has caused greater concern since the outbreaks of avian influenza a h5n1 and severe acute respiratory syndrome in hong kong in the past. these outbreaks have posed special challenges for paediatric practice in hospitals as suspected cases had to be confined in isolation rooms before the suspected pathogens were exlcuded [leung et al., 2004] . this aggravated the shortfall of isolation cubicles and also caused great distress to children and their family. urgent pcr tests for coronavirus and infleunza a h5n1 have since become available for pneumonia cases with severe respiratory distress, and for avian infuenza cases suspected on the ground of history of travelling to endemic areas or contact with birds; but this policy of selective testing is inadequate to cover all the clinical needs.along with rapid advances in molecular diagnostic techniques, an increasing number of multiplex pcr assays for respiratory pathogens have been developed by different research groups for early and more comprehensive assessment of viral and bacterial etiologies [gröndahl et al., 1999; coiras et al., 2004; oosterheert et al., 2005; freymuth et al., 2006; mahony et al., 2007; nolte et al., 2007] . the current study employed the multiplex nested pcr assays established recently for the detection of 20 respiratory viruses and atypical bacteria: influenza a (subytpes h1, h3, and h5); influenza b; parainfluenza types 1, 2, 3, and 4; respiratory syncytial virus groups a and b; adenoviruses; human rhinoviruses; enteroviruses; human metapneumoviruses; human coronaviruses oc43 and 229 e and sars-cov; chlamydophila pneumoniae; legionella pneumophila; and mycoplasma pneumoniae [lam et al., 2007] . this study aimed at delineating the spectrum of respiratory viruses and atypical bacteria that accounted for hospitalization of children with acute respiratory tract illnesses, and examined the seasonality and clinical manifestations of these infections.this prospective study examined children under 5 years old who were admitted to a university-affiliated general hospital (prince of wales hospital) with acute respiratory infections during november, 2005 to october, 2006 . the prince of wales hospital is an acute hospital situated at the east new territories of hong kong serving approximate a population of 1.5 million with 15% are under 15 years old. the first 10 children admitted on monday (or tuesday if monday was a public holiday) for suspected acute respiratory tract infections and whose parent provided a written consent were included in this study. the selection of monday was arbitary. the diagnostic criteria for acute respiratory infection were sudden onset (<36 hr) of one or more of the following symptoms and signs: rhinorrhoea, cough, sore throat, earache, hoarseness, stridor, wheeze, dyspnoea with or without fever.paired nasopharyngeal aspirate and nasal swab samples were taken under strict infection control guidance in a dedicated area by trained nurses. for nasopharyngeal aspirate, a catheter was inserted into one nostril to a depth of 5-7 cm and drawn back while applying gentle suction with an electric suction device [heikkinen et al., 2002] . for a nasal swab, a dacron swab with a plastic shaft (copan, italy) was placed 1-1.5 cm into the opposite nostril and rotated three times against the surface of the nasal cavity. both specimens were collected into viral transport medium and kept at 4-108c until processing further. all specimens were subjected to respiratory virus detection using immunofluorescence, conventional virus culture and multiplex nested pcr.all specimens were processed within the same of day of collection. specimens were tested for influenza a, influenza b, parainfluenza (types 1, 2, and 3), respiratory syncytial virus and adenovirus by direct immunofluorescence using specific antibodies (chemicon, temecula, ca).virus culture was performed by inoculating approximately 200 ml of specimens onto hep-2, mdck, and llc-mk 2 cell monolayers. after adsorption for 1 hr, the medium was replaced with corresponding maintenance medium, and the tubes were then incubated in a roller drum, at 378c for hep-2 cells or 338c for mdck and llc-mk 2 cells. hep-2 tubes were incubated for 14 days and examined daily for cytopathic effects, while haemadsorption was performed on day 7 for mdck and llc-mk 2 monolayers. the growth of viruses was confirmed by immunofluorescence using virus-specific antibodies.viral rna and dna present in the specimens were extracted by a commercial kit according to the manufacturer's protocol (qiaamp minelute virus spin kit, qiagen, valencia, ca). the rna template was mixed with 1 ml of random primer (2.5 ng/ml) and 1 ml of dntps (0.5 mm each) in a final volume of 10 ml, and heated at 658c for 5 min. the solution was equilibrated at 48c and mixed with 2 u of rnase out, 4 ml of 5â first-strand buffer, 0.5 mm dtt and 10 u m-mlv superscript iii reverse transcriptase (invitrogen, carlsbad, ca), in a final volume of 20 ml. reverse transcription was performed at 508c for 50 min, and then stopped by heating for 15 min at 708c. cdnas were stored at à208c until further analysis.five separate multiplex nested pcr assays were used for detection of 20 respiratory viruses and atypical bacteria. multiplex pcr group 1 comprised of influenza a and influenza b group-specific, and subtype h1, h3, h5-specific primers. group 2 comprised of parainfluenza viruses type 1, 2, 3, and 4. group 3 comprised of respiratory syncytial virus groups a and b, rhinoviruses, and enteroviruses. group 4 was comprised of human coronaviruses oc43, 229e, sars-cov, and human metapneumovirus. group 5 included mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydophila pneumoniae, legionella pneumophila, and adenovirus. the details of the assay procedures and performance have been described previously [lam et al., 2007] . the nested pcr assays were run in a ''fast'' thermal cycler (applied biosystem fast pcr machine, foster city, ca), which allow the completion of a 35-cycle pcr assay within 35 min, compared to the $180 min of ordinary cyclers.a standard form for demographic data and detailed history was completed for each patient as soon as they were recruited for the study. additional laboratory results, information on treatment, clinical course and final diagnosis were retrieved from the medical records. the routine immunofluorescence results for seven common respiratory viruses were available to clinicians within one working day. the multiplex pcr results were retained by the virology laboratory until the end of the study.paired samples were collected from 475 children under 5 years old (253 boys, 222 girls) with a mean age of 23.8 months (sd, 17 m). the study population represented 20% of children under 5 years old admitted for acute respiratory infections during the study period. the results of comparing the diagnostic yield between nasopharyngeal aspirates and nasal swabs with respect to different testing methods (immunofluorescence, isolation, multiplex pcr) for influenza a and b, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza 1, 2, and 3, and adenovirus have been described previously [sung et al., in press ]. the following are analyses of the results of the multiplex pcr assays covering all the 20 respiratory pathogens.altogether, 47% (225/475) of cases had at least one virus or atypical bacteria detected by the multiplex pcr assays. the positive rate for nasopharyngeal aspirate specimens (43%) was higher than nasal swab specimens (39%), but the difference was not significant (p > 0.05 by chi squared test). a single pathogen was detected in 206 children and two pathogens were detected in 19 children. influenza a, parainfluenza, and respiratory syncytial virus were the most frequently identified pathogens which accounted for 51% of all positive cases (table i) . nineteen patients had coinfection with two pathogens. these included three cases with metapneumovirus plus mycoplasma, two cases with adenovirus plus chlamydophila; and the remaining 14 cases had other combinations. parainfluenza virus, mycoplasma pneumoniae, rhinovirus and metapneumovirus were the pathogens found most commonly among coinfections. sars-cov and influenza a h5n1 was not detected during the study period. figure 1 shows the monthly distribution of the number of positive specimen for each pathogen. influenza a infection peaked in march and june. influenza b was detected in january, february, and april. parainfluenza virus was prevalent throughout the year except from april to june. respiratory syncytial virus was also prevalent throughout the year but was more common from february to september. adenovirus showed multiple peaks, and was more active from november to april. both rhinovirus and coronavirus oc43 were detected more often in winter and early spring. mycoplasma pneumoniae peaked at march.the clinical manifestations and discharge diagnoses of the 225 children with respiratory pathogens identified are shown in table ii . more than one third of the cases had a principal diagnosis of upper respiratory tract infection on discharge, four cases had croup, and 44 (20%) cases had lower respiratory tract infections (14 cases with pneumonia, 30 with bronchiolitis). twenty-six (12%) cases had acute gastrointestinal symptoms as the main feature of their illness. thirteen cases (6%) had febrile convulsions and eight cases (4%) had asthma exacerbation in association with the acute respiratory infection. none of the patients required intensive care or ventilatory support. the duration of fever before admission was 3.4 ae 3.2 days, the temperature on admission was 38.7 ae 0.98c. the total duration of fever was 4.74 ae 2.54 days. in general, children infected with adenovirus, influenza a and mixed viruses had higher temperatures; whereas those infected with respiratory syncytial virus had a lower degree of fever.this study used multiplex pcr assays to assess the role of 20 respiratory viruses and atypical bacteria as a cause of hospital admission for children with suspected acute respiratory infections in hong kong. these multiplex pcr assays have been shown to provide a much greater sensitivity compared to immunofluorescence and conventional virus isolation [lam et al., 2007; sung et al., in press ]. this improved sensitivity together with the broad coverage allows a more precise evaluation on the relative importance of these pathogens in hong kong.in this study, one or more respiratory pathogen(s) was found in 47% of cases. this positive rate was about twice of those based on conventional methods [lam et al., 2007] . in concordance with previous reports [druce et al., 2005; weigl et al., 2007] , respiratory syncytial virus, influenza a, and parainfluenza virus were identified most frequently, and accounted for 51% of positive cases in the current study population. respiratory syncytial virus and parainfluenza virus were the predominant viruses detected in infants younger than 6 months old, whereas 39% of adenovirus infections occurred in children between 3 and 4 years old. influenza a were evenly distributed in children between 1 and 5 years old. other viruses identified more frequently included influenza b, coronavirus oc43 and rhinoviruses; each accounted for 7-8% of positive cases. mycoplasma and human metapneumovirus each accounted for about 3% of positive cases. enterovirus, reported to be circulating widely in children [juvén et al., 2000; tsai et al., 2001] , was identified in three cases only (two single and one coinfection). a previous local study on the viral etiology of acute respiratory infections in children carried out from august 2001 to july 2002 using rt-pcr for the detection of rhinovirus, metapneumovirus and coronavirus; and immunofluorescence and culture for other respiratory viruses showed slightly lower positive rates for adenovirus (5% vs. 3%), influenza b (3% vs. 1%), parainfluenza (9% vs. 6%) and respiratory syncytial virus (8% vs. 7%). the positive rates for influenza a and coronavirus were similar, whereas the positive rate for rhinovirus (4% vs. 35%) was remarkably higher in the previous study [cheuk et al., 2007] . this discrepancy of sung et al. rhinovirus detection rates might be due to differences in the sensitivity of pcr tests used. nevertheless, both studies continued for only 1 year and the seasonal pattern of respiratory viral activities might vary in different years. further prospective studies of longer duration are necessary to elucidate the epidemiology and disease burden associated with rhinovirus in hong kong.with the exception of the strong association between respiratory syncytial virus infection and bronchiolitis, and between parainfluenza and croup; the clinical manifestations of other viral infections were largely nonspecific with fever and cough as the main symptoms. among the 225 patients with positive results, 26 (12%) cases had prominent gastrointestinal symptoms, which appeared to be overrepresented (25%) in human coronavirus oc43 infections. this is in agreement with a previous report that gastrointestinal symptoms were common in human coronavirus oc43 infections [vabret et al., 2001] . febrile convulsions and asthmatic attacks were observed in 6% and 4% of positive cases respectively, which were in line with previous reports [grü nberg et al., 2001; chung and wong, 2007] . notably, more rhinoviruses were detected between october and december which are peak months of asthma admissions in hong kong. in this study, 2 of 17 patients with rhinovirus infection had asthmatic attack as the principal diagnosis of their admission. however, the number of rhinovirus positive asthma cases was too small to allow further evaluation on the association. in line with a previous report [lin et al., 2007] , the current study revealed that adenovirus, influenza a and mixed viral infections were associated with higher fever than other single viral infections.rapid identification of the aetiology of acute respiratory infections is essential for better decisions on the usage of antiviral agents and antibiotics, and to implement proper isolation to prevent transmission [woo et al., 1997; oosterheert et al., 2005] . in this regard, the rapid pcr system used in this study can reduce the time required for a single round of pcr from 3 hr to 35 min, and therefore the whole testing process can be completed within 1 day. this rapid turnaround time may alleviate the anxiety of the parents, and potentially decrease the duration of hospital stay and the need for isolation cubicles. nevertheless, it should be noted that this gain in turnaround time can only be achieved when the rapid pcr system is available on site at the hospital or clinic.while multiplex pcr assays have major advantages, their sensitivities and specificities are in general inferior to the equivalent monoplex pcr assays. this technical hurdle has to be overcome before multiplex pcr can be recommended for routine clinical use. under certain circumstances for examples, pathogens of great public health concern including sars-cov and avian influenza, a positive multiplex pcr result requires further testing with a supplementary assay to ascertain the infection status.a practical concern about routine use of multiplex pcr assays is the cost which can however be justified in view of the devastating economic and human loss sustained during the outbreaks of h5n1 influenza in 1997 and sars in 2003, and the increasing concern about repeated unexpected outbreaks of other viral infections in hong kong [yuen et al., 1998; chan, 2002; lee et al., 2003] . the importance of establishing a sustainable surveillance system for monitoring circulating respiratory pathogens, disease burden, and economic impact of a wide range of respiratory infections has become increasingly recognized. the results of this study support that multiplex pcr assays with expanded detection spectrum are valuable tools for surveillance which could be performed at one or more sentinel hospitals and government or private clinics.one limitation of the current study is that bacterial culture of nasopharyngeal aspirate or sputum was not performed systematically except when a bacterial aetiology was suspected clinically. so it is possible that the clinical manifestations in some cases might have been contributed in part by co-existing bacterial infections.in conclusion, the data generated from this study have expanded the knowledge of the epidemiology of respiratory viral infections in children in hong kong. the management of children with severe acute respiratory infections in hospital, and surveillance for respiratory viral infections in the community could be greatly enhanced with the use of multiplex pcr assays.diagnostics 2020, 10, 202 2 of 7 from the high mortality rate due to covid-19 of over 14,000 deaths, while spain and the usa are also seriously impacted with over 10,000 and 6000 deaths, respectively. the last few weeks have led to an exponential increase in the number of cases in the usa, uk, iran, and the european union (eu). however, singapore, south korea, and china have managed to successfully contain the spread of covid-19 by taking all essential measures to deal with the pandemic.sars-cov-2 was transmitted to humans via human-animal contact at the live animals market in wuhan, china, in late december, 2019 [3] . chinese researchers found its origin in bats, but the intermediate hosts for sars-cov- 2 have not yet been identified [4] . the genomic sequence of sars-cov-2 has about 82% sequence homology to the human sars-cov and about 89% with bat sars-like-covzxc21 [5] . the aged population (age above 65 years), and persons having decreased immunity or chronic diseases, such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular diseases, and lung disease, are at a higher risk for developing severe covid-19 if they are infected with sars-cov-2. therefore, they must take special precautions to prevent the infection. the who has stressed the need for more intensive testing of suspected cases to identify covid-19 infected people so that they can be quarantined in order to avoid the further spread of infection. it is also evident that the existing real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain (rt-pcr) assays are unable to detect the covid-19 in the early stages of infection, and there are reports where it has given false negatives in subjects for up to two weeks [6, 7] . the reason of false negative results by rt-pcr could be due to the improper extraction of nucleic acid from clinical materials and insufficient cellular material for detection. a chest computerized tomography (ct) scan act as a complementary diagnostic tool that enables physicians to effectively detect covid-19 infection in several such rt-pcr false-negative cases [8, 9] . therefore, there is a need for developing better in vitro diagnostic (ivd) assays that can detect the sars-cov-2 infection reliably in persons even at the initial stage. the specific biomarkers involved during the early stage of covid-19 infection should be investigated and employed for the development of diagnostics.the structure of sars-cov-2 comprises of spikes, which are formed by the sp (figure 1 ). sp is a major glycoprotein (mol. wt.~180 kda) that consists of two subunits, i.e., s1 and s2 [10] . s1 contains a receptor binding domain (rbd), which is responsible for recognizing and binding with the host cell receptor, i.e., angiotensin converting enzyme 2 receptor (ace2) found in the lower respiratory tract [11] . on the other hand, s2 contains other basic elements needed for the membrane fusion. sp is the common target for neutralizing antibodies and vaccines, while the amino-terminal s1 subunit of sp is the most variable immunogenic antigen. additionally, sars-cov-2 has np (mol. wt.~40 kda), the most abundant viral phosphoprotein produced and shed during infection. the template mrna of np is the most abundant subgenomic rna. np exhibits high immunogenicity and can be detected in either serum or urine samples during the first two weeks of infection with peak viral shedding around ten days after infection [12] . being a large protein, it can be detected via a sandwich immunoassay. furthermore, sars-cov-2 contains mp, which is the most abundant protein on the complete virion particle. the ep is the smallest major structural protein of sars-cov-2, which is involved in viral assembly, release of virions, and pathogenesis. the most abundant viral phosphoprotein produced and shed during infection. the template mrna of np is the most abundant subgenomic rna. np exhibits high immunogenicity and can be detected in either serum or urine samples during the first two weeks of infection with peak viral shedding around ten days after infection [12] . being a large protein, it can be detected via a sandwich immunoassay. furthermore, sars-cov-2 contains mp, which is the most abundant protein on the complete virion particle. the ep is the smallest major structural protein of sars-cov-2, which is involved in viral assembly, release of virions, and pathogenesis. several serological immunoassays have been developed by ivd companies for the detection of sars-cov-2 viral proteins and antibodies in the serum or plasma. the most widely used biomarkers for the detection of sars-cov-2 infection in commercial immunoassays (rapid lateral flow immunoassay (lfia) tests, automated chemiluminescence immunoassay (clia), manual elisa, and other formats) are igm and igg antibodies produced in suspects from the 2nd week of viral infection. igm can be detected in the patient samples from 10 to 30 days after sars-cov-2 infection, while igg can be detected from 20 days onwards [13] . the igm response occurs earlier than that of igg, but it then decreases and disappears. on the other hand, igg can persist after infection for a long time and may have a protective role. several manual elisa kits are also commercially available for the detection of np and sp, but these are used mainly for research.the most widely used ivd assays for the confirmatory diagnosis of covid-19 are based on rt-pcr that have been employed globally to deal with the pandemic. a novel and robust real-time rt-pcr assay was developed by tib-molbiol, germany, in collaboration with various partners by the 2nd week of january 2020 [14] . it was highly specific for sars-cov-2 rna and did not cross-react with other coronaviruses. the test detects the sars-cov-2 rna via envelope (e) and rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) gene assays. the e-gene assay was used for first line screening, while the rdrp gene assay was employed for confirmatory testing. in another approach, the researchers developed one-step rt-pcr assays to detect orf1b and n regions of sars-cov-2 in 1 h and 15 min [15] . the n gene assay was used for screening, while orf1b was used as confirmatory test. however, as the assay involved the detection of orf1b and n regions that are highly conserved among sarbecoviruses, it could also bind to sars-cov and other closely-related viruses. the authors mentioned that they could distinguish the sars-cov-2 from sars-cov via sequence analysis of positive amplicons if the rt-pcr results are positive. of interest was the development of real-time rt-pcr assay for the detection of rdrp/helicase (h) genes of sars-cov-2, which did not cross-react with other human coronaviruses and respiratory viruses [16] . due to its high sensitivity, it can be used for covid-19 detection in samples that have low viral loads and for testing saliva, plasma, and upper respiratory tract samples. many rt-pcr assays have already been developed by many companies and researchers worldwide. the most prominent real-time rt-pcr rapid test is the xpert ® xpress sars-cov-2 test by cepheid, usa, which provides results in just 45 min using genxpert benchtop system [17] . it is a rapid and automated point-of-care (poc) molecular test that enables the qualitative detection of sars-cov-2 in nasopharyngeal swab, nasal wash, or aspirate specimens from suspects. the test requires only a minute for sample preparation, employs cepheid's xpert ® xpress cartridge technology, and targets multiple regions of the viral genome. it has also received food and drug administration (fda) emergency use authorization (eua). another prominent advance is the vivalytic covid-19 test by bosch, germany [18] , which detects sars-cov-2 infection in suspects in less than 2.5 h. the test was developed by bosch in collaboration with randox laboratories, uk. it is a fully automated and rapid poc molecular test that can simultaneously detect sars-cov-2 and nine other respiratory viruses, including influenza a and b. the sample is taken from the nose or throat of suspect using a swab and placed inside a vivalytic cartridge containing all the assay reagents. the cartridge is then plugged into a small benchtop vivalytic analyzer.abbott id now™ covid-19 test is the most recent breakthrough ivd assay that detects sars-cov-2 in just 5 min [19, 20] . it is a molecular poc test that utilizes the isothermal nucleic acid amplification technology for the qualitative detection of viral rna from sars-cov-2. the test can be used in any location, such as hospitals, clinics, physicians' offices, or in outbreak hotspots of covid-19. it requires just a portable touchscreen-operated instrument, i.e., id now, which is lightweight (6.6 pounds) and compact (the size of a small toaster). it employs a molecular test for the rdrp gene, and can take throat, nasal, nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs as samples. the kit contains 24 tests, positive and negative controls, swabs for sample collection, and pipettes. it has just received the fda eua and is being seen as a remarkable achievement worldwide.apart from the molecular diagnostics, numerous lfia based rapid poc tests have been developed by several companies, which enable the detection of igm and igg antibodies produced in suspects in response to sars-cov-2 infection. one of the most prominent rapid tests is the covid-19 test developed by biomedomics, usa, which detects igm and igg antibodies in suspects in just 10 min [21] . it requires minimal sample volume, i.e., 20 µl of finger-pricked blood or 10 µl of serum/plasma. it does not require any instrument or trained staff and, thus, it can be employed at any place and time, especially in developing nations with limited healthcare resources and remote settings. the assay is ideal for primary healthcare workers for the rapid testing of covid-19 suspects. another prospective test is the sars-cov-2 rapid by pharmacyt ag, germany [22] , which employs only two drops of finger-pricked blood sample from the suspects and can provide results in 20 min. the results obtained by the rapid test correlated well with those achieved by rt-pcr. the most exciting advance is the dpp covid-19 igm/igg test launched recently by chembio diagnostics, usa, which has already received fda eua. it is a poc rapid lfia test that provides results in just 15 min using finger-pricked blood sample. however, the distinct feature of the test is that it does not rely on the visual detection by naked eye but employs optical readout via microreader 1 and 2 analyzers produced by chembio, germany [23] . a large number of rapid igm/igg tests have been developed by several ivd companies, such as beijing lepu medical technology, sona nanotech, jiangsu medomics medical technologies, innovita biological technology, guangzhou wondfo biotech, zhejiang orient gene biotech, biomerica, xiamen amonmed biotechnology, sugentech, chil, zhenjiang orient gene biotech, sure bio-tech. however, there are very few peer-reviewed publications [24] that show the accuracy of the covid-19 diagnostic results obtained by the rapid tests with respect to rt-pcr tests. rapid tests could be used as a complementary ivd assay to the existing rt-pcr assays, which could lead to much better diagnosis of covid-19 and provide additional information about the immune status of the suspects. however, the clinical accuracy of rapid tests needs to be stringently evaluated before they are authorized for the mass screening of covid-19. the recent reports from many european countries suggest that most of the rapid tests for covid-19 procured from china did not show good analytical performance and did not work for over 70% of covid-19 cases [25 -28] . furthermore, as igm and igg could only be detected in suspects about two weeks after the onset of infection, there is an immense need to include other biomarkers of the early stage of sars-cov-2 infection for developing improved covid-19 rapid tests.an exciting development is the dz-lite sars-cov-2 clia igm and igg tests developed by diazyme, usa, that have received fda eua [29] . the tests are based on the principle of chemiluminescence immunoassay (clia) and run on an automated diazyme dz-lite 3000 plus chemiluminescence analyzer with a throughput of 50 tests/h. similarly, snibe, china, has developed automated clia tests on maglumi clia analyzers for the detection of igg and igm in the patient sample in 30 min [30] . the main advantages of automated clia analyzers based covid-19 assays compared to rapid lfia tests is the very high throughput of samples that can be analyzed and the ability to perform more clinical tests for other biomarkers, such as c-reactive protein (crp), which also need to be monitored in covid-19 suspects.several ce marked manual elisa kits have also been developed by various ivd manufacturers, such as euroimmun, ibl international, drg diagnostics gmbh, and epitope diagnostics. most of them target the igg and igm produced in subjects in response to sars-cov-2 infection.other prospective ivd assay formats, such as those based on reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (rt-lamp), lab-on-a-chip, microfluidics, and multiplex detection are currently being investigated by researchers. it would also be useful to develop an automated and fully integrated poc ivd assay that can perform molecular and immunological testing on a single analytical platform. an ideal ivd assay for the poc detection of covid-19 in the near future would be the smartphone-based poc electrochemical test for sars-cov-2 biomarkers, similar to the ihealth align device developed by ihealth, usa, for smartphone-based blood glucose monitoring [31] . smartphones are omnipresent, powered by internal battery, and equipped with large storage capacity, advanced processing power and a large screen display. moreover, they have global positioning system (gps) for spatiotemporal tagging of data, internet connectivity, and capability to store the processed results in the internal device memory as well as to a secure cloud. therefore, smartphone-based poc electrochemical device for the detection of sars-cov-2 biomarkers could be very useful for the large-scale rapid testing of covid-19 suspects at the point-of-need.the accurate diagnosis of people infected with the sars-cov-2 is essential to curb the global spread of covid-19. however, the current rt-pcr based diagnostic assays are not robust, as they are still missing several infected cases [6, 8, 9] . moreover, they can only be performed in well-equipped central laboratories by highly skilled analysts. therefore, they are of limited utility and cannot be deployed widely, such as in developing nations, remote locations, and regions with decentralized laboratories. the delay in diagnosing people until after they have passed the disease onto many others is contributing to the continued global spread of covid-19. the rapid lfia and automated clia tests for igm and igg could complement the existing covid-19 testing by rt-pcr. however, there is a need to stringently evaluate the clinical performance of commercial tests before they are used for the diagnosis of covid-19. the biomarker discovery could also play a key role in identifying novel biomarkers that are involved in the early stages of sars-cov-2 infection. the recently developed abbott id now™ covid-19 test that detects sars-cov-2 in 5 min is a remarkable achievement [19, 20] and could revolutionize covid-19 testing. the ongoing efforts will further lead to reliable, robust, rapid, and easy-to-implement ivd assays and smart diagnostics for covid-19. there are still significant knowledge gaps in health research that are crucial for an effective public health response in the case of epidemics. it signifies the need for all nations to invest in health research and make it an integral part of healthcare.antimicrobial resistance (amr) is the arguably one of the greatest threats to global human health and is driven by the overuse of antibiotics. 1 antibiotics are prescribed to the vast majority of patients hospitalised with acute respiratory illness (ari), including in clinical groups where viruses are strongly implicated in their aetiology. most asthma exacerbations are associated with respiratory virus infection, especially rhinovirus 2 and randomised controlled trials have failed to demonstrate any benefit from antibiotic treatment. 3, 4 additionally, a large retrospective observational study of nearly 20,0 0 0 patients hospitalised with an exacerbation suggests that antibiotic use does not improve outcome and is associated with higher costs. 5 professional societies strongly discourage the use of antibiotics in asthma exacerbation through national guidelines 6, 7 but despite this antibiotic use in adults hospitalised with exacerbation of asthma remains very common. [8] [9] [10] patients hospitalised with exacerbation of copd are also routinely treated with antibiotics despite viruses being frequently implicated in their aetiology 12 and a lack of high quality evidence for benefit in patients with non-life threatening exacerbations. 11 several randomised trials of biomarker-directed therapy show that antibiotics use can be safely reduced in non-critically ill hospitalised patients with exacerbation of copd and low levels of crp or procalcitonin 13, 14 supporting the concept that antibiotics are currently overused in this population. diagnostic uncertainty regarding the aetiology of exacerbations of airways disease contributes to the ongoing overuse of antibiotics in these groups. the uk department of health commissioned report into antimicrobial resistance specifically noted the importance of rapid diagnostic tests to help combat amr through effective antibiotic stewardship and recommended that by 2020 all prescribing of antibiotics should be informed by a diagnostic test where one exists. 1 rapid molecular tests for respiratory viruses could potentially fulfil this need in patients hospitalised with exacerbation of airways disease.the respoc study was a large pragmatic randomised controlled trial that evaluated the clinical impact of syndromic (i.e. comprehensive multiplex pcr) point-of-care testing (poct) for respiratory viruses in adults presenting to hospital with acute respiratory illness. 10 it demonstrated that syndromic poct for respiratory viruses using the fimarray respiratory panel was associated with several clinical benefits compared to routine clinical care with laboratory testing, including the earlier discontinuation of antibiotics, without any increase in adverse events. subgroup analysis from the trial suggests that these antibiotic changes occurred predominantly in patients with exacerbation of airways disease testing positive for viruses, with little difference seen in antibiotic use in other clinical groups such as patients with community acquired pneumonia or in patients testing negative for viruses. several observational studies support the findings of respoc, demonstrating a reduction in unnecessary antibiotics with rapid molecular testing for respiratory viruses in a variety of clinical setting. 15, 16 in addition a post hoc analysis from the trial itself suggests that the very rapid turnaround times for results seen with poct compared to laboratory testing are critical in modifying antibiotic use in hospitalised patients. 17 several rapid molecular test platforms for respiratory viruses are now available with the potential for deployment as pocts in clinical areas and their use in hospitals is becoming more widespread. 18 however, there is a lack of evidence to inform clinicians and hospitals in the choice between multiplex syndromic panels such as the filmarray rp, which test for a comprehensive range of respiratory viruses, and platforms that test for influenza only, or for influenza and rsv. rapid, accurate influenza detection is clearly a priority for hospitals during periods of intense influenza transmission, to correctly and rapidly administer influenza antivirals and to efficiently utilise infection control facilities. in addition multiplex syndromic panels are more expensive than uniplex tests for influenza and it is not currently clear what additional clinical value is gained by testing for the other virus types in hospitalised patients.in this further analysis we examine in detail the changes in antibiotic use associated with syndromic molecular poct among patients with exacerbation of airways diseases, and determine the importance of changes in antibiotic management occurring due to the detection of non-influenza viruses.the study design, inclusion and exclusion criteria, outcome measures and baseline population characteristics of the respoc study have been previously described in the original report of this trial. 10 in brief, adults presenting to the emergency department or acute medical unit with ari were recruited at presentation and randomised 1:1 to receive poct for respiratory viruses using the filmarray respiratory panel or routine clinical care. the study was approved by the north west -preston regional ethics committee (nw/14/1467). the protocol is publically available. 19 in this further analysis we evaluated patients with exacerbation of asthma or copd who were treated with antibiotics. the duration of antibiotics and proportion treated with a single dose or short course (defined as less than 24 h) were compared between patients testing positive for viruses by poct, those testing negative by poct and control patients. patients testing positive for viruses by poct were then compared according to the virus types detected. kaplan-meier curves were generated for duration of antibiotic use.early discontinuation of antibiotics was defined as receipt of less than 24 h of antibiotics before stopping (including those that only received a single dose). where rhino/enterovirus was codetected with influenza or rsv, they (influenza and rsv) were considered to be dominant and the patient was classified accordingly.statistical analyses were done using prism version 7.0 (graphpad software; la jolla, ca, usa) and stata version 13.1 (statacorp; college station, tx, usa). we compared duration of antibiotic use between groups using median differences and the kruskal-wallis test and differences in proportions using chi squared test or fisher's exact test, as appropriate. kaplan-maier curves for the duration of antibiotics were generated and compared using the log rank test.there were 143 patients with exacerbation of airways disease in the poct group (62 with asthma and 81 with copd) and 118 (83%) of these received antibiotics. there were 140 patients with exacerbation of airways disease in the control group (57 with asthma and 83 with copd) and 111 (79%) of these received antibiotics, difference in antibiotic use between poct and control group of 4% (95%ci -6 to 13%), p = 0.55. in the poct group 62/143 (43%) patients tested positive for respiratory viruses and 49/62 (79%) of these received antibiotics, 81/143 (57%) patients tested negative for viruses and 69/81 (85%) of these received antibiotics, difference in antibiotic use between poct positive and negative patients of 6% (95%ci -7 to 20%), p = 0.38. baseline characteristics of patients testing positive and negative by poct and control patients were well matched including physiological observations and laboratory results. only 48/140 (34%) patients in the control group were tested for respiratory viruses using laboratory pcr and the median turnaround time for results was 31.1 h compared with 1.6 h for those tested with poct, p < 0.0 0 01, table 1 .of those testing positive for viruses by poct and who received antibiotics, 17/49 (35%) had early discontinuation of antibiotics versus 9/69 (13%) in those testing negative and 7/111 (6%) in control patients, p < 0.0 0 01. the median duration of antibiotic was 5.5 days in those testing positive by poct versus 6.3 days in those testing negative by poct and 6.4 days in the control group, p = 0.012. the median duration of iv antibiotics was 1 h (i.e., a single dose) in those testing positive by poct versus 6.5 in those testing negative and 26 h on the control group, p = 0.09. antibiotic use by poct result and in control patients is shown in table 2 . kaplan-meier curve analysis for duration of antibiotics is shown in fig. 1 . although the curves for the three groups (poct positive, poct negative and control) becomes similar after approximately 6 days from starting antibiotics, the curves show that there is a sharp reduction in antibiotic use early on for those testing positive for viruses by poct, p = 0.034.of those tested for viruses by poct 12/143 (8%) were positive for influenza a or b, 26/143, (18%) positive for rhino/enterovirus and 24/143 (17%) positive for other viruses combined (rsv, parainfluenza 1-4, human metapneumovirus and human coronavirus), fig. 2 . there were 4 co-detections; rsv with rhino/enterovirus ×2, influenza a with human coronavirus, and rsv with hmpv and human coronavirus. in patients who received the poc test and fig. 3 . among those positive for viruses receiving antibiotics, the proportion with early discontinuation of antibiotics was not different between the virus types, 3/10 (30%) for influenza, 6/21 (29%) for rhinovirus and 8/18 (44%) for other viruses combined, p = 0.54. antibiotic use by virus type is shown in table 3 . a higher proportion of patients with influenza received iv antibiotics compared to those with rhino/enterovirus or other virus types (53% vs. 23% and 21%, p = 0.044) but the median duration of iv antibiotic or any antibiotic was not different between the virus types, although the small numbers of individual virus types make definitive statement difficult. survival analysis did not show any differences in early antibiotic discontinuation between virus types, p = 0.53, fig. 4 .this study shows that syndromic molecular poct for respiratory viruses in adults presenting to hospital with exacerbation of airways disease, leads to a reduction in antibiotic use due to early discontinuation in those testing positive for viruses. most viruses detected in these patients were non-influenza viruses with rhino/enterovirus being the most commonly detected single virus type, and there was no difference in the rate of antibiotic discontinuation between different virus types. as noted in the respoc study, poct did not lead to a reduction in the proportion treated with antibiotics compared to routine clinical care however this is unsurprising as patients are started on antibiotics very early in their patient journey when admitted to hospital and this was often before the results of poct can be made available. the reason that antibiotics are stopped early in patients with exacerbation of airways disease testing positive for viruses is unknown but is likely to be due to clinicians feeling the detection of a virus adequately explains their acute illness and giving them confidence that a bacterial infection is unlikely and no longer needs to be 'covered' with antibiotics, in combination with other data such as crp level and radiology results.as expected rhino/enterovirus was the most frequently detected virus in this group but the type of virus detected did not seem to influence the decision to stop antibiotics early, although as the numbers in each groups were small we cannot definitively exclude a difference. this suggests that for patients with exacerbation of airways disease respiratory virus testing should be performed at the point-of-care using a comprehensive syndromic multiplex panel rather than a molecular poct for influenza alone, which would not detect the majority of viruses associated with early antibiotic discontinuation. it could be argued that for many of the patients in the study treated with antibiotics that they should not have been treated in any case, on clinical grounds alone, given that antibiotic use in patients with asthma exacerbation is already strongly discouraged by national society guidelines. however, despite these guidelines inappropriate antibiotic use in hospitalised patients with asthma remains very common 8-10 and diagnostic uncertainty regarding the possibility of bacterial infection, especially in the early part of hospital admission before all diagnostic information is available, is likely to be a key driver of this practice. the early provision of accurate results regarding exacerbation aetiology seems to assist in rational antibiotic decision making and is a potential alternative or complementary strategy to biomarkerdirected therapy.there are additional reasons beyond the antibiotic stewardship benefits for choosing to test using a comprehensive syndromic poct for a range of respiratory viruses rather than with a poct for influenza alone. although some molecular poct platforms for influenza have diagnostic accuracy comparable to laboratory pcr, others have demonstrated inferior sensitivity in non-industry sponsored, real world studies 20 potentially reducing their usefulness in the hospital setting where missed diagnoses have serious consequences including nosocomial transmission of influenza. although influenza may represent a priority for hospital infection control teams during peak influenza season, the detection of other respiratory viruses is also important for infection control purposes as other viruses also pose a serious risk of nosocomial transmission and outbreaks, which are especially dangerous to immunocompromised patients in certain high risk areas such as haematology wards and renal units. in some hospitals a two-step testing process is adopted where a patient with a negative influenza poct is then tested using a multiplex laboratory pcr, increasing costs and prolonging the time before result are available compared with a comprehensive syndromic poct. regulatory consideration are also important and rapid diagnostic platforms may not be able to be used at the poct in certain countries due to regulatory requirements, for example the current filmarray system is not fully clia waived in the us. a further significant consideration is obviously the higher cost associated with syndromic panels versus molecular poct for influenza and there is clearly a need for health economic studies to provide evidence for the cost effectives of such an approach considering the incremental benefits of syndromic testing. a lower rate of re-admission was seen in those testing positive for viruses versus those testing negative or control patients. the reason for this is not clear but it may be that non-viral exacerbations have a higher rate of subsequent exacerbations or even that clarity around the aetiology of exacerbation may reduce readmission.although the respoc study is the only published randomised controlled trial of syndromic respiratory virus testing at the pointof-care, other non-randomised, pre and post intervention studies have suggested similar benefits from rapid syndromic respiratory virus testing in terms of reducing unnecessary antibiotic use, in both paediatric and adults patients presenting to hospital. 15, 16 the strengths of this study include the randomised nature of the parent study, the large overall cohort of patients studied and the pragmatic nature with broad generalisability to other uk and international centres. its limitations include being a single-centre trial and the relatively small numbers of patients with asthma and copd with each respiratory virus detected. although it is likely to be generalisable to other centres we cannot rule out that the changes seen are dependent on the processes of care in uk hospitals. it is also currently uncertain as to how molecular poct for respiratory viruses should be best implemented within the nhs and other health systems. potential models include training clinical staff to perform the testing or the development of dedicated point-of-care testing laboratories staffed by technicians and located within, or close to, acute areas. 21 in conclusion syndromic molecular poct for respiratory viruses in adults with exacerbation of airways disease is associated with early discontinuation of unnecessary antibiotics in those testing positive for viruses. most viruses detected were non-influenza viruses and there was no difference in antibiotic discontinuation between different virus types. these results suggest that syndromic molecular poct for respiratory viruses should be favoured over poct for influenza alone in adults with exacerbation of airways disease.university of southampton. the manufactures of the molecular test platform (biofire diagnostics llc, salt lake city, utah, us) had no role in the study conception, design, data analysis or manuscript preparation. the corresponding author had full access to all of the data and the final responsibility to submit for publication. this report is independent research supported by the national institute for health research (nihr post doctoral fellowship, dr tristan clark, pdf 2016-09-061 ). the views expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the nhs, the national institute for health research or the department of health.the world health organization (who) characterized the covid-19 pandemic on 11th march 2020 [1] . the symptoms of covid-19 induced by the novel pathogen sars-cov-2, are difficult to differentiate from other common infections in a large proportion of those infected. it is estimated that about 40% of cases will experience mild disease (cough, fever), 40% experience moderate disease (bilateral pneumonia), 15% develop severe disease and 5% will have critical disease [2] . a recommendation by the who has been to conduct early screening of patients to identify, isolate and track those infected and prevent transmission [2] .reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) based methodologies have been the gold standard in confirming that the individual presenting with covid-19 has active viral shedding of sars-cov-2 [3, 4] . however, the ability to conduct wide scale testing of patients has been limited by a number of factors including suitable resources for rt-pcr based testing for the presence of sars-cov-2. in addition, the standard test used has an 80% accuracy (compared to chest ct scan results) [5] , which may depend on the specific level of viral shedding by any individual at the time of sample test. moreover, the time from sample collection to informing the patient is estimated to take many hours to several days according to the systems in place. these complex issues hand in hand with the wide-ranging symptoms presenting in patients and the discrepant results between chest ct, symptoms and rt-pcr results [5] , indicates that testing for the direct presence of virus requires significant improvement.while highly specific tests for sars-cov-2 are under development using crispr [6] and biosensors [7, 8] , these innovative applications will require highly specialised equipment and resources. this will negatively affect less affluent areas that will be unable to access these technologies in the short time frame in order to contain the pandemic. therefore, there is a global challenge to enable screening without the need for sophisticated equipment and resources.machine learning (ml) and artificial intelligence (ai) approaches are rapidly being developed to aid clinical procedures in the current pandemic, such as predicting the specificity of new therapies [9] and diagnosing covid 19 patients from radiographic patterns on ct scans [10] .in the current study we focused on predicting whether a person is sars-cov-2 positive or negative in the early stage of the disease. the approach taken is based on the reported limitation to conduct rt-pcr tests and the need to quickly differentiate between individuals presenting with similar symptoms as seen between covid 19 and other common infections. the dataset used here comes from a public challenge by mindstream-ai [11] to use ai to predict the test result for sars-cov-2 (positive/negative) solely from full blood counts.the hospital israelita albert einstein is located in the state of sao paulo, brazil, with a population of 12 million people had 477 confirmed cases of covid 19 and 30 associated deaths by the 23rd march 2020. the hospital publicly released full blood counts [12] from 598 anonymised patients, along with the rt-pcr result for sars-cov-2 and their age quantile (symptoms or patient history were not released). here we present evidence that patients having sars-cov-2 can be identified by random forest, ml and artificial neural networks (ann) to patients not admitted to hospital (community) and to patients in a regular ward setting through recognition of the altered immune cell profile. these will allow for a rapid early screening purely based on the blood profile.all data processed in this study is published on a public forum [12] , as part of a challenge to accelerate approaches to combat the spread of sars-cov-2. this dataset contains anonymized data from patients seen at the hospital israelita albert einstein, at são paulo, brazil, and who had samples collected to perform the sars-cov-2 rt-pcr and additional laboratory tests during a visit to the hospital. all data were anonymized following the best international practices and recommendations [11] . all clinical data were standardized to have a mean of zero and a unit standard deviation.data provided included age (percentile group), outcome from rt-pcr sars-cov-2 test and standard full blood count: hematocrit, haemoglobin, platelets, mean platelet volume (mpv), red blood cells (rbc), lymphocytes, mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration (mchc), leukocytes, basophils, neutrophils, mean corpuscular haemoglobin (mch), eosinophils, mean corpuscular volume (mcv), monocytes and red blood cell distribution width (rbcdw) [13] .the full dataset released included 5,644 individual patients tested between the 28th of march 2020 and 3rd of april 2020, of which 598 full blood count results were used for statistical analysis. the remaining 5046 results were not used due to lack of full blood count data.without in-depth data on the timeline of the tests performed in the duration of the infection, analysis was performed on the basis of severity according to the location of the patient within the hospital system. the blood counts are from four classifications of patients: community (patients not admitted to hospital), regular ward, semi intensive unit and intensive care unit (icu) ( table 1 ).patients that are in semi-intensive unit and icu were excluded from our modelling, so as to ensure prediction is based on early indicators. also neutrophils are not included, since this is not reported for all 598 patients. furthermore, we exclude age from our modelling.there is a large imbalance of positive (8%) vs negative (92%) sars-cov-2 patients in the community. as a result it is more informative to test separately for the specificity (% of negative patients correctly identified as negative) and the sensitivity (% of positive patients correctly identified as positive) rather than solely the total accuracy.of for our 2-class (sars-cov-2 positive vs negative) classification we employ several ml and ann network models.for the ml models we apply random forest [14] [15] [16] and lassoelastic-net regularized generalized linear (glmnet) models for classification. random forest as a classifier is based on several decision trees. to classify a new object, each decision tree provides a classification for input data and the random forest uses the mode of those classification to decide on the class.in this paper, glmnet, on the other hand, fits a traditional logistic model. but instead of using all the predictors, it uses a regularized path to select the most important variables and only use them in the logistic regression. for both these methods, we present results for 10-fold cross- validation and their corresponding variable importance plots [17] . furthermore, an ann [13] model is defined with 14 input parameters and three hidden layers and trained for 100 epochs. the classification performance of the ann model is evaluated with stratified 10-fold cross validation.the performance of each model is expressed in terms of auc, sensitivity, specificity and accuracy. they are defined as follows: sensitivity is the fraction of the sars-cov-2 positive patients correctly identified; specificity is the fraction of sars-cov-2 negative patients correctly identified as such; accuracy is the total number of patients correctly identified. by lowering the threshold of detecting sars-cov-2 positive patients, the sensitivity can increase at the expense of specificity. hence we also look at the commonly employed auc. this is the area under the receiver-operating characteristics curve; the curve when plotting sensitivity vs (1-specificity) upon changing the threshold. the auc, also known as the wilcoxon-mann-whitney statistic, is the probability that a sars-cov-2 positive patient is higher ranked than a sars-cov-2 negative patient. a higher auc generally implies a better performing model. we note that the drawback of using accuracy alone is that, in an unbalanced set of mainly sars-cov-2 negative patients (as is the case in the community dataset), the accuracy can be high using zero sensitivity.significant differences (p < 0.05) between 9 of the 15 blood count parameters were shown between patients in a regular ward setting who tested positive or negative to sars-cov-2 presence (fig. 1) . in order of importance (lower p) for the significant increased values for sars-cov-2 positive patients: mpv > rbc > lymphocytes > hematocrit > hemoglobin. the decreased values are eosinophils > leukocytes > platelets. for community-patients we found statistically significant differences (p < 0.05) in 6 blood count parameters; the increased values are monocytes > mpv, while leukocytes > platelets > neutrophils > eosinophils show a significant decrease for sars-cov-2 positive patients.among the 598 patients with full blood count profiles, 57 were admitted in the regular ward (26 tested rt-pcr positive to sars-cov-2, and 31 negative). furthermore, a total of 470 patients were not admitted to the hospital (39 tested positive for sars-cov-2 and 431 negative). we will report model predictions for both sets of patients.the defined ann model for the regular ward patients produces an average classification accuracy of 90% over stratified 10-fold crossvalidation. the receiver operating characteristic (roc) curves for all 10 folds and the values of area under the curve (auc) are presented in fig. 2a , along with the average auc (0.95 ± 0.08). the normalized confusion matrix corresponding to fold 2 (the worst auc value), is presented in fig. 2b .the defined ann model for the community ward produces an average classification accuracy of 89% over stratified 10-fold crossvalidation. the roc curves for all 10-folds produce an average auc of 0.77 ± 0.08, while the sensitivity and specificity indices are estimated as 0.28 and 0.95, respectively. since the imbalance between two classes in the dataset (positive/negative = 0.09) degrades the performance of the defined ann model, the synthetic minority oversampling technique (smote) [18] is adapted for balancing the two classes in the training dataset. the stratified 10-fold cross-validation technique is again incorporated and it is repeated for 10 times. the average accuracy, auc, sensitivity, and specificity are estimated as 0.87, 0.80, 0.43, and 0.91, respectively. the roc curves and the values of auc for one repetition of the stratified 10-fold cross-validation are presented in fig. 3a , along with the average auc (0.80 ± 0.05). the normalized confusion matrix, corresponding to fold 8, is presented in fig. 3b .the results from the implementation of random forest and glmnet on the 57 patients in the regular ward gives an average auc of 94% over 10 fold classification, while for the patients in the community the auc is 84-86%. the full array of sensitivity, specificity and accuracy values for optimal choices of cutoff for these two classifiers are given table 2 and table 3 . as compared to the ann, both random forest and glmnet provide more insight into the most important variables (fig. 4(a) and (b) ) and a clear indication of how the decision has been obtained. additionally, glmnet does a variable selection, by providing a much smaller stable set of variables among 14 highly correlated predictors.analysis of the top four variables according to glmnet that corresponded to patients in community (supplementary fig. 1 ) and regular ward ( supplementary fig. 2 ) indicated a clear recognisable pattern. in particular to note in patients in the regular ward is in the decreased pool of leukocytes overall, increase in red blood cells, and in particular a significant decrease in eosinophils. community patients having sars-cov-2 have distinctively high levels of monocytes and low levels of leukocytes.in order to enable a rapid prediction model for clinics [12] where clinicians may want to choose only two (fig. 5a ) three (fig. 5b) or four parameters (fig. 5c) , the monocytes/leukocytes/eosinophils/platelets trends in supplementary figs. 1 and 2 and fig. 1 were analysed by adding monocytes and subtracting leukocytes, eosinophils and platelets. this difference indicates little overlap between patients who test positive and negative for sars-cov-2, however it must be noted that this is a simple additive formula based on normalised data.for example a simple logistic regression (lr) with derived variable y = monocytes -leukocytes -eosinophils -platelets, shows this blood characteristic can predict the sars-cov-2 test outcome with an average auc = 85% over 10 fold cross-validation among the patients in the community, and auc = 81% for patients in regular ward.the model predictions from ann, random forest, glmnet and the formula: monocytes -leukocytes -eosinophils (and m-l-e-p) are summarized in table 2 and table 3 .of the patients testing for sars-cov-2 and full blood count tests, 366 patients were tested for other pathogens, of which 188 patients were diagnosed with other infections, to note rhinovirus and influenza b (table 4) the similar presentation of many of these infections to covid19 may however be differentiated by the clear difference in immune response to sars-cov-2 using the ann model of full blood count analysis.of the 598 patients, only one tested positive for sars-cov-2 and for at least one other pathogen; that patient also tested positive for influenza b and for coronavirus nl63 and was in icu.in addition to the changing profile of immune cells, a change in red blood cells and platelets were noted. in order to describe the profile of cells, the mean changes were plotted from patients in regular ward (supplementary fig. 3 ).we developed multiple independent models (statistical, random forest and shallow learning) that can predict sars-cov-2 with an auc of up to 86% for community and 95% for regular ward patients, using only data collected from their normalized full blood counts. this provides an initial screen of sars-cov-2 positive from negative using biomarkers at an early stage in the disease presentation. this screen has been conducted on a set of data based on severity judged by the location of the patient in hospital (admitted to the regular ward compared to not admitted to hospital; icu patients were excluded). hence the models are able to distinguish from altered blood profiles in patients who were later diagnosed with other pathogens. it is well recognised that the symptoms of covid-19 are accompanied by a significant change in immune response [19] , with a decreased population of leukocytes, lymphocytes [20, 21] and eosinophils [19] [20] [21] found throughout all stages of infection. indeed it was suggested in one case report from wuhan that eosinopenia together with lymphopenia may be a potential indicator for diagnosis [22] . other early reports used similar predictive patterns found in full blood count parameters, suggesting that elevated neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio could be used as part of the diagnosis [23] . in that study they investigated the change in blood parameters in a total of 93 patients (severe and non severe collected together), using commonly used ratios used in the diagnosis of viral respiratory diseases such as: neutrophil-tolymphocyte ratio, derived nlr ratio (d-nlr, neutrophil count divided by the result of wbc count minus neutrophil count), platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio and lymphocyte-to-monocyte ratio. however, these parameters commonly alter in respect to other viral infections, and we initiated research to identify new ratios to distinguish sars-cov-2 from other pathogens.here we show that a new simple calculation based on leukocytes, monocytes, eosinophils and platelets (normalized monocytes -leukocytes -eosinophils -platelets) can be used to predict with 85% auc the presence of sars-cov-2 for early-stage community patients. further validation will be required to determine whether our model can distinguish fully from other pathogens, although initial small numbers indicate a trend that is positive.leukocytes are a family of white blood cells that includes neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils and basophils. specific pathogens induce specific responses, such as an increase in circulating neutrophils and monocytes typically increase during sepsis as part of the immune defence mechanism, and several studies have indicated that ratios between different blood cells can be used to predict outcome. the ratio of monocyte: neutrophil can be used to determine sepsis severity [24] , and platelet: monocyte aggregation has been reported to be increased in patients with influenza a (h1n1) [25] . indeed, the clinical interest in using the relationship between different parameters of the full blood counts is of great value and interest due to its simplicity and readily measurable parameters. while not yet in common clinical use, it has been shown that neutrophil: lymphocyte and mean platelet volume: platelet count could predict the outcome for critically ill patients with peritonitis and pancreatitis (bacteremia) [26] . our results presented here clearly demonstrates that an early prediction of those infected with sars-cov-2 may be made by the relationship between monocytes, eosinophils and leukocytes to differentiate them from other pathogen induced infections.the data analysed in this report focussed on the clear early stages in order to differentiate between patients presenting with common symptoms prior to the need to be in icu. the changes in parameters of the full blood counts is easily distinguishable from other pathogen-induced infections, with an apparent decrease in leukocyte population consisting of a large proportion of monocytes. this observation is in keeping with other tools used to diagnose the severity of covid-19 by the measurement of il6 which significantly increases throughout the progression of disease. the cytokine il6 is predominantly synthesised by monocytes and macrophage (which derive from monocytes), and is partly responsible for the drive of the immune response to deleterious cytokine storm. in order to best understand the immune response to sars-cov-2 it is useful to compare it to other similar coronaviruses. there are two main example: closest known example is that sars virus directly infects human monocytes, which then produces the cytokines that attract neutrophils, macrophage and activated t lymphocytes [27] ; mers was shown to increase monocytes and their il6 production [28] . in parallel, this study indicates that the pathogenesis to sars-cov-2 may be linked to monocytes and the production of il6.here in our study, the analysis of monocyte involvement will be crucial in the prediction of sars-cov-2 infection. additionally, use of ai and ml to recognise the altered pattern of key blood parameters will be a useful tool in future with the emergence of any future coronavirus that is equally pathogenic and contagious. the decrease in platelets in patients testing positive for sars-cov-2 in the regular ward is opposite to that observed in separate reports of patients with influenza a [29] . a subset of the patients included in this analysis were tested for other pathogens, and a proportion of those negative for sars-cov-2 were positive for other pathogens including coronaviruses (nl63, hku1 and 229e) and few had influenza a or b. this suggests that platelet count is a good indicator in this predictive model, and may be a good way to differentiate sars-cov-2 infection from influenza a.the suggests a potential decreased platelet presence in patients, which is of concern due to its link to thrombocytopenia and increased internal bleeding. this supports other reports of an increase in thrombocytopenia being associated with higher mortality in covid-19 patients [21] . the condition of thrombocytopenia may be the reason for the recently noted rashes observed in patients, especially young children [30] . however there have been reports that clotting is increased in covid-19 patients, and the data we show is normalised and may be misleading. this normalised data also indicates an increase in platelet size (mpv), which suggests that there is rapid platelet production by the bone marrow. indeed, it is recommended that covid-19 patients are administered antiplatelet therapy to protect against thrombosis [31] . overall this highlights the difficulty of interpreting mean normalised data.this report is the first to use primary patient data of full blood counts to test and train an ann to predict from patients in a regular ward as well as those in the community who will test positive for sars-cov-2. this preliminary model will be further trained and adapted with the aim to address the shortfall in direct sars-cov-2 testing methods in hospitals. this will enable a prediction that allows health care providers to conduct rapid cheap screening to separate patients into those who are most likely to have sars-cov-2 and those who do not. early screening allows segregation of patients and early treatment intervention.this research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. since december 2019 the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 has been identified as the cause of the pandemic covid 19. early symptoms overlap with other common conditions such as common cold and influenza, making early screening and diagnosis are crucial goals for health practitioners. the aim of the study was to use machine learning, an artificial neural network (ann) and a simple statistical test to identify sars-cov-2 positive patients from full blood counts without knowledge of symptoms or history of the individuals. the dataset included in the analysis and training contains anonymized full blood count results from patients seen at the hospital israelita albert einstein, at são paulo, brazil, and who had samples collected to perform the sars-cov-2 rt-pcr test during a visit to the hospital. patient data was anonymised by the hospital, clinical data was standardized to have a mean of zero and a unit standard deviation. this data was made public with the aim to allow researchers to develop ways to enable the hospital to rapidly predict and potentially identify sars-cov-2 positive patients.we find that with full blood counts random forest, shallow learning and a flexible ann model predict sars-cov-2 patients with high accuracy between populations on regular wards (auc = 93-94%) and those not admitted to hospital or in the community (auc = 80-86%). here auc is the area under the receiver operating characteristics curve and a measure for model performance. moreover, a simple linear combination of 4 blood counts can be used to have an auc of 85% for patients within the community. the normalised data of different blood parameters from sars-cov-2 positive patients exhibit a decrease in platelets, leukocytes, eosinophils, basophils and lymphocytes, and an increase in monocytes.sars-cov-2 positive patients exhibit a characteristic immune response profile pattern and changes in different parameters measured in the full blood count that are detected from simple and rapid blood tests. while symptoms at an early stage of infection are known to overlap with other common conditions, parameters of the full blood count can be analysed to distinguish the viral type at an earlier stage than current rt-pcr tests for sars-cov-2 allow at present. this new methodology has potential to greatly improve initial screening for patients where pcr based diagnostic tools are limited.sars-cov-2; machine learning; artificial neural network (ann), screening; full blood count; leukocytes; monocytesthe world health organization (who) characterized the covid-19 pandemic on 11 th march 2020 1 . the symptoms of covid-19 induced by the novel pathogen sars-cov-2, are difficult to differentiate from other common infections in a large proportion of those infected. it is estimated that about 40% of cases will experience mild disease (cough, fever), 40% experience moderate disease (bilateral pneumonia), 15% develop severe disease and 5% will have critical disease 2 . a recommendation by the who has been to conduct early screening of patients to identify, isolate and track those infected and prevent transmission 2 .reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) based methodologies have been the gold standard in confirming that the individual presenting with covid-19 has active viral shedding of sars-cov-2 [3] [4] . however, the ability to conduct wide scale testing of patients has been limited by a number of factors including suitable resources for rt-pcr based testing for the presence of sars-cov-2. in addition, the standard test used has an 80% accuracy (compared to chest ct scan results) 5 , which may depend on the specific level of viral shedding by any individual at the time of sample test. moreover, the time from sample collection to informing the patient is estimated to take many hours to several days according to the systems in place. these complex issues hand in hand with the wideranging symptoms presenting in patients and the discrepant results between chest ct, symptoms and rt-pcr results 5 , indicates that testing for the direct presence of virus requires significant improvement.while highly specific tests for sars-cov-2 are under development using crispr 6 and biosensors 7-8 , these innovative applications will require highly specialised equipment and resources. this will negatively affect less affluent areas that will be unable to access these technologies in the short time frame in order to contain the pandemic. therefore, there is a global challenge to enable screening without the need for sophisticated equipment and resources.machine learning and artificial intelligence approaches are rapidly being developed to aid clinical procedures in the current pandemic, such as predicting the specificity of new therapies 9 and diagnosing covid 19 patients from radiographic patterns on ct scans 10 .in the current study we focused on predicting whether a person is sars-cov-2 positive or negative in the early stage of the disease. the approach taken is based on the reported limitation to conduct rt-pcr tests and the need to quickly differentiate between individuals presenting with similar symptoms as seen between covid 19 and other common infections. the dataset used here comes from a public challenge by mindstream-ai 11 to use artificial intelligence to predict the test result for sars-cov-2 (positive/negative) solely from complete blood tests.the hospital israelita albert einstein is located in the state of sao paulo, brazil, with a population of 12 million people had 477 confirmed cases of covid 19 and 30 associated deaths by the 23rd march 2020. the hospital publicly released full blood counts 12 from 598 anonymised patients, along with the rt-pcr result for sars-cov-2 and their age quantile (symptoms or patient history were not released). here we present evidence that patients having sars-cov-2 can be identified by random forest machine learning and artificial neural networks (ann) to patients not admitted to hospital (community) and to patients in a regular ward setting through recognition of the altered immune cell profile. these will allow for a rapid early screening purely based on the blood profile.all data processed in this study is published on a public forum 12 , as part of a challenge to accelerate approaches to combat the spread of sars-cov-2. this dataset contains anonymized data from patients seen at the hospital israelita albert einstein, at são paulo, brazil, and who had samples collected to perform the sars-cov-2 rt-pcr and additional laboratory tests during a visit to the hospital. all data were anonymized following the best international practices and recommendations 11 . all clinical data were standardized to have a mean of zero and a unit standard deviation.data provided included age (percentile group), outcome from rt-pcr sars-cov-2 test and standard full blood count: hematocrit, haemoglobin, platelets, mean platelet volume (mpv), red blood cells (rbc), lymphocytes, mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration (mchc), leukocytes, basophils, neutrophils, mean corpuscular haemoglobin (mch), eosinophils, mean corpuscular volume (mcv), monocytes and red blood cell distribution width (rbcdw) 13 .the full dataset released included 5644 individual patients tested between the 28th of march 2020 and 3rd of april 2020, of which 598 full blood count results were used for statistical analysis. the remaining 5046 results were not used due to lack of full blood count data.without in-depth data on the timeline of the tests performed in the duration of the infection, analysis was performed on the basis of severity according to the location of the patient within the hospital system. the blood counts are from four classifications of patients: community (patients not admitted to hospital), regular ward, semi intensive care and intensive care unit (icu) ( table 1) . 12 17 12 188patients that are in semi-intensive and intensive care units are excluded from our modelling, so as to ensure prediction is based on early indicators. also neutrophils are not included, since this is not reported for all 598 patients. furthermore, we exclude age from our modelling.there is a large imbalance of positive (8%) vs negative (92%) sars-cov-2 patients in the community . as a result it is more informative to test separately for the specificity (%-ge of negative patients correctly identified as negative) and the sensitivity (%-ge of positive patients correctly identified as positive) rather than solely the total accuracy.of the 598 complete counts analysed, 367 patients had also been tested for other pathogens: for our 2-class (sars-cov-2 positive vs negative) classification we employ several machine learning and artificial network models.for the machine learning models we apply random forest 14-16 and lasso-elastic-net regularized generalized linear (glmnet) models for classification. random forest as a classifier is based on several decision trees. to classify a new object, each decision tree provides a classification for input data and the random forest uses the mode of those classification to decide on the class.in this paper, glmnet, on the other hand, fits a traditional logistic model. but instead of using all the predictors, it uses a regularized path to select the most important variables and only use them in the logistic regression. for both these methods, we present results for 10-fold cross-validation and their corresponding variable importance plots 17 .furthermore, an artificial neural network (ann) 13 model is defined with 14 input parameters and three hidden layers and trained for 100 epochs. the classification performance of the ann model is evaluated with stratified 10-fold cross validation.the performance of each model is expressed in terms of auc, sensitivity, specificity and accuracy. they are defined as follows: sensitivity is the fraction of the sars-cov-2 positive patients correctly identified; specificity is the fraction of sars-cov-2 negative patients correctly identified as such; accuracy is the total number of patients correctly identified. by lowering the threshold of detecting sars-cov-2 positive patients, the sensitivity can increase at the expense of specificity. hence we also look at the commonly employed auc. this is the area under the receiver-operating characteristics curve; the curve when plotting sensitivity vs (1-specificity) upon changing the threshold. the auc, also known as the wilcoxon-mann-whitney statistic, is the probability that a sars-cov-2 positive patient is higher ranked than a sars-cov-2 negative patient. a higher auc generally implies a better performing model. we note that the drawback of using accuracy alone is that, in an unbalanced set of mainly sars-cov-2 negative patients (as is the case in the community dataset), the accuracy can be high using zero sensitivity.significant differences (p<0.05) between 9 of the 15 blood count parameters were shown between patients in a regular ward setting who tested positive or negative to sars-cov-2 presence (figure 1) .in order of importance (lower p) for the significant increased values for sars-cov-2 positive patients: mpv > rbc > lymphocytes > hematocrit > hemoglobin. the decreased values are eosinophils > leukocytes > platelets. for community-patients we found statistically significant differences (p<0.05) in 6 blood count parameters; the increased values are monocytes > mpv, while leukocytes > platelets > neutrophils > eosinophils show a significant decrease for sars-cov-2 positive patients. among the 598 patients with complete blood profiles, 57 were admitted in the regular ward (26 tested rt-pcr positive to sars-cov-2, and 31 negative). furthermore, a total of 470 patients were not admitted to the hospital (39 tested positive for sars-cov-2 and 431 negative). we will report model predictions for both sets of patients.the defined ann model for the regular ward patients produces an average classification accuracy of 90% over stratified 10-fold cross-validation. the receiver operating characteristic (roc) curves for all 10 folds and the values of area under the curve (auc) are presented in figure 2a , along with the average auc (0.93±0.10). the normalized confusion matrix, corresponding to fold 0, is presented in figure 2b . the results from the implementation of random forest and glmnet on the 57 patients in the regular ward gives an average auc of 94% over 10 fold classification, while for the patients in the community the auc is 84-86% . the full array of sensitivity, specificity and accuracy values for optimal choices of cutoff for these two classifiers are given table 2 and table 3 . as compared to the ann, both random forest and glmnet provide more insight into the most important variables (figure 4(a) and (b) ) and a clear indication of how the decision has been obtained. additionally, glmnet does a variable selection, by providing a much smaller stable set of variables among 14 highly correlated predictors.analysis of the top four variables according to glmnet that corresponded to patients in community (supplementary figure 1) and regular ward (supplementary figure 2) indicated a clear recognisable pattern. in particular to note in patients in the regular ward is in the decreased pool of leukocytes overall, increase in red blood cells, and in particular a significant decrease in eosinophils. community patients having sars-cov-2 have distinctively high levels of monocytes and low levels of leukocytes.in order to enable a rapid prediction model for clinics 12 where clinicians may want to choose only two (figure 5a ) three (figure 5b ) or four parameters (figure 5c) , the monocytes/leukocytes/eosinophils/platelets trends in supplementary figure 1 and 2 and figure 1 were analysed by adding monocytes and subtracting leukocytes, eosinophils and platelets. this difference indicates little overlap between patients who test positive and negative for sars-cov-2, however it must be noted that this is a simple additive formula based on normalised data.for example a simple logistic regression (lr) with derived variable y=monocytes -leukocyteseosinophils -platelets, shows this blood characteristic can predict the covid test outcome with an average auc = 85% over 10 fold cross-validation among the patients in the community, and auc = 81% for patients in regular ward.the model predictions from ann, random forest, glmnet and the formula: monocytes -leukocyteseosinophils (and m-l-e-p) are summarized in table 2 and table 3 . of the 598 patients, only one tested positive for sars-cov-2 and for at least one other pathogen; that patient also tested positive for influenza b and for coronavirus nl63 and was in icu.in addition to the changing profile of immune cells, a change in red blood cells and platelets were noted. in order to describe the profile of cells, the mean changes were plotted from patients in regular ward (supplementary figure 3) . we developed multiple independent models (statistical, random forest and shallow learning) that can predict sars-cov-2 with an auc of up to 86% for community and 94% for regular ward patients, using only data collected from their normalized full blood counts. this provides an initial screen of sars-cov-2 positive from negative using biomarkers at an early stage in the disease presentation. this screen has been conducted on a set of data based on severity judged by the location of the patient in hospital (admitted to the regular ward compared to not admitted to hospital; icu patients were excluded). hence the models are able to distinguish from altered blood profiles in patients who were later diagnosed with other pathogens.it is well recognised that the symptoms of covid 19 are accompanied by a significant change in immune response 19 , with a decreased population of leukocytes, lymphocytes 20-21 and eosinophils [19] [20] [21] found throughout all stages of infection. indeed it was suggested in one case report from wuhan that eosinopenia together with lymphopenia may be a potential indicator for diagnosis 22 . other early reports used similar predictive patterns found in full blood count parameters, suggesting that elevated neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio could be used as part of the diagnosis 23 . in that study they investigated the change in blood parameters in a total of 93 patients (severe and non severe collected together), using commonly used ratios used in the diagnosis of viral respiratory diseases such as: neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio, derived nlr ratio (d-nlr, neutrophil count divided by the result of wbc count minus neutrophil count), platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio and lymphocyte-tomonocyte ratio. however, these parameters commonly alter in respect to other viral infections, and we initiated research to identify new ratios to distinguish sars-cov-2 from other pathogens.here we show that a new simple calculation based on leukocytes, monocytes, eosinophils and platelets (normalized monocytes -leukocytes -eosinophils -platelets) can be used to predict with 85% auc the presence of sars-cov-2 for early-stage community patients. further validation will be required to determine whether our model can distinguish fully from other pathogens, although initial small numbers indicate a trend that is positive.leukocytes are a family of white blood cells that includes neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils and basophils. specific pathogens induce specific responses, such as an increase in circulating neutrophils and monocytes typically increase during sepsis as part of the immune defence mechanism, and several studies have indicated that ratios between different blood cells can be used to predict outcome. the ratio of monocyte : neutrophil can be used to determine sepsis severity 24 , and platelet : monocyte aggregation has been reported to be increased in patients with influenza a (h1n1) 25 . indeed, the clinical interest in using the relationship between different parameters of the full blood count is of great value and interest due to its simplicity and readily measurable parameters.while not yet in common clinical use, it has been shown that neutrophil : lymphocyte and mean platelet volume : platelet count could predict the outcome for critically ill patients with peritonitis and pancreatitis (bacteremia) 26 . our results presented here clearly demonstrates that an early prediction of those infected with sars-cov-2 may be made by the relationship between monocytes, eosinophils and leukocytes to differentiate them from other pathogen induced infections.the data analysed in this report focussed on the clear early stages in order to differentiate between patients presenting with common symptoms prior to the need to be in icu. the changes in parameters of the full blood count is easily distinguishable from other pathogen-induced infections, with an apparent decrease in leukocyte population consisting of a large proportion of monocytes. this observation is in keeping with other tools used to diagnose the severity of covid 19 by the measurement of il6 which significantly increases throughout the progression of disease. the cytokine il6 is predominantly synthesised by monocytes and macrophage (which derive from monocytes), and is partly responsible for the drive of the immune response to deleterious cytokine storm.in order to best understand the immune response to sars-cov-2 it is useful to compare it to other similar coronaviruses. there are two main example: closest known example is that of sars- in contrast, the highly infectious and highly pathogenic coronaviruses sars and mers were noted to have similar effects on the immune response, and more recently overlaps with the pathogenesis now witnessed with sars-cov-2 infections. the sars virus directly infects human monocytes, which then produces the cytokines that attract neutrophils, macrophage and activated t lymphocytes 27 ; mers was shown to increase monocytes and their il6 production 28 .in parallel, this study indicates that the pathogenesis to sars-cov-2 may be linked to monocytes and the production of il6. here in our study, the analysis of monocyte involvement will be crucial in the prediction of sars-cov-2 infection. additionally, use of ai and ml to recognise the altered pattern of key blood parameters will be a useful tool in future with the emergence of any future coronavirus that is equally pathogenic and contagious.the decrease in platelets in patients testing positive for sars-cov-2 in the regular ward is opposite to that observed in separate reports of patients with influenza a 29 . a subset of the patients included in this analysis were tested for other pathogens, and a proportion of those negative for sars-cov-2 were positive for other pathogens including coronaviruses (nl63, hku1 and 229e) and few had influenza a or b. this suggests that platelet count is a good indicator in this predictive model, and may be a good way to differentiate sars-cov-2 infection from influenza a.the suggests a potential decreased platelet presence in patients, which is of concern due to its link to thrombocytopenia and increased internal bleeding. this supports other reports of an increase in thrombocytopenia being associated with higher mortality in covid 19 patients 21 . the condition of thrombocytopenia may be the reason for the recently noted rashes observed in patients, especially young children 30 . however there have been reports that clotting is increased in covid 19 patients, and the data we show is normalised and may be misleading. this normalised data also indicates an increase in platelet size (mpv), which suggests that there is rapid platelet production by the bone marrow. indeed, it is recommended that covid 19 patients are administered antiplatelet therapy to protect against thrombosis 31 . overall this highlights the difficulty of interpreting mean normalised data.this report is the first to use primary patient data of full blood counts to test and train an ann to predict from patients in a regular ward as well as those in the community who will test positive for sars-cov2. this preliminary model will be further trained and adapted with the aim to address the shortfall in direct sars-cov-2 testing methods in hospitals. this will enable a prediction that allows health care providers to conduct rapid cheap screening to separate patients into those who are most likely to have sars-cov-2 and those who do not. early screening allows segregation of patients and early treatment intervention.aim of the study was to use machine learning, an artificial neural network (ann) and a simple statistical test to identify sars-cov-2 positive patients from full blood counts without knowledge of symptoms or history of the individuals. the dataset included in the analysis and training contains anonymized full blood count results from patients seen at the hospital israelita albert einstein, at são paulo, brazil, and who had samples collected to perform the sars-cov-2 rt-pcr test during a visit to the hospital. patient data was anonymised by the hospital, clinical data was standardized to have a mean of zero and a unit standard deviation. this data was made public with the aim to allow researchers to develop ways to enable the hospital to rapidly predict and potentially identify sars-cov-2 positive patients.we find that with full blood counts random forest, shallow learning and a flexible ann model predict sars-cov-2 patients with high accuracy between populations on regular wards (auc = 93-94%) and those not admitted to hospital or in the community (auc = 80-86%). here auc is the area under the receiver operating characteristics curve and a measure for model performance. moreover, a simple linear combination of 4 blood counts can be used to have an auc of 85% for patients within the community. the normalised data of different blood parameters from sars-cov-2 positive patients exhibit a decrease in platelets, leukocytes, eosinophils, basophils and lymphocytes, and an increase in monocytes.sars-cov-2 positive patients exhibit a characteristic immune response profile pattern and changes in different parameters measured in the full blood count that are detected from simple and rapid blood tests. while symptoms at an early stage of infection are known to overlap with other common conditions, parameters of the full blood count can be analysed to distinguish the viral type at an earlier stage than current rt-pcr tests for sars-cov-2 allow at present. this new methodology has potential to greatly improve initial screening for patients where pcr based diagnostic tools are limited.4. early sars-cov-2 prediction from monocytes-leukocytes-eosinophils variable: auc 84% 5. prediction in regular ward using machine learning from complete blood count: auc 94%6. predominance of monocytes in sars-cov-2 positive patients similar to sars and mersduring the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) outbreak, governments have strived to maximize their daily testing capacity in order to facilitate the diagnosis and isolation of cases (1) . although important, this metric alone is not sufficient to gauge the ongoing effectiveness of a nation's response. a healthcare system may have access to many tests, but unless these are used and distributed as part of a coherent testing strategy, their value is limited. here we make the case that high-throughput testing should be combined with more nuanced, context specific, testing approaches using validated rapid point of care diagnostics.the sars-cov-2-associated respiratory disease (covid-19) is highly variable and symptoms range from a mild coryza through to severe life threatening respiratory compromise (2) . furthermore, an unascertained proportion of individuals develop an asymptomatic viraemia (2, 3) . this disease spectrum can lead to diagnostic and management challenges, including the reliable distinction of patients with covid-19 from those without. this is a concern when considering how best to cohort patients within a healthcare system. a lack of accurate cohorting, with subsequent nosocomial spread, could lead to a persistent reservoir of infectivity within hospitals.detection of sars-cov-2, typically via real-time polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), is gold standard for the diagnosis of covid-19. however, using standard testing approaches, the time from swab to clinically actionable result could be well over 24 hours, especially in hospitals without their own laboratory facilities (4) . therefore it is unlikely that any molecular result would be available whilst the patient is in the emergency department (ed), a setting where this information could be of greatest value. the global biotechnology industry has been quick to recognise this gap in the testing paradigm and an increasing number of rapid point-of-care tests (pocts) for sars-cov-2 are entering the market.these pocts will most likely be a relatively limited resource, therefore strategies should be developed to guide their implementation.currently, without a molecular result in the ed, clinicians must assess whether a patient might have covid-19 based on their clinical presentation. early case series suggest that the most frequently observed symptoms are fever (98%) and cough (76%), however dyspnoea (55%), myalgia (44%) and headache (8%) are also frequently reported (5) . additionally, radiographic imaging appears to be of value in reaching a diagnosis; in a study assessing over 1000 cases, ct scanning had a diagnostic sensitivity of 97% with a positive predictive value of 65% (6) . the role of the clinician is to consider the available variables and, alongside generating a differential diagnosis, determine the probability that a given patient has covid-19. it is this probabilistic assessment that could be used to guide the deployment of pocts.if a previously well patient presets with fever, cough and has bilateral infiltrates on ct chest, there is a high index of suspicion for covid-19. in this scenario rapid molecular confirmation, negative or positive, adds little. there is a high pre-test probability and therefore a strong rationale for cohorting this patient alongside patients with covid-19. furthermore, even if a rapid molecular result were available and returned negative, the a priori odds are such that the post-test probability would still indicate a likely covid diagnosis (figure 1 ). given a pre-test probability of 0.95, assuming a relatively conservative assay sensitivity of 70% and a specificity of 98%, positive and negative results would alter the post-test probabilities to 0.99 and 0.85, respectively. both outcomes are still indicative of a likely covid-19 diagnosis, therefore a rapid molecular result in this context has limited clinical value.frequently however patients cannot be clearly differentiated at presentation. the symptomatology may be equivocal, and imaging may be inconclusive. in a clinical scenario where there is equipoise, the pre-test probability is 0.5. in this situation there is an inherent difficulty in knowing how best to cohort the patient. if a poct were available this could be of considerable benefit. either outcome, positive or negative, notably alters the post-test probability in one direction or the other, allowing the clinician to make a more informed decision regarding cohorting and management (figure 1 ). assuming the same assay sensitivity and specificity as above, positive and negative results in this scenario adjusts the post-test probabilities to 0.97 and 0.23 respectively. this divergence in post-test probabilities may empower clinicians to accordingly adjust their management strategies indicating that, in this context, a rapid assay represents a clinically more useful test.determining pre-test probability is traditionally based upon clinical gestalt. however, to formalize this strategy, risk stratification tools could be developed using data from prospective observational cohort studies (7) . the diagnostic utility of specific symptoms or findings at presentation could be combined via a bayesian framework, generating reliable pre-test probabilities. for indeterminate cases, where there is greatest value from a molecular result, a rapid poct could be deployed. similar dynamic risk stratification strategies are already widely used in ed when triaging patients with cardiac chest pain and, as such, the workforce is accustomed to this approach (8).if dynamic risk stratification approaches are to be adopted, the analytical sensitivity and specificity of any incorporated diagnostic test must first be established. given the unprecedented demand for sars-cov-2 diagnostics, many new assays are receiving emergency regulatory approval with relatively limited analytical validation (9, 10). as an assay's sensitivity increases, so does its ability to differentiate indeterminate cases ( figure 2 ). poorly validated assays could lead to inappropriate cohorting, increased nosocomial spread and avoidable patient deaths. it is therefore critical that any assay proposed for implementation is properly validated in the clinical setting.at the time of writing many countries are beginning to slow their rates of infection and governments are cautiously relaxing social distancing measures. as caseloads begin to fall, efforts must be made to develop assessment and testing strategies to minimise hospital acquired infections. this should include evidenced based cohorting approaches, beginning in the ed. ensuring that there is a formal and scientifically guided approach to triaging patients could improve outcomes, control disease spread and ultimately reduce the scale of the pandemic. the recent 2009 h1n1 influenza a pandemic has heighten our awareness of the need for improved diagnostic tests for respiratory pathogens. because there is such overlap in the clinical presentation of various respiratory infections, it is not possible to reliably predict the pathogen based on clinical signs and symptoms. moreover, rapid diagnostic tests has been shown to reduce the length of hospital stay and the costs for testing for those with viral respiratory tract infections [1, 2] . here we will discuss emerging multiplex technologies, which can detect or quantify multiple respiratory pathogens in a single test. this is not an exhaustive discussion of emerging technologies but rather an overview of 6 technologies that are being applied to respiratory pathogens (table 1. ). note that none of tests described herein have been cleared by the us food and drug administration, and all are currently available only for research use. a brief overview of each technology will be presented along with any published data on respiratory virus testing. each test should be viewed in the context of clinical utility. for example, is the method applicable for near-patient testing or more suited for testing in the clinical laboratory? what is the turnaround time for a result, and how will this affect utility for outpatient and/or inpatient diagnostic testing? does the test identify all needed pathogens, or does it identify more or less pathogens than would be needed in a certain clinical setting? finally will the result alter clinical management, that is, will it lead to better-directed (or reduced) use of antiviral therapy or antibiotics?the respplex technology (qiaplex technology; qiagen) involves nucleic acid purification and multiplex amplification by polymerase chain reaction (pcr), followed by detection using a liquid-phase bead-based array technology (luminex xmap). the technology allows for a high degree of multiplexing, with the detection of >15 pathogens from a single test. the respplex i test is designed to detect bacterial respiratory pathogens, whereas the respplex ii test detects respiratory viruses. for each pathogen in the multiplex pcr, nested gene-specific primers are designed and included in the reaction [3] . these target specific primers are added at very low concentrations and are used to enrich the targets during the first few cycles of pcr. the inner gene-specific primers have tag sequences that are recognized by a universal set of primers, called superprimers. the superprimers are added at a higher concentration than the gene-specific primers, which allows for the exponential amplification of all targets present in the sample. the reverse superprimer is labeled with biotin and is added at a higher concentration that the forward superprimer; the asymmetric pcr yields more reverse strands for detection and eliminates the need to denature the pcr products before hybridization with probe. the labeled pcr products are detected using a capture probe specific for each target; these probes are covalently coupled to a color-coded bead, and each specific target corresponds to a unique bead color. the biotin-labeled amplified products are then detected by the addition of streptavidin-phycoerythrin. detection occurs in the luminex instrument, each unique colored bead is recognized by the laser, and the presence or absence of the phycoerythrin-labeled product determines whether that gene-specific target is present in the sample. the unique design of the resplex ii system allows for sensitive, specific, and reproducible amplification of multiple targets.the respplex system has been used to identify viral and bacterial pathogens in patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection [4, 5] . the tests used in one study [4] were designed to detect 21 pathogens, including common viral and bacterial pathogens. of the 1742 respiratory samples tested, 67% had >1 pathogen detected, including 40% with 1 pathogen, 21% with 2, and 6% with >3. for the viruses that were also detected by direct immunofluorescence testing [direct fluorescent antibody dfa] (influenza a and b, parainfluenza 1-3, respiratory syncytial virus [rsv] ), the respplex test had a sensitivity of 84%-100% compared with dfa. for adenovirus, the resplex test had a sensitivity of ,10% compared with dfa, which led to the reconfiguration of the adenovirus component of the test. another study showed similar results [5] ; the sensitivity of the respplex ii test varied from 72% to 100% when compared with culture and monoplex real-time pcr assays, with a very high specificity (.99%). although the sensitivity for some pathogens needs to be improved, overall the respplex tests have potential as a diagnostic tool. the ability to detect multiple pathogens in a single test is an important diagnostic advance and provides an approach to study the outcomes and clinical significance of coinfections.the respplex system has also been used to detect h5n1 influenza a virus. the assay was designed to target h1, h2, h3, h5, h7, h9, n1, and n2 genes from influenza a virus as well as the ns genes from influenza a and influenza b viruses. this test allowed for the detection and genotyping of influenza a and b viruses. a total of 217 clinical samples were tested, including 14 samples with human h5n1 infection, and results were compared with those of viral culture and conventional and real-time reverse-transcription (rt) pcr. the respplex test had a clinical sensitivity of 93% and a specificity of 100% [3] , providing a rapid method for identifying and subtyping influenza viruses.the respplex i test, which detects 6 bacterial pathogens (streptococcus pneumoniae, neisseria meningitidis, haemophilus influenzae, legionella pneumophila, mycoplasma pneumoniae, and chlamydophila pneumoniae), was used to test 26 formalinfixed, paraffin-embedded tissue samples from fatal cases of pneumonia or meningitis/meningococcemia that were confirmed by immunohistochemistry and organism-specific realtime pcr. overall, the respplex i test identified 20 of 23 cases with a single pathogen and 1 of 3 with multiple pathogens [6] . multiplex tests have value in respiratory specimens and formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue when there is a broad differential and a limited volume of specimen. the advantage of the resplex ii test is that it can identify a large number of pathogens in a single test. however, this is a complex test with multiple steps, requiring batching of specimens with a turn-around time for results of 5-6 h. this is not practical for near-patient testing; the test needs to be performed in a clinical laboratory. one of the most significant limitations of this technology is the need for postamplification manipulation of samples, which greatly increases the risk of carryover contamination, and could lead to false-positive results.the infiniti system (autogenomics) couples multiplex pcr with an automated microarray hybridization using the infiniti analyzer. after nucleic acid extraction, a multiplex conventional rt-pcr reaction is performed with primers specific for .20 respiratory viruses. after amplification, the amplicons are purified with an enzymatic step to remove unincorporated nucleotides and primers and are then subjected to a proprietary primer extension step within the infiniti analyzer. this step attaches a specific tag on each amplicon and also incorporates fluorescent-labeled nucleotides (cy5-dctp). the tagged and labeled amplicons are then hybridized to anti-tags immobilized on the microarray allowing specific identification of targets. three replicates of each anti-tag on the microarray provide redundancy. the primer extension and, tagging, hybridization, scanning, and data analysis steps are automated and performed within the infiniti analyzer.a recent study by raymond et al [7] compared the microarray test with single-target quantitative real-time pcr assays for 23 respiratory viruses that commonly infect children. nasopharyngeal aspirates were collected from children <3 years of age hospitalized for acute respiratory tract infections. overall, 79.6% of specimens were positive for >1 virus by both real-time and the microarray tests, 18.5% were negative for all viruses by both methods, 1.8% of the samples (4 of 221) were positive only with the real-time tests, and no viruses were detected only with the microarray test. the most common viruses detected were rsv, influenza a, coronaviruses, and rhinoviruses or enteroviruses; multiple viruses were found in 13.1% of the specimens. when results were compared between the 2 methods for each specimen, there was a 94.1% concordance. the sensitivity of the microarray test was >90% for all of the viruses except adenoviruses and coronavirus nl63. overall, the single real-time pcr tests were more sensitive than the microarray test, although the latter required fewer manual steps; for 24 specimens, 5 h less hands-on time is required, and throughput is higher than for the performance of the individual real-time tests. the microarray test requires several steps before loading of the infiniti analyzer and is designed for batching specimens. the nucleic acid extraction, rt-pcr, and enzyme digestion steps take 3 h; once the infiniti analyzer is loaded, the first result is available in 3.5 h, and each subsequent result requires an additional 20 min. based on the complexity, batching, and time required for results, this technology is designed for the clinical laboratory and not for near-patient testing.the jaguar system (handy lab, recently acquired by bd diagnostics-geneohm) couples an automated nucleic acid extraction method with real-time pcr technology for the detection of multiple respiratory pathogens. after the clinical specimen is pipetted into the specimen tube, the reagents and disposables for the nucleic acid extraction and amplification reactions are loaded onto the instrument. nucleic acid extraction is performed in individual reagent cartridges which are loaded into the jaguar instrument along with the amplification cartridge. the remainder of the test is completely automated. the proprietary extraction method allows for the rapid and efficient purification and concentration of nucleic acid from a relatively large specimen volume (500 ll to 1.0 ml) into an elution volume of 10 ll , which is then used to resuspend the amplification reagents. the amplification step is performed in a cartridge that is about 7 3 11 cm and 2 mm thick, each cartridge can accommodate 12 reactions, each with a reaction volume of 4 ll. this small volume allows for a very rapid cycling time hence the entire test is completed in 90-110 min. because the system uses real-time pcr, the multiplexing capabilities are limited to 2-6 targets. however, the jaguar system has several advantages: it is automated and very simple to use, essentially requiring a single pipette step, and because it uses real-time pcr there is no postamplification manipulation of the specimen, eliminating the risk of carryover contamination. the ease of use and rapid time to result would allow this system to be placed in a rapid-response laboratory in an emergency department to provide near-patient testing, with results available quickly enough to affect clinical management.a multiplex assay for the detection of influenza a, influenza b, and rsv from nasopharyngeal specimens has been developed on the jaguar system. the sensitivities for the detection of influenza a, influenza b, and rsv were 100%, 90%, and 100%, respectively, compared with tissue culture results [8] . the overall specificity was 99%. during a 10-day period, 1232 clinical samples were tested, and 134 were positive for influenza a. the jaguar assay demonstrated 100% positive agreement when compared with laboratory-developed molecular tests; 2 falsepositive findings were noted, for a 99.8% negative agreement. of the 134 specimens, 126 were subtyped and found to be 2009 h1n1; all of these were detected by the jaguar test, although the assay as currently designed does not distinguish between influenza a subtypes. the jaguar system required 20 min of technical and 3.5 h to test 24 specimens.the filmarray system (idaho technologies) integrates nucleic acid extraction, nested pcr, detection, and data analysis in a single-use pouch. the system is automated and enables the detection of numerous viral and bacterial respiratory pathogens in a single test. all of the needed reagents for the assay are enclosed in the single-use pouch; after addition of water (to hydrate the lyophilized reagents) and the respiratory specimen, the pouch is loaded into the filmarray instrument, and the rest of the test is completely automated. after extraction and purification of nucleic acid, a nested pcr reaction is performed within the pouch. the first-step pcr is a multiplexed reaction containing primers for all of the viral and bacterial targets, the amplicons from the first pcr are then diluted, and a second round of pcr reactions is performed in a multiwell array, each well containing a single primer set targeting a specific pathogen.redundancy is built into the array, with each target is amplified in 3 separate wells. using amplification and melt curve analysis the filmarray software generates a result for each target. the system is very robust, detecting a low concentration of pathogen in the presence of a high concentration of a second pathogen, with results available in 1 h. although nested pcr is used, the system is closed, so there is no risk of carryover contamination. preliminary studies show that the filmarray system detects more viral pathogens and more coinfections than dfa testing. a respiratory panel is under development that detects adenoviruses, bocaviruses, conornaviruses, influenza a and b, influenza a subtypes (novel h12009, h1, h3), metapneumonvirus, parainfluenza viruses 1-4, rsv, and rhinoviruses, as well as bordetella pertussis, c. pneumoniae, and m. pneumoniae. the ability to detect multiple pathogens within 1 h, with a simple set-up and fully automated system, raises the possibility of nearpatient testing with the filmarray technology, in the emergency department or an outpatient clinic. the current instrumentation is limited to a single test per run, so multiple instruments may be needed, depending on the required throughput.scalable target analysis routine (star) technology (primer-adx) integrates conventional pcr with capillary electrophoresis, providing the ability to detect a large number of pathogens (.20) in a single reaction; it also has the unique feature of providing quantitative data. star is similar in principle to realtime pcr but uses amplicon size instead of fluorescent probes to identify targets. after nucleic acid extraction, a multiplex pcr reaction is set up with unique primers for each specific target. the thermal cycler for the amplification reaction and capillary electrophoresis device are contained in the iceplex instrument. during the amplification reaction a very small sample (nanoliter) of the master mix is subjected to capillary electrophoresis; with sequential sampling (every 2 cycles, starting at cycle 19) and size separation, the signal for the amplicon increases. the accumulation of the amplicon is plotted over time, generating an amplification curve, and a cycle threshold is determined for each target. each different target can be identified based on the unique size of the amplicon. quantification of the targets is accomplished by adding 3 standards to the master mix, each at a different concentration and with a unique amplicon size. a standard curve is generated by plotting the cycle threshold values for the standards against their known concentration, and this curve is used to determine the concentration of the targets. all of the amplification, capillary electrophoresis, and data analysis steps are automated with the iceplex instrument.star technology can demonstrate a large number of pathogens in a single reaction, and the ability to quantify pathogens may prove very important in distinguishing colonization from invasive disease for pathogens such are s. pneumoniae. because the assay requires 5 h to complete, testing is performed in a clinical laboratory and samples are batched; this technology is therefore not designed for near-patient testing. the instrument is a closed system, so there is minimal risk of carryover contamination. currently, a test for the quantification of cytomegalovirus, epstein-barr virus, bk virus, and human herpesviruses 6 and 7 in transplant recipients has been developed and is being evaluated; a test for respiratory pathogens is also planned.plex-id (abbott molecular) is a unique system that combines pcr with electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (esi-ms) to detect a broad array of pathogens including bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites. after nucleic acid is extracted and purified from the clinical specimen, multiple pcr reactions are performed in 96-well microtiter plates that use primers targeting highly conserved regions of the microbial genome that flank variable regions. these types of primers have been also used for sequence-based pathogen identification. the plates are loaded into the plex-id analyzer, which automates the desalting step, esi-ms, determination of base composition, and data analysis. the amplified mixture is injected into an electrospray ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometer, where the mass of each amplicon is measured. from the mass of the amplicon it is possible to determine the nucleotide base composition (ie, the number of a, g, c, and t nucleotides for that dna molecule). by requiring the base composition for the forward and reverse strands to be complementary, the number of possibilities is reduced to a single unambiguous solution. the organism(s) in the sample are determined by comparing the base composition of the observed amplicons to a database comprising known sequence data from a wide array of pathogens. compared with culture or nucleic acid probe assays, which are limited to the detection of only those microbe(s) that grow or are targeted by the assay primer sequences, this broad-based approach enables the identification of known, emerging, or unanticipated pathogens.the plex-id system has been used to identify viral respiratory pathogens from clinical specimens with results compared with an expanded reference standard, including a combination of antigen detection, culture, and pcr methods. the plex-id system performed well with a sensitivity of 95% for the detection of influenza a and b and 88% for rsv. its sensitivity for the detection of adenoviruses, parainfluenza viruses, and coronaviruses was 100%, although the number of specimens with these pathogens was low [9] . the pcr/esi technology has been used to examine samples obtained from military recruits during outbreaks of respiratory disease and identified a variety of bacterial pathogens including h. influenzae, n. meningitidis, and streptococcus pyogenes [10] .this unique technology can detect a wide array of pathogens from clinical samples and is well suited for pathogen discovery and evaluation of emerging pathogens. for example, the plex-id system was able to determine the mixed lineage (swine, avian, human) of the novel h1n1 influenza a virus. pcr/esi technology was also able to identify and distinguish between a diverse collection of coronavirus species that included the acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus [11] . testing can be completed in 6-8 h; the system is designed for use in clinical laboratories, and it can be adapted for high-throughput testing, although the high cost of the instrumentation has to date limited its use to research studies.there are a wide array of emerging technologies for the detection and quantification of respiratory pathogens directly from clinical specimens. some of these technologies have potential for high-throughput testing, and others will allow rapid nearpatient testing. more studies are needed to fully elucidate their performance characteristics and determine their ideal clinical application. the goal is to identify the tests that will improve diagnostic testing for respiratory pathogens, affect patient management decisions, and lead to improved patient outcomes, more appropriate use of antivirals and antibiotics, and/or more cost-effective delivery of care.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) is an infectious disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2), which first appeared in wuhan, china, in december 2019 and then quickly spread worldwide, so that the outbreak was declared a pandemic in march 2020 by the world health organization (who). the responsible pathogen of covid-19 is a positive-sense single-stranded rna virus, belonging to the coronaviridae family (1) . because no vaccine and not approved specific treatment are currently available (2, 3), even if many trials are in progress, who has defined mandatory to mobilize research to control the covid-19 emergency. so, epidemiological studies, clinical characterization and management, infection prevention and control, including health care workers' protection, have a crucial role to quickly identify sick people, treat them, and better estimate how widely the virus has spread (4) . knowledge of diagnostic tests for sars-cov-2 is still evolving and the immune response against the virus is not yet fully understood. nevertheless, as for other well-known infectious diseases, the host immunity certainly has a role in fighting against the pathogen and in predicting the prognosis (5) . real-time reverse-transcript polymerase chain reaction (real-time rt-pcr), performed using nasopharyngeal swabs or other upper respiratory tract specimens (i.e. throat swabs, or salivary samples) is the commonly used test for diagnosis of covid-19 (6) , but even if widely adopted as the gold standard method, it presents some limitations (7) . false-negative results can occur due to poor quality of the specimen collected, for example when the sample is collected with an inappropriate timing in relation to the illness onset, or to an inappropriate specimen handling or shipping to the laboratory department. at the same time, false positive results can be due to contamination or technical errors. unlike molecular testing, detection of an immune response to the virus is an indirect marker of infection and the development of robust serological tests and their appropriate utilization are essential to support ongoing public health effort to effective epidemic prevention (8) . serological tests could be used for epidemiologic studies on a large scale population, especially in asymptomatic population or those presenting mild symptoms (including . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.28.20116046 doi: medrxiv preprint healthcare workers) (5) to theoretically determine the number of people exposed to the virus in a population and to reveal who have had the disease and are currently immune. however, up to date, there are only few data published about their efficiency, often controversial (9) (10) (11) . an immunoglobulin test measures the level of antibodies produced and secreted by b lymphocytes when the immune system tries to protect the body from bacteria, viruses, etc. immunoglobulin m (igm) is the first antibody the body makes when it fights a new infection. then, immunoglobulin g (igg) starts to be produced to ensure a robust, longer lasting immunity (7) . literature data report that igm and igg against sars-cov start to be detected after 3-7 days from the onset of the infection and persist for a period of 2-3 years (12) (13) (14) (15) , similarly the first studies about the antibodies against sars-cov-2 show that they started to be detected after 4-5 days (7, 16) . from 3 rd to 27 th of april 2020, 10,945 asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic healthcare workers were submitted to qualitative serological tests for sars-cov-2 igm and igg during the covid-19 medical surveillance at the local health unit of bologna in order to determine their immunological state. due the contacts caused by the type of work done, some of them were considered much more exposed to risk of infection, for this reason they had previously been submitted to rt-pcr, so that 151 individuals already tested positive for sars-cov-2 rt-pcr (nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal samples). our aim was to evaluate the performances of two different ic assays, submitting to serological testing the 151 healthcare workers previously tested positive for sars-cov-2 rt-pcr and trying to find a correlation between the molecular method, that is considered the gold standard and rapid ic tests actually available. finally, we submitted the samples who tested positive by ic to elisa/clia assays for a further evaluation.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.28.20116046 doi: medrxiv preprinthealth professional workers samples were collected into collection tube containing edta by venepuncture and the plasma was immediately separated by centrifugation to be submitted to qualitative rapid serological tests.due to the emergency, our availability of ic testing was affected from difficulties to find the same kit continuously, so we were forced to use two different rapid tests for two different groups of individuals. during the first part of the surveillance we used the khb® diagnostic kit for sars-cov-2 igm/igg antibody (colloidal gold), while for the second part we used cellex qsars-cov-2 igg/igm cassette rapid test. both the methods were characterized by a lateral flow chromatographic immunoassay in a cassette format. when an adequate volume of test specimen, according to manufacturer instructions, is dispensed into the sample well, the specimen migrates by capillary action along the cassette. immediately after the specimen, two or three drops of the sample diluent are added to the same area. the cassette is incubated for 15 minutes at room temperature then it is possible to read the result. igg and/or igm anti sars-cov-2, if present, will bind to the sars-cov-2 conjugate constituting an immunocomplex that can be captured by the anti-human igg and/or igm conjugate. the presence of the captured immunocomplex is visible due to its precipitation in a coloured red band. if the specific antibodies igg/igm are absent or are present in extremely low concentrations to be detected, no test line will appear except for the internal control line. the samples that showed presence of igg and/or igm by rapid testing were transferred to microbiology department and then subjected to iflash-sars-cov-2 igg/igm assay (clia) supplied by pantec s.r.l. and/or anti-sars-cov-2 igg elisa assay supplied by euroimmun italia s.r.l. for a further determination of igg and igm antibody against sars-cov-2. the remaining plasma were stored at -20°c for further analysis.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.28.20116046 doi: medrxiv preprint sampling was conducted within the surveillance program established by the emilia-romagna region and did not require ethical approval (17). the samples were collected after informed consent was given.statistical significance was assessed using fisher's exact test and a p-value of <0.05 was considered significant.as showed in table n. 1 we stratified the results according to the time intercourse between the positive rt-pcr and the ic testing, without distinguishing between igg and/or igm positivity.only 90 out of 151 (59.6%) samples with the molecular positive result came out with at least one (igm and/or igg) positivity by ic assays moreover, comparing the two ic methods, we found a significant difference between the them (p=0.003). moreover, calculating the proportion of individuals showing the presence of anti-sars-cov-2 (igm and/or igg) by ic after the rt-pcr positivity, khb showed a sensitivity of 35.3%, so much lower than cellex, that even showed a poor sensitivity (66.4%).in order to eliminate the possible bias due to different tests used in different periods for the calculation of the p-value, we tried to compare the two ic assays at the same period after the positive molecular result reducing the period of comparison: first we considered the tests carried out from day 0 to day 25 after positive rt-pcr and then, because literature data on sars-cov show that the development of antibodies generally reach the peak after 7-10 days from the onset of the infection (12-15), we further reduced the evaluation period considering the ic results obtained between 10-25 days after rt-pcr positivity. in both cases we had a significant difference (p <0.001) between used ic methods, with a sensitivity of 39.4% for khb and 75% for cellex when . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.28.20116046 doi: medrxiv preprint the period of evaluation was 0 to 25 days, and a sensitivity of 32.1% and 74.6% for cellex when the considered period was reduced from day 10 to day 25 after rt-pcr positivity. even if both methods did not show a great efficiency in term of sensitivity, especially if we consider that the assays used for screening and epidemiological purposes need to have a high sensitivity, cellex ic test seems certainly to have the best performances.in table n.2 are showed the specific igg and/or igm positivity patterns obtained by ic tests. we is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.28.20116046 doi: medrxiv preprint system and table 3b for cellex). overall percentages of concordant patterns between each ic testing results and elisa/clia were 15% for khb and 43% for cellex, proving a better performance of the latter. anyway we noticed that khb system showed a concordance with elisa/clia only for two igm+/igg+ samples (15.4% of the total) found between 16 10  ---3  --11-15  1  --1  --16-20  1  --3  --21-25  ------26-30  ------31-35  ------36-40  ------41-45 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. (9, 18) , but why some patients seem not to develop a humoral immune response is uncertain, as well as is still unclear the relationship between antibody response and clinical improvement (19) . for these reasons, reliable test data are necessary to better assess the validity of the information related to the pandemic spread, in term of positive cases, deaths, and immune individuals (12) (13) (14) 20) . at the same time, the apparent lack of systematic and standardized protocols in most countries represents the main source of discrepancies in mortality rates. in our . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.28.20116046 doi: medrxiv preprint study we underline the necessity of using on a large scale validated testing in order to guarantee their usefulness in the epidemiological field, especially in emergencies such as this pandemic covid-19, where the lack of sufficient time prevents the correct validation of the methods before their use. moreover, we must consider that cross-reactivity may occur due to the structural similarity and the genomic sequence conservation of the immunogenic proteins of cov species, that share common structural epitopes. for this reason, it is also important to know the epitopes to which the tests are directed (i.e. n protein-based serological assays, s protein-based assays, etc) (5).our findings showed a great discrepancy between molecular and ic results, probably due to the poor sensitivity of the ic assays. also, we found an inconsistency of immunoglobulins positivity patterns when we compared ic to elisa/clia results, highlighting the absolute necessity of assays performance validation before their marketing and use, to avoid errors in the results evaluation at both clinical and epidemiological level. as recently confirmed by the circular of italian ministry of health the qualitative rapid tests to sars-cov-2 antibodies detection need the validation by third parties in relation to their quality before being chosen for their clinical utilization and, to the best of the knowledge available today, there is currently no evidence produced by third parties about that (21) . after all, because the methods are still in development, it is too early to make an evaluation of their usefulness in current epidemiology purposes (22) . a limitation of our study was that we were not able to calculate the specificity of both ic assays, due to the lack of data about healthcare professional workers with rt-pcr negative submitted to serological evaluation.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.28.20116046 doi: medrxiv preprintthe dynamics that underlie the rapid spread of covid-19 are currently unknown [1] [2] [3] [4] . however, the lack of vaccine and herd immunity and the paucity of knowledge concerning human-to-human transmission at the beginning of the outbreak are potentially important contributing factors [5, 6] . remarkably, many patients with covid-19 may present with non-specific symptoms such as fever, cough and sore throat, while others may remain asymptomatic. the latter subjects are thought to be significant sources to propagate infection in the population [4] [5] [6] . at the time of this report (cdc's update on may 16, 2020) , the case count of covid-19 in the usa stands at 1,470,000 cases, including 88,237 deaths, indicating a mortality rate of 6%. the total count of cases worldwide stands at 4,560,000 cases, including 308,000 deaths, indicating a mortality rate of 6.7% [5] . we refer the readers to the reference citation [5] . https://www.google.com/search?sxsrf= alekk03cs16rzzv2-d4wnlt2uech7msoma: 1589689664696&q=covid+19+case+count+worldwide for timely update of the case count, regional and worldwide.holistic approaches interrogating the principles of early diagnosis, early isolation, and early prevention have been implemented at the personal, national, and international levels. several governments around the globe have activated a national emergency alert to establish infection prevention measures to contain the propagating effects of the disease. healthcare organizations and medical centers provide dynamically updated guidelines to best alleviate the impact of the pandemic. medical personnel exchange knowledge about the mechanisms of transmission, the clinical manifestations, and the therapeutic approaches. clinical diagnostics and research laboratories around the world are at work to understand disease mechanisms, to optimize diagnostic tests, and to develop vaccines for prevention. however, despite incredible efforts at multiple levels, one of the few certainties is that nothing yet is certain.the coronaviruses (covs) have become the most emerging pathogens of respiratory disease epidemics. prior to the sars-cov-2 pandemic, two epidemics with covs have occurred during the past two decades, the sars-cov in 2003 and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) in 2012 [6, 7] . these viruses can cross species barriers and cause, in humans, illness ranging from mild upper respiratory infection to severe acute respiratory illness such as mers and sars. indeed, person-to-person transmission of sars-cov-2 among close family contacts and coworkers, even without travel history, is the regular route for the infection [6, 7] .the covs are enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded rna viruses with nucleocapsid and a crown-like appearance u n d e r a n e l e c t r o n m i c r o s c o p e . t h e s u b f a m i l y orthocoronavirinae of the coronaviridae family classifies into four genera of covs: alphacoronavirus (alphacov), betacoronavirus (betacov), deltacoronavirus (deltacov), and gammacoronavirus (gammacov) [7, 8] . the sars-cov-2 belongs to the betacov genera, like mers-cov and sars-cov. to date, seven covs are known to infect humans and cause outbreaks with variable clinical severity [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] .several sequences for sars-cov-2 have been published [1, 2, 11] . these resources allowed researchers to trace the phylogenetic tree and to recognize strains that vary according to the mutations [12, 13] . for instance, a recent report by angeletti et al. suggested that a spike mutation, which probably occurred in late november 2019, triggered crossing the species barriers to humans [12] . moreover, the availability of the complete genome of sars-cov-2 allowed scientists to develop diagnostic laboratory tests [14, 15] . the synthesis of viral polyprotein 1a/1ab (pp1a/pp1ab) from the viral rna is achieved in the host cells. in the sars-cov-2 genome, at least six orfs can be generated. specifically, a frameshift between orf1a and orf1b guides the production of both 1a and1ab polypeptides that are processed by virally encoded proteases for producing 16 nonstructural proteins (nsps). other orfs encode structural proteins, including spike (s), membrane (m), envelope (e), nucleocapsid proteins (n), and accessory protein chains [1, 2, 10, 16] [fig 1] .evolving literature links virulence mechanisms of covs, including sars-cov-2, to the nsps and structural proteins. for example, the nsps are able to block the host innate immunity [17] , and the envelope (e) promotes viral assembly and release. in particular, more information is now available about the features of the spike glycoproteins positioned on the viral surface of covs, which guide the binding to host receptors and determine host tropism and transmission properties [12, 16, 17] . each monomer of the trimeric s protein contains two subunits, s1 and s2, mediating attachment and membrane fusion, respectively. the s1 subunit utilizes human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (hace2), an important regulator of the cardiovascular system, as the receptor to infect human cells [18] [19] [20] . being highly conserved, s2 could be a selective target for antiviral (anti-s2) agents. in contrast, the spike receptor-binding domain presents only 40% amino acid identity with sars-cov. other sars-cov-2-specific structural elements are the orf3b and orf8 that have no homology with those of sars-cov. finally, the n protein plays an important role in viral replication. research will be needed to further determine the structural components of sars-cov-2 that underlie the pathogenicity.the pathogenic mechanism of covid-19 disease is complex and poorly understood. clinical longitudinal studies will have to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of the variety of clinical manifestations of this disease. the expression of ace2 in the lower respiratory tract is believed to have determined the natural history of sars tropism to infect the lower respiratory tract [20] . the available data indicate that sars-cov-2 infection produces an uncontrolled immune response in the host, known as a "cytokine storm" [21] . the main culprit of this storm is interleukin 6 (il-6) produced by activated leukocytes. il-6 can execute different actions on a large number of cells and tissues. it also stimulates the production of acute phase proteins that play important roles in thermoregulation and can result in severe tissue damage and multi-organ dysfunction.clinical and epidemiologic information have been used by most countries to determine who should be tested [22] . in the usa, diagnostic testing indications were limited at the beginning of the outbreak secondary to regulatory procedures for the new tests. subsequently, the fda released policies to allow laboratories to use their validated assays. on march 4, 2020, the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) removed restrictive testing criteria, encouraging the clinicians to use their judgment to determine whether a test should be performed. at present, the cdc recommends two criteria for testing [23] . the high priority category includes hospitalized patients with symptoms, healthcare facility workers, and residents in long-term care facilities or other congregate living settings with symptoms. the priority category includes persons with symptoms of suspected covid-19 infection and persons without symptoms who are prioritized by healthcare providers, for any reason, including public health monitoring or screening according to state and local plans. the cdc does not recommend testing for asymptomatic persons.once a person is identified as a person under investigation (pui) for covid-19, it is recommended that the clinician should immediately adapt infection control and prevention (ppe) measures. in addition to excluding all other sources of respiratory infection, the decision on who to test should be based on the cdc guidance and local epidemiological data. for sampling, the who recommends collecting specimens from both the upper respiratory tracts, nasopharyngeal (np) and oropharyngeal (op) swabs, in the spontaneously breathing patients, and the lower respiratory tract in the mechanically ventilated patients. researchers have proven that np swab specimen is superior to the op swab specimen for the examination of sars-cov-2 [24, 25] as higher viral loads were detected in the nasal area than in the throat [26] . therefore, np swab is the preferred sampling method for covid-19 diagnosis. upon collection, the swabs should be placed immediately into a sterile transport tube containing 2-3 ml of either viral transport medium (vtm), amies transport medium, or sterile saline [27] and stored at 4°c. potential risks of np swabs include (1) the production of aerosol during the sampling, which can impose infection risks to healthcare workers;(2) the inconsistent quality of np swabs between collections, which may lead to false-negative results; and (3) the patient may experience discomfort during the sampling procedure. aiming to address these potential risks, further studies demonstrated the efficacy of less invasive routes for sampling such as throat wash and sputum collection [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] . saliva collection was shown to yield greater detection sensitivity and consistency throughout the course of the infection when compared with patient-matched np samples. furthermore, saliva could enable self-administered sample collection for accurate large-scale sars-cov-2 testing [28] . some authors suggested a potential value in testing both fecal and respiratory specimens to improve the test sensitivity [29] . however, this issue remains under debate, as the detection of viral rna in stool may not reflect actual viral replication or infection [30] .the top priority for controlling the rapidly evolving sars-cov-2-associated-covid-19 is developing a diagnostic test of high performance. the use of viral culture is not feasible option for rapid diagnosis as it takes 3-5 days for sars-cov-2 to cause obvious cytopathic changes in vitro. in addition, virus isolation requires biosafety level-3 (bcl-3) facilities of limited availability in many medical centers. serology tests have not yet been validated. moreover, the issue of crossreactivity with sars-cov remains to be solved. therefore, at present, a positive result in nucleic acid testing (nat) using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) is the gold standard for diagnosing covid-19 [14, 31, 32] . although the assay is highly specific, the sensitivity is relatively low secondary to several factors including the viral load, virus replication, rna isolation method, and the source and timing of swab collection in relation to the disease stage [33] . therefore, further optimization to mitigate the high falsenegative rate has been a crucial goal of high priority.after collection, the clinical samples are subjected to rna isolation. this is a time-consuming step that is also extremely important to avoid the false-negative results. the optimal protocol for the isolation of rna would ideally provide pure rnase-free nucleic acid and recover rna quantitatively across a range of dilutions. several protocols for rna isolation have been used by different laboratory. the efficiency of rna isolation protocols for sars-cov-2 from stool samples was discussed in a recent multicenter study [34] . however, limited data are currently available regarding the performance of rna extraction methods from other different types of specimens.after rna isolation from the clinical sample and amplification through a reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), the sars-cov-2-specific primers serve to search for the viral rna sequences that are conserved [35] . in patients with confirmed covid-19 diagnosis, the laboratory evaluation should be repeated to confirm viral clearance prior to releasing from isolation [36] . the conserved or abundantly expressed genes such as the structural genes n and e and the nonstructural rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) as well as the orf 1a/b genes are the preferred targets for the sars-cov-2 rt-pcr assays [12, 16] . traditionally, two molecular targets should be included in the assay to avoid potential cross-reaction with other covs as well as potential genetic drift of sars-cov-2. among these assays, the rdrp assay exhibited the highest sensitivity (3.8 rna copies/reaction at 95% detection probability) and involves two probes. one of the probes is non-specific, which would detect other covs, whereas the second probe is specific for the sars-cov-2. these rdrp assays have been used in > 30 laboratories in europe [15, 37] . in the usa, the cdc recommends assays targeting two nucleocapsid proteins [n1 and n2] [38] , while the who recommends an initial screening with the e gene assay followed by a confirmatory assay using the rdrp gene [15] . importantly, the rdrp assays were designed and validated using synthetic nucleic acid technology (in vitro transcription) in the absence of sars-cov-2 isolates or patient specimens [16] .given high false-negative rates, additional studies on covid-19 samples highlighted the importance of successive sampling and testing of sars-cov-2 by rt-pcr [39] . yuan et al. reported that pcr assays returned positive in 25 covid-19 patients after discharge [40] . therefore, repeated viral rt-pcr testing separated by 48 h is essential. in addition, other parameters (d-dimer and absolute lymphocyte count, etc.) should be combined with negative rt-pcr test as additional measures to assure that recovered patients can be released from isolation. the protocols of several rt-pcr assays have been implemented and published online (https:// www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/ technical-guidance/laboratory-guidance). one of these assays is the reverse transcripton loop-mediated isothermal amplification assays, known as rt-lamp, which were developed by park gs et al. these assays were designed to detect sars-cov-2 specifically even at low copy numbers, without detecting other human covs. furthermore, a colorimetric detection method was developed for this assay allowing its potential use at higher throughput [41] .more recently, chan jf et al. developed novel rt-pcr assays for covid-19 targeting a different sequence of the rdrp/ hel (helicase/hemagglutinin-esterase (he) [42] . the researchers validated these assays using both in vitro system and samples from patients with confirmed diagnosis of covid-19. the new rdrp/hel assay exhibited higher sensitivity and specificity without cross-reactivity with other common respiratory viruses. the authors speculated that the new rdrp/hel assay might be employed for detecting covid-19 cases with low viral loads, particularly when samples from the upper respiratory tract, saliva, or plasma are used for testing. moreover, they proposed using these assays for serial monitoring of the viral load in plasma of the covid-19 patients to detect the cases with sars-cov-2 rnaemia (circulating viral rna in blood) and, thereby, to inform prognostic and treatment decisions.serologic assays are urgently needed for (1) infection prevention measures including identifying the viral sources; (2) epidemiologic and sero-surveillance studies to infer the burden of disease, taking into account the rate of asymptomatic infection and the extent disease transmission to the households; and (3) analyzing the results of vaccine trials and therapeutic antibodies. however, other than few exceptions [43] , validated serologic assays are relatively lacking at present.the lateral flow assays for sars-cov-2 igm and igg antibodies may potentially be useful in assessing the burden of covid-19 infection. however, important limitations exist, including the low specificity of the igm responses and the delayed seroconversion of the specific igg responses. therefore, these assays cannot be used for acute diagnostics but may represent an indirect indication of covid-19 infection that is best utilized to confirm late covid-19 cases, retrospectively, or to assess the immunity of healthcare providers during the pandemic. in addition, they can be useful to predict which patient would benefit from repeat testing, selfisolation, or targeted therapies for covid-19 [43, 44] . finally, it should be noted that convalescent plasma, or immunoglobulin-containing fractions, obtained from recovered covid-19 cases have been successfully used to treat patients with active covid-19 disease [45, 46] .the spike and nucleocapsid proteins are the main immunogens of the sars-cov-2 [6] . okba nma et al. established serologic assays for detection of sars-cov-2 neutralizing, spike protein-specific (s), and nucleocapsid-specific (n) antibodies using serum samples from patients with pcrconfirmed sars-cov-2 infection [47] . the investigators validated the various antigens using elisa platforms and found that most of the patients with the sars-cov-2 infection seroconverted by 2 weeks after the beginning of their illness. particularly, the s1 subunit was more specific than s2 in detecting the sars-cov-2-specific antibodies. this finding could be explained by the higher conservation of the s2 subunit in covs, relative to s1. therefore, s1 was identified as a specific antigen for the sars-cov-2 serology testing. remarkably, further validation of s1-specific iga and igg elisa assays by two different groups revealed that while the iga-based elisa was more sensitive, the igg elisa showed higher specificity than the iga elisa. furthermore, compared with iga, igg is longer lasting in patients and thus is preferred for serology studies. to date, no studies have addressed cross-reactivity from other non-specific proteins that can lead to false-positive result. further studies and optimization of elisa assays will be necessary.the frequency of detecting antibodies to the n protein in covid-19 patients indicates that the n protein may be useful as an immunodominant antigen in the early diagnosis of covid-19 disease [48] [49] [50] . for testing antibodies to the n protein, investigators relied on the high degree of similarity between the sars-cov and sars-cov-2 proteins (estimated 90%) to develop a new elisa assay, in which the sars-cov n protein was used as antigen. using 3 different validated elisas, the investigators demonstrated that higher antibody levels are associated with the severity of infection. furthermore, they showed that n-specific igg seroconversion occurs in the second week after the beginning of the symptoms. remarkably, compared with s1 elisas, the n protein elisas showed higher sensitivity in detecting antibodies in mildly infected patients and stronger correlations with the plaque reduction neutralization test. however, this observation requires confirmation in a larger cohort of patients with different levels of disease severity to precisely monitor the timing of seroconversion even in mildly symptomatic patients. further, antibodies against two different antigens should be tested to decrease false-negative results in serial disease monitoring studies [51] . well-defined standard references should be developed to standardize the serologic assays developed by different laboratories, to account for inter-assay variability, and to unify data interpretation tools from different studies. finally, as research efforts are currently focused on developing a vaccine for sars-cov-2, validation and standardization of serologic testing are crucial for evaluating vaccine immunogenicity and effective induction of antibody responses for prevention.rapid antigen assays are emerging new class of tests to be used in the sars-cov-2 pandemic. these assays are designed to detect particles of the viral proteins in nasal swabs quickly by using simple qualitative or semiquantitative in vitro diagnostic procedure, which can be performed either in the lab or at a local point of care to give results within 1 h [52] . rapid antigen assays are currently being validated to enhance clinical laboratories' capacity to match the urgent need for rapid covid-19 detecting in response to the pandemic. the first emergency used authorization has been issued by the us food and drug administration (fda) to the quidel corporation for the sofia 2 sars antigen fia on may11, 2020 [53] . this test is authorized for use in clia (clinical laboratory improvement amendments) certified laboratories. few other rapid tests are currently being validated by the who or on the fda list. an important advantage of an antigen test is the speed of the test at lower cost and the high specificity. however, they have high false-negative rate due to lower sensitivity. therefore, a negative result from a rapid antigen test requires confirmation with a pcr test prior to formalizing isolation and treatment decisions.as mentioned previously, the main culprit of the uncontrolled excessive immune reaction to sars-cov-2 is il-6, which was found to increase, particularly during the symptomatic exacerbation of covid-19 disease. other common molecular laboratory findings in the early stage of covid-19 disease include decreased white blood cells, lymphocytes, and platelets as well as metablic acidosis with elevated lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), elevated liver transaminases, muscle enzymes, and reactive protein c. in addition, laboratory indicators of systemic shock, ards, and disseminated intravascular coagulopathy have been reported in the severely ill patients. notably, lymphopenia and elevated ldh appear to be negative prognostic factors, while procalcitonin value has been reported to be normal in several covid-19 cohorts [21, 54] . other than the descriptive data obtained from retrospective analysis of covid-19 patients' clinical records, the current literature is lacking the pathogenic mechanisms. clinical, preclinical, and pathological research will have to elucidate the pathophysiology underlying the various manifestations of the disease.the pathomechanisms of pneumonia in covid-19 disease are poorly understood. data available from histopathological slides indicate pulmonary edema, of primary respiratory origin, and thick proteinaceous exudates consisting of large protein globules associated with hyperplasia of the pneumocytes. additionally, vascular engorgement and interstitial inflammatory process, involving fibrinoid material and multinucleated tissue macrophages, have been reported [55] .current literature evidence indicates that 60-93% of patients have positive chest computed tomographic (ct) findings consistent with covid-19 infection prior to positive rt-pcr test results [56, 57] . the pulmonology findings on chest ct images are more prominent approximately 10 days after the onset of the disease, including bilateral pneumonia noted in 80% of cases. other lung abnormalities include ground glass opacities and lobular wall thickening. notably, progressive consolidation can take place up to 2 weeks, while fibrotic bands were recognized upon the resolution of symptoms. in addition, reactive lymphadenopathy that resolved within 1 month was noted in some cases. remarkably, any of these radiology findings were reported to change dynamically over a short period of time.in light of high false-negative result rate in nucleic acid testing (nat) using rt-pcr technology, thoracic ct imaging has become a critical diagnostic tool, in combination with close monitoring of clinical features and epidemiological data for covid-19 confirmation and management. more recently, fang et al. reported that the sensitivity of ct (98%) exceeded that of rt-pcr (71%) in diagnosing covid-19 [56] . therefore, several reports suggested that the suspected covid-19 patient (pui) should not be prematurely cleared from quarantine and ppe measures should not be discontinued by one negative result of rt-pcr testing [56, 57] . rather, the patient's symptoms, chest ct images, and other laboratory parameters should be taken into account to inform the clinical decision regarding further management, ppe measures, and evaluating the need for repeating the diagnostic test. although several studies described the imaging features of covid-19, clinical stratification of pulmonology abnormalities and their correlation with the disease course need to be conducted in the future. such data may lead to identification of a prognostic matrix for the disease.incredible efforts are being made to contain a global crisis that is aggressively testing the healthcare systems worldwide. infection prevention and control officers are tasked at maximum capacities to flatten the curve of covid-19 spread. clinicians are intensely challenged with limited therapeutic options and specific targets for this disease. scientists are at full speed to develop diagnostic testing, vaccines, and new therapies.laboratory investigations to determine the structural elements of sars-cov-2 that underlie its pathogenicity are needed to identify diagnostic and therapeutic targets.longitudinal clinical and preclinical studies will be tasked to explain the heterogenous clinical manifestation of the covid-19 disease. prospective longitudinal studies and clinical trials will be necessary to understand the disease epidemiology and clinical course and to evaluate potential vaccines for prevention and efficacy of specific therapies.it must be acknowledged that this overview is based on initial clinical and scientific reports. to date, there is paucity of information regarding the impact on the cardiovascular system and congenital heart defects population [58] . current therapeutic approaches to deal with the infection are mainly symptomatic and basic life support measures. prevention aimed at reducing human-to-human transmission remains our best option.sir, since december 2019 the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 has emerged as the cause of a pandemic disease known as coronavirus disease 19 (covid-19). 1 on february 21 th 2020 the outbreak began in italy, presently the world's worst affected country. 2 the diagnosis of covid 19 is based on a molecular test, aimed to detect the virus rna in respiratory samples such as nasopharyngeal swabs (ns) or bronchial aspirate (ba). 3 this is an imperfect gold standard, which can give false negatives if the amount of viral genoma is insufficient or if the correct time-window of viral replication is missed. 4 testing the igm and igg production in response to viral infection might be a simple method to enhance the detection sensitivity and accuracy of the molecular test. 5 in addition, it may be used for screening purpose to assess antibody profiles in a large population. large-scale screening programs using antibody tests are currently under evaluation by different governments.recently, a test for the rapid detection of combined igg and igm antibodies to sars-cov-2 in human blood, serum/plasma has become available. 6 as soon as the kits were commercially available, we assessed the reliability and usefulness of the 2019-ncov igg/igm antibody rapid 2) 7 patients with suspected covid 19 who had suggestive radiological/clinical findings but negative molecular tests; 3) 7 asymptomatic controls with negative molecular tests.all patients had molecular testing using ns or ba as they arrived to our emergency room with covid 19 symptoms. sars-cov-2 rna in the samples was detected by real-time reverse transcriptase quantitative pcr (rt-pcr) assay, according to guidelines. 3 qualitative assessment of igg and igm was performed using the rapid immunochromatographic assay during hospital stay (confirmed cases) or upon admission to the emergency room (suspicious cases). following the manufacture's instruction, the response was obtained within 15 minutes using 200µl of blood. the test allowed detection of a single antibody or combinations of both. the presence or absence of each antibody was expressed as + or -, respectively.in the group with confirmed covid 19 (mean age 57±17 yrs), two patients were intubated for severe disease and 10 were treated with non invasive ventilation and/or o 2 -therapy. the time from symptoms onset to antibody testing ranged from 3 to 34 days. overall, the seroconversion rate for both igm and igg was 82.6% (19/23). four confirmed cases had both negative igm and igg (igm-/igg-). among these, two patients were tested at day 3 and 5 from symptoms onset. since a recent report showed that the median time for igm and igg detection from symptoms onset was 11 and 12 days, respectively, 3 we reasoned that these two were likely early tests. excluding these two, in the remaining patients, after a median time of 18 days from symptoms onset the conversion rate was 90.4%.in the group with suspected covid 19 (mean age 67±15 yrs), only a 40 yrs old man, considered a "highly probable case" had igm+/ igg+ after 12 days from symptoms onset and two negative molecular tests. based on consistent clinical/radiological and antibody test findings he was admitted and properly treated for covid 19. all the remaining 6 patients with suspected covid 19 had two to three negative molecular testis on na, confirmed by negative tests on bronchial aspirate.consistently, they all had igm-/igg-. all healthy controls had igm-/igg-. overall, including 37 tests, the concordance between rt-pcr and antibody test was 86.4% (table 1) , cohen's k: 0.72 (substantial agreement). considering the molecular test the gold standard for diagnosis, the sensitivity and specificity of the antibody test were 83% and 93%, respectively.the reason why two patients with confirmed covid 19 had negative igg/igm, at a time when seroconversion was already expected, remains unclear. one was a 93 yrs old woman, so that immunesenescence can explain the finding. however, the other patient was young and immunocompetent, so that we must consider an issue related to the test performance, e.g the lower limit of detection.the correct timing to detect igm and igg response after infection with sars-cov-2 is so far unclear as few studies are available with divergent results. 5, 7 our preliminary data suggest that the rapid igg/igm test is reliable in evidencing seroconversion as long as the testing is not performed <6 days before symptoms onset. if this finding will be confirmed in a larger sample, the test could be a putative mean by which assessing population immunization.in the group with suspected covid 19, which was anyway very small, we found mainly a consistency between negative molecular and negative antibody test. however, the antibody test was performed earlier, compared to the group with confirmed disease (median 9 days vs 18 days) and this may have biased these results, so that we will further test these patients.to our opinion this antibody test is quite reliable and useful, since it has the advantage to be a pointof-care test that gives a response within minutes. in those patients presenting with a discrepancy between the clinical/radiological feature and the molecular test, the rapid antibody detection might be an additional element helping the clinician to make a correct diagnosis. this is true, as long as the test is not performed within the first days of symptoms onset. indeed, further studies are granted to investigate both the diagnostic and the screening value of this test. the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is the latest pandemic gaoling the humanity, having very high spreading rate and approximately 5-6% of mortality worldwide. this novel beta coronavirus is an enveloped non-segmented positive sense rna virus. the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) genome structure comprises single stranded rna with nucleocapsid protein which are enclosed by membrane proteins, envelope proteins and spike glycoproteins [1] (fig. 1) . as a coronavirus, the sars-cov-2 has high similarity with other viruses like sars-cov and mers-cov [2] . the entry of the novel coronavirus to host is through the interaction between the densely glycosylated spike proteins to the receptors on host cell membrane. the spike glycoprotein is a trimeric class i fusion protein consisting s1 and s2 domains [3] . it is reported that there is 55% similarity in s1 domain of spike glycoproteins among sars-cov-2 and sars-cov and 91% similarity in case of s2 domain. it is evident that the sars-cov-2 can infect the human respiratory epithelial cells through interaction of spike protein with the human ace2 receptor. [4] .the coronaviruses are large rna viruses (65-125 nm in diameter) come under the coronaviridae family in the nidovirales order. normally the coronavirus genome contains six open reading frame (orfs) which encodes for the structural as well as accessory proteins in the virus. the nucleocapsid protein (n-protein) in the coronavirus binds to rna genome and forms a capsid around the enclosed nucleic acid. the function of n-protein includes the interaction with membrane protein during viral assembly, assists in rna synthesis/folding and affects host cell responses, including cell cycle and translation. the structural and accessory proteins are essential for viral replication, genome maintenance and pathogenesis of the virus. [5] .the currently available invitro diagnostic techniques can be broadly classified into (1) nucleic acid based assays and (2) serological assays. these are described below.at present the most widely used approved test for the diagnosis of covid-19 is the polymerase chain reaction (pcr). two different strategies are in use for pcr based assays; the reverse transcriptase pcr (rt-pcr) and the loop mediated isothermal amplification pcr (lamp pcr). both methods offer high sensitivity (85-90%) and specificity for the covid-19 diagnosis as the methods are focusing on direct amplification of the virus genetic material. the rt-pcr is quantitative in nature whereas the lamp pcr is qualitative. as compared to rt-pcr, lamp pcr will be more cost effective and less time consuming. high throughput screening is another nucleic acid detection technology. it is costly and has high equipment dependency making it less widely used. even though the aforementioned methods can offer nearly 90% accurate result, the improper sample collection, handling and transportation may lead to false negative results, obviously decreasing the sensitivity of the assay.the rt-pcr is the most common and effective method used in the market to detect sars-cov-2. in rt-pcr, reverse transcriptase converts virus rna into cdna following amplification into millions of copies of dna using a set of specific primers and probes. the amplification taking place in 3 steps: [1] denaturation [2] annealing and [3] elongation. these three steps take place at 95°c for 30 s, 50°for 30 s and 72°c for 60 s respectively. the primers target and amplify different regions for sars-cov-2 such as nucleocapsid protein (n) gene, envelope protein (e) gene and orf1ab gene regions which can be determined within the same cycle and separately for confirmatory testing [6] . the turnaround time for sample analyses is 2.5-3.5 h. one-step rt-pcr assay to detect e gene and rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp gene) regions of sars-cov-2 has been developed by tib-molbiol [7] . predominantly, upper respiratory samples including nasopharyngeal swabs and oropharyngeal swabs are recommended for analysis. there are many breakthrough assays developed by various ivd manufacturers including abbott, bosch and cepheid where a specific gene of sars-cov-2 is detected within few minutes. although rt-pcr is the most widely used confirmatory test for covid-19, this technique is not robust and can only be performed by skilled analysts due to various biological safety hazards making sample detection cumbersome in many cases [8] .even though the rt-pcr is a robust technology there are many factors contributing to false-positive and falsenegative results. mutations in primers targeting virus genome can lead to false negative results. laboratory practices and safety procedures including collection, transportation and handling also contribute to false negative results [9] . the sampling timing and optimum sample types play significant role in obtaining highly sensitive and highly specific results [10] . in most pcr assays two different regions of genes are targeted. hence the result interpretation will be positive, negative or inconclusive. if both genes are amplified the result is positive; if only one gene is positive, that is called inconclusive; and negative could be a false negative. so, inconclusive and negative persons should be treated as doubtful. the efforts on minimizing length of the entire pcr process and practice of isothermal amplification has resulted in the development of loop-mediated isothermal amplification. the lamp is a highly specific isothermal amplification technique with an analytical limit of detection of 75 copies per ll. in lamp, conversion of rna to dna is followed by amplification of sample genome using 4-6 primers (forward inner primer, forward outer primer, reverse inner primer and reverse outer primer) targeting different regions of the dna [11] . the lamp has several advantages over rt-pcr. it is considered to be more user friendly with easy detection, speed and less background signal when compared to rt-pcr. in addition to its speed, lamp shows high level of specificity and high amplification efficiency than rt-pcr [12] . the recently developed chitra gene lamp-n by sree chitra thirunal medical institute and technology in collaboration with agappe diagnostics ltd. detects two different regions of n gene. the turnaround time of 20 min for the analysis of 30 samples is a remarkable achievement. however, stringent evaluations on commercial lamp kits are needed for accuracy check and processing of large samples is an impetus for covid-19 testing.apart from rt-pcr and lamp, united states centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) approved onestep real time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr) to quantitatively detect viral particles in more than 90 samples within 45 min [13] . recently, specific high sensitivity enzymatic reporter unlocking (sherlock) that allows multiplexed, portable, and ultrasensitive detection of rna is a detection strategy used to combat sars-cov-2. cas13a ribonucleases used for rna sensing binds to amplified rna which when activated, cleaves fluorophore-quencher probes emitting fluorescence. sherlock has previously been used to detect clinical samples for zika virus [14] . nevertheless, there is a need for further optimisation of this technique in larger samples to achieve large scale evaluation of sars-cov-2.though the rrt-pcr is considered as the 'gold standard' in the clinical diagnosis of covid-19, it has own limitations. as a pandemic, screening and isolation of the infected patients is the only way to reduce the spread of covid-19. in rt-pcr, the testing directly look for the presence of viral dna but serological tests detect the presence of antibodies/antigens in human blood against the covid-19. hence rt-pcr will give the positive results in 3-7 days of infection but serological test will take 7-14 days to give positive results. the test cost and testing time of pcr based assays inevitably demands the development of rapid serology tests [15] [16] [17] . several immunoassays are developed by various ivd companies for detecting covid-19 infection in serum, plasma and whole blood. among these strategies lateral flow immunoassays, elisa and chemiluminescence are most promising approaches.the limitation of rrt-pcr to detect covid-19 past infection and the progress of the disease, increases the importance of serological assays. the serological tests can detect both active and past infections, if the tests are performed within the correct time frame after the onset of the disease. in case of antibody detection assay, both igg and igm antibodies against the covid-19 are the target analytes where igm appears in blood within a week of time and igg expression will take more than 10 days. apart from antibody detection, antigen detection against spike glycoprotein and nucleocapsid protein is also under development which offers early detection of covid-19 infection. in case of rt-pcr one of the important reasons for false negative results is improper sampling (throat swab) and transport, whereas the sample of choice for serological test is serum/plasma/whole blood which are easy to handle and transport. serological tests like lfia for antigen/antibody detection can be used as a rapid test or a point of care testing which offers quick screening of the patients with limited expertise [18] . detecting antibody titre is important for convalescent plasma therapy and the development of vaccines for covid-19. apart from that, serological testing would also provide valuable information regarding the course and degree of immune response as well as the durability of immunity in both infected individuals and participants in the vaccine clinical trials. [19] .the lfia can be utilized as a preliminary testing tool for covid-19 in case of community spread or in mass population screening. at present the covid-19 igg/igm antibody evaluation kits based on lfia is widely available in market. upon covid-19 infection the igm and igg antibodies will start to develop in our body from 7-10 days and 14-20 days respectively. though igm can be detected earlier it also decreases and disappears earlier but igg can persist for a long time after the infection. even though the antibody test kits are reliable for preliminary screening, the test cannot be used as a confirmatory test because of nonspecific interaction of antibodies and other proteins in the blood with capture and detector molecules in the membrane, which may results in false positive or false negative results [20] .the main advantages of lfia are that it can be used as a rapid poc test and it can be detected using finger-pricked blood or serum/plasma. it does not require any instruments or expertise staff for carrying out the test and it gives result in 5-30 min [21] . the lfia antibody test for covid-19 can also be considered as a prognostic tool there by provides information about the immune status of the patient. mostly the lfia results are qualitative but can be made quantitative by the use of customized color readers. currently covid-19 antigen lfia test is under development which will offer more sensitive and specific result for covid-19 diagnosis and will detect the viral antigen in 3 days of infection [22] .enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (elisa) and chemiluminescence immunoassay (clia)the elisa and clia platforms are widely using serology techniques for the quantitative detection of specific antigen or antibody in the samples. zhang et al. have developed an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay for the detection of covid-19 igm and igg antibody from serum sample. sars-cov-2 rp3 nucleocapsid protein is adsorbed on the surface of a 96 well plate as capture molecule and anti-igg antibody conjugated with horse radish peroxidase is used as the detector molecule [23] . manual elisa kits for detecting covid-19 have been developed by ivd manufactures like ibl international, drg diagnostics gmbh, epitope diagnostics and euroimmun for detecting the igg and igm antibodies developed in response to covid-19 infection [24] . elisa and clia based covid-19 antigen detection kits are under development by ivd manufacturers worldwide.automated clia method can also detect igg and igm antibody in serum or plasma. the advantages of automated clia analyzers compared to rapid lfia tests is the very high throughput of samples and the ability to detect other biomarkers like c-reactive protein simultaneously [22] . dz-lite sars-cov-2 clia developed by diazyme, usa and maglumi clia developed by snibe, china are chemiluminescent analyzers which can detect igg and igm antibodies of covid-19.besides the aforementioned specific tests, certain routine biochemical and haematological tests show abnormal results in covid 19 patients. upon covid-19 infection the level of prothrombin time, lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), d-dimer, alanine transaminase (alt), c-reactive protein (crp), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr) and creatine kinase are elevated [25] . there is a marked lymphopenia with depletion of cd4 and cd8 lymphocytes in the early phase of the disease. as the disease progress patients show higher levels of interleukin-2 (il-2), il-7, il-10, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor(gcsf), interferon gamma-induced protein, monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (mcp1), macrophage inflammatory protein alpha and tumour necrosis factor-a (tnf-a). it's also noted that patients in intensive care show significant increase in amylase and d-dimer. and in case of non survivors there is a marked elevation in the level of ferritin, blood urea, neutrophil count, and d-dimer and creatinine levels. but procalcitonin (pct) is not elevated in covid 19. so procalcitonin level can be used for the differential diagnosis of covid 19 from bacterial pneumonia [26, 27] .the level of crp starts to rise at the time of mild pneumonia and reaches peak at severe pneumonia. the crp is also used as a marker of inflammation and the rise correlates with the level of inflammation regardless of the factors such as age, sex and physical condition. it is reported that the crp levels are positively correlated with lung lesions in early stage of covid 19 cases and can be used as a key indicator for disease monitoring [28, 29] .the nucleic acid based diagnostics methods and serological assays described above are serving as strong diagnostics tools for the covid-19 diagnosis. the assurance of quality of developed diagnostics kits is having prime importance at this scenario. even though recently many developments happened in the field of serological diagnosis for covid-19, still there are many concerns regarding the sensitivity and specificity of the assays. the complexity, cost effectiveness and limitations of nucleic acid based diagnostic tools, impetus the innovative development of well standardized, high sensitive, specific and low cost serological assays for covid-19 diagnosis.recently, a novel coronavirus was first reported to cause lethal pneumonia in humans and inter-person transmission in china. [1] . subsequent molecular studies confirmed that the origin of the transmissible pneumonia was due to a novel coronavirus named sars-cov-2 causing the new corona virus disease covid-19 (2) .as the covid-19 disease rapidly spread to other asian and european countries, the italian governmenthad to take drastic measures to contain the outbreak. the actions rolled outhave included establishing strict criteria to define patients from whomoropharingeal swabsshould be collected for molecular pcr diagnosis of covid-19 and to quarantine individualswho may have contacted infected people (3) .these measures have been active since some 4 weeks but the trend of new sars-cov-2 infected casesin italy is still increasing with more than 4000 new casesdaily (4).several attempts have been made to interpret the epidemiological trend of covid-19 in italy and experts have pinpointed the importance of the limited possibilityof making an early diagnosis of the infection (5) as well as the impossibility to detect asymptomatic subjects carrying the virus (6) .the rt-pcr test for identificationof viral nucleic acid is the current standard diagnostic method for the diagnosis of covid-19. however, this assay has some practical limitations (3)such as the annoying method to obtain biological material from the nasopharynx, the relatively long time to generate results, the need for certified laboratories and specific expertise. these limitations make rt-pcr unsuitable for a quick and simple patient screening and therefore, the search for a precise, rapid and simple test to quickly identify sars-cov-2 infected patients in a large scale screening has become urgent to prevent virus transmission and to ensure timely treatment of patients. the saw swee hock school of public health of the national university of singapore (https://sph.nus.edu.sg/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/covid-19-science-report-diagnostics-13-mar.pdf) recently reviewed the diagnostic test for covid-19 infection currently undergoing clinical validation by listing dozens of assays based on rt-pcr, realtimepcr, ngs, microfluidics. twelve immunoassays based on the evidence of covid-19 related igg andigmwere also listed. this latter experimental attempt, based on previous experiences with epidemic viral sars infection, argued that igm specific sars-cov-2 antibody could be detected in the blood after 3-6 days while iggsome days later (4). it has also been speculated that, since sars-all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.03.20052183 doi: medrxiv preprint cov-2 belongs to the same large family of viruses that caused the mers and sars epidemics, their antibody seroconversion should be similar (5) .in the previously mentioned report by singapore national university, an immunoassay described as with available information regarding sensitivity and specificity is viva-diag tm kit produced by jiangsu medomics medical technologies kit (https://www.vivachek.com/vivachek/english/prods/prod-covid19.html) which, according to the preliminary data available (6), may be a potential candidate for reliable and rapid (15 minutes) testing. the test has been reported to be based on the utilization of anti-human igg and anti igm against the recombinant antigen representing the receptor-binding domain of the covid-19 spike protein.based on these assumptions, we designed a study to verify the clinical information that the serological vivadiag tm test can provide compared to the standard rt -pcr lab test for sars-cov-2 andregarding the clinical outcome of patients.to this purpose, we set upa prospective, mono-institutional, ad hoc, blind and independent study enrolling a series of 191 patients.between march 23 rd and march 29 th , a consecutive cohort of 191 patients having access to emergency room of ospedale policlinico consorziale of bari for covid-19 disease orienting-symptoms has been enrolled. all these patients received oropharingeal swap for standard sars-cov-2 rt-pcr analysis and, simultaneously venous blood sampling for viva-diag tm test performance. registries and main clinical information comprising timing of appearance of symptoms were collected togheter with informed consent. oropharingeal swap samples were suddenly analyzed for sars-cov-2 rt-pcr in laboratory of molecular epidemiology and public health of the hygiene unit of policlinico hospital (bari, italy), which is the regional reference laboratory for the sars-cov-2 identification. venous blood sampled were analyzed in clinical pathology laboratory (certified iso-9001/2015;head e. savino) and institutional biobank (certified iso-9001/2015;head a. paradiso) of istituto tumori g paolo ii, irccs, bari (i). the study has been approved by ethical committee of istitutotumori g paolo ii, irccs, bari with protocol number ce 870/2020.nasopharyngeal/oropharyngeal swabs weresubjected to nucleic acid extraction by magna pure (roche diagnostics, mannheim, germany), according to the manufacturer's instructions. the presence of e gene, rdrp gene and n gene of sars-cov-2 virus were identified by a commercial real-time pcr assay (allplex2019-ncov assay; seegene, seoul, republic of korea). samples were all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.03.20052183 doi: medrxiv preprint considered positive at molecular screening if all the three genes were detected. moreover, the who real-time rrt-pcr protocol was used to confirm the presence of sars-cov-2 (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/uscdcrt-pcrp a n e l  -f  o  r  -d  e  t  e  c  t  i  o  n  -i  n  s  t  r  u  c  t  i  o  n  s  .  p  d  f  ?  s  f  v  r  s  n  =  3  a  a  0  7  9  3  4  _  2  ) . sars-cov-2 rapid igg-igm test sars-cov-2 rapid igg-igm viva-diag tm test combined antibody test kit designed and manufactured by jiangsu medomics medical technologies.the test is based on a lateral flow qualitative immunoassay for the rapid determination of the presence or absence of both anti-sars-cov-2-igm and anti-sars-cov-2-igg in human specimens (whole blood, serum, and plasma). a surface antigen from sars-cov-2 which can specifically bind to sars-cov-2 antibodies (including both igm and igg) is conjugated to colloidal gold nanoparticles and sprayed on conjugation pads. the sars-cov-2 rapid igg-igm combined antibody test strip has two mouse anti-human monoclonal antibodies (anti-igg and anti-igm) stripped on two separated test lines.when testing, 10-15ul of specimen was added into the sample port followed by the addition of sample dilution buffer. as the specimen flows through the device, anti-sars-cov-2 igg and igm antibodies, if present in the specimen, are bound by the sars-cov-2 antigen labeled gold colorimetric reagent fixed on the conjugate pad. as the conjugated sample continues to travel up the strip, the anti-sars-cov-2 igm antibodies are bound on the m(igm) line, and the anti-covid-19 igg antibodies are bound to the g (igg) line. if the specimen does not contain sars-cov-2 antibodies, no labeled complexes bind at the test. the presence of sars-cov-2 igg and igm antibodies are indicated by a red/purple line in the specific region indicated on the device.each test was evaluated by two operators and picture was taken. in case of disagreement, the picture was evaluated by a third party.the performance of thevivadiag tm tests was compared to that of the rt-pcr tests via the "caret" r package that computed all the parameters needed (accuracy, precision, recall, kappa). univariate and multivariate logistic regression was performed. age was dichotomized using the median as a cut-off; days from the onset of symptoms was also transformed into a categorical variable (0-5 days, 6-8 days, 9-10 days, 11-15 days, more than 15 days). all the analyses were carried outin r v3. 6 and results were considered to be significant when the p-value was <0.05.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.03.20052183 doi: medrxiv preprint all the 191 subjects enrolled in the study had a sars-cov-2 rt-pcr test and rapidigg/igm test performed. the cohort had a median age of 58.5 years, 60.62% were male and had presented to the emergency room at different times from the onset of symptoms. a description of the symptoms wasavailable in 160 of the191 patients. fourteen subjects (8.7%) were asymptomatic at time the came to the emergency room . 70 patients (37%) had positive sars-cov-2 rt-pcr tests while 33 (18%) had positive serum igm/iggtests. compared to the rt-pcrtest, the serological test showed an accuracy of 0.67 (95%ci: 0.604-0.741), a sensitivity of 30% and a specificity of 0.89%. cohen's kappa value was 0.21, whose strength of agreement, according to altman (10) was considered "fair". notably,13 patients (7%) had positiveserological testsbut negative rt-pcrresult. the distribution of the percentage of positive results detected by both tests broken down by days from symptom onset is shown in figure 1 . aclear increase inpositive serological tests can be observed as more days elapsed from symptom appearance, reaching 66.67% 15 days after symptom onset. conversely, the highest likelihood of a positive rt-pcr test resultwas seen9-10 days from symptom onset and it decreased after that point in time. amongstthe asymptomatic individuals,28.57% had positive rt-pcr test result while21.43% had serological test one. a further analysis regardingthe behavior of igm and iggaccording to the time from symptom onset is described in figure 2 . only minimal differences in the behavior of the two immunoglobulins with respect tothe time of symptom appearance became evident. however, all 13 patients withvivadiag tm positive test and negative rt-pcr result (6.8%) were positive for igm while only 7 subjects resulted positive for igg. univariate and multivariate logistic regressions were performedto look for independent variables predictive of positive vivadiag tm and rt-pcr test results (table 2 ).both univariate and multivariate analysesshowed that age>58.5years and more than 15 days from symptom onset were significantly associated with vivadiag tm positivity while 9-10 days after symptom onset was related to positive rt-pcr test result.the clinical relevance of so-called rapid serological testing is still an open issue since the data currently available are still scarce (9) . for this reason we have analyzed its performance compared to standard rt-pcr testing and with respect to the time of onset of covid-19 related symptoms. to this end, we set up a mono-all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.03.20052183 doi: medrxiv preprint institutional consecutive cohort of patients who were tested with both assays each in a single qualified laboratory. the design of our study allowed us to specifically analyze two aspects of the open issue: the concordance of the rapid serological test with standard molecular testing; the trend of immunoglobulinsigg/igmexpression with respect to the onset of clinical symptoms.regarding the degree of concordance between the two tests, the results reported in table 1 clearly show that the precision of the rapidserological test viva-diag tm is unsatisfactory. notably, only 43% of the patients that were covid-19-positive with the molecular test were also positive with serological test. this figure is impressively similar to the performances reported for serological tests in spain (11) and germany (12). however, the first important information from our study concerns the 12% of cases that tested negative with molecular test but had positive serological results. the two tests do not produce similar results as would be obvious for assays that look at different aspects of covid-19; in fact, the molecular test demonstrates the presence of sars-cov-2 virus in samples from specific anatomical parts of the respiratory system while the kinetics of immunoglobulinsis devoted to describe as the body reacts to the viral infection. negative serological test results in patients with a positive molecular test could mean that the latter are infected subjects that have not yet reached the stage of developing an immunoglobulin reaction; conversely, subjects whose serological tests show the presence of specific igg and/or igm antibodies and have negative molecular tests, may be considered as recovering from covid-19. the data shown in figure 1 seem to confirm these assumptions as the molecular test yielded more positive results in early symptomatic phases of the disease while the serological test performed better in the late phases of the disease (i.e. 10 days after symptom appearance).the second aspect we were able to analyze in our study regarded seroconversion and the kinetics of immunoglobulins with respect to the onset of covid-19 related symptoms. figure 2 shows the behavior of the two immunoglobulins with respect to symptom appearance. interestingly, igg and igm do not seem to behave differently based on the number of days elapsing from symptom appearance but they display a clear progressive increase along the course of the disease. this unexpected finding, in contrast with common thinking concerning the kinetics of the two immunoglobulins, is supported by the results reported by zhang (13) and lou (14) reportingthat detectable serology markers igg and igm had a similar seroconversion in covid-19 patients with antibody levels increasing rapidly starting from 6 days post exposure and that this trend occurred with a concomitant decline in viral load. such a behavior in the 6-10 day time window after all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.03.20052183 doi: medrxiv preprint symptom appearance is accompanied by an improvement in serological test sensitivity compared to standard molecular testing our study has some important limitations. firstly, the viva-diag tm test is based on a colorimetric evaluation of the igg and igm bands by the operator thus implying all the limitations that a qualitative inter-intra-operator evaluation produce in terms of variability (15) . in our study, this aspect was partially solved by resorting to double operator evaluation and taking picture of all test results to be re-analyzed by a third party in the case of first level evaluation disagreement. however, in this regard, our next step of research to overcome the issues met,will be to use quantitative immunoenzymatic methods to analyze sars-cov-2 specific immunoglobulins (16) . a further limitation of our study regarded the fact that the neutralizing antibodies used in the viva-diag tm test might cross-react with other corona-virus antigens, like those of the sars-cov. the recombinant antigen utilized in viva-diagis the receptor binding domain of sars-cov-2 spike protein for which information on possible cross-reactivity with other corona and flu viruses has not yet been studied (9) . further studies are urgently needed to definitely clarify this point.our study analyzed theclinical performance of the rapid serological test, viva-diag tm and confirmedthe test's limited applicability for the diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infection when compared to standard molecular testing. however, this rapid serological test seems to provide important information concerning the immunoreaction of individuals to the infection and, more importantly, it may detect previous exposure to the virus in currently healthy persons. the trial, recently registered in clinicaltrial.gov (nct04316728), specifically addresses this issue by planning to investigate the monitoringof seroconversion of covid-19 igg/igm in healthy subjects who may develop covid-19 related symptoms. 1 1all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.03.20052183 doi: medrxiv preprint author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.03.20052183 doi: medrxiv preprintin december 2019, numerous cases of pneumonia of unknown etiology were reported in 46 wuhan (china) [1] . in january, the novel causative virus named sars-cov-2 was identified, 47 which spread to other chinese regions and to other countries, causing a world pandemic [2, 3] . 48 the clinical presentation of this disease, named "coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19)", 49 varied from asymptomatic or mild flu-like symptoms to severe bilateral pneumonia with acute 50 respiratory distress and death. a rapid replication of the virus within the first 24 hours from 51 the infection and the relatively high (about 3) reproduction number were described [4] . 52 the available viral genome sequences allowed to soon recognize the close relationship (recombination), thus donating them some genomic plasticity [5] . furthermore, rna 59 biosynthesis seems to use a virus-specific template switch, which results in transcription of 60 sub-genomic mrnas and eventually leading to homologous rna recombination [5] . 61 nevertheless, by encoding a 3'-5'exoribonuclease within nonstructural protein 14 (nsp14-62 exon), which is required for high-fidelity replication, the mutation capacity of sars-cov-2 63 is debated [6] . in the end, somehow the plasticity allowed coronaviridae to acquire a rich 64 strains biodiversity and the ability to jump species, which already caused previous zoonotic 65 outbreaks, as for mers-cov and sars-cov [7-9]. 66 starting from observed similarities in a short region of rdrp gene between sars-cov-2 and 67 a bat coronavirus (batcovratg13), further sequences were identified to be 96% identical at 68 the whole-genome level, corroborating the hypothesis of animals to humans spill-over [10].as of june 3, more than 6 million cases of covid-19 have been declared, including more rna extraction methods can generally be classified into i) one-step (with the rt step and the 106 pcr reaction in the same tube) and ii) two-steps rt-pcr (initial creation of dna copies 107 with rt reaction followed by their addiction to the pcr reaction). typically, one-step pcr table 1 ), which can allow to improve sensitivity and 113 tat but also sometimes increase the costs.despite the good performance of the validated naats, there is still a risk of false negative 115 results. most of them concern the pre-analytic setting, such as the timing of the specimen 116 collection (too early or too late in the infection course, including the limit of detection due to 117 late infections with atypical manifestations), the quality of sampling (insufficient material) or 118 type of specimens (bronchoalveolar lavage -bal exhibits the highest sensitivity, followed by 119 induced sputum, naso-pharyngeal -np swab, oro-pharyngeal -op swab, and feces), and finally 120 the sample transport (inappropriate container, exposure to extreme temperatures, etc.) [18] [19] . sensitivity and specificity of serological assays can also be affected by the target antigen. as 146 highlighted by meyer and colleagues, the s protein (produced in more advanced stage of 147 sars-cov-2 infection) showed lower levels of sensitivity and more specificity (especially 148 the s1 subunit) compared to the n protein, [38] . noteworthy, we recently observed (a. coste 149 et al., data not shown) that the antibodies directed against the n protein seems to decrease 150 earlier than the s protein; thus the sensitivity of assays targeting only the n protein may be 151 impaired according to the timing of infection (figure 1 ). for this reason, we recommend to 152 systematically use two tests, one targeting the s protein and one targeting the n protein for 153 diagnostic purposes. for sero-epidmiological studies, a test targeting the s protein is 154 recommended. the added value to target the s protein is that the titers will likely better reflect 155 protection against reinfection. in table 2 we summarized the interpretation of diagnostic assays with sensitivity greater than 95% and specificity superior or equal to 98% should be 165 used. as well as for naats, different platforms can be considered also for serological tests. interestingly, the appearance of igm occurs at the same time than igg, thus, the main 183 advantage to also test igm is to assess the timing of the infection. table 3 . 206 while serological assays can represent a useful epidemiological asset, naats remains the 207 gold standard for diagnosis, due to their high sensitivity even at early stages of the disease. samples like blood and urines were found to be weakly-to-none sensitive, while the virus was 231 also found in feces and perineal swabs of patients with gastro-intestinal symptoms [44] [45] , 