the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic has become a global threat to public health. 1 the disease is believed to be of zoonotic origin. 2, 3 snakes, pangolins, and turtles are speculated to be intermediate host(s). 4 severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is the causative organism for covid-19. 5 betacoronavirus, which is based on the most conserved sequence of coronavirus genome, that is, the open reading frame 1a/1b (orf1a/1b) responsible for replicases encoding. 6 the rna genome has 29,891 nucleotides and share 79% sequence identity with sars-cov and 50% sequence identity with middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov). 6, 7 the phylogeny of this accepted article coronavirus show that it is most close to the bat coronavirus (batcov) ratg13, with 96.3% sequence identity. 3 the sars-cov2 spike (s) protein is thought to mediate the virus entering host cells via surface angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2). 7, 8 covid-19 patients can be asymptomatic or symptomatic. the incubation period for symptomatic development in covid-19 is approximately 4-7 days. 9 based on the severity of symptoms, covid-19 can be classified into three categories. 1, 2, 10 mild cases are marked by the onset of symptoms such as fever, cough, fatigue, headache, diarrhea, and so forth, with or without mild pneumonia. severe cases demonstrate dyspnea, acute respiratory stress, decrease in blood oxygen saturation, lung infiltrates, multiple peripheral ground-glass opacities on both lungs, and so forth. critical cases present symptoms such as respiratory or multiple organ failure and septic shock. the mortality rate of covid-19 is estimated to be about 2.3%, with a range from 6 to 41 days from the onset of symptoms to death. 10, 11 covid-19 patients also develop dyslipidemia which is associated with the disease severity. 12, 13 many cancer biomarkers such as carcinoembryonic antigen (cea) and carbohydrate antigens (ca) have shown an elevation in various inflammatory conditions in the lungs. [14] [15] [16] we posit that sars-cov-2-induced acute lung injuries may be associated with elevations of some cancer biomarkers. in this study, we performed a thorough investigation of the pathological profiles of covid-19 from a series of laboratory serum tests; these profiles may reflect the progression of the disease. we found that the levels of a panel of serum cancer this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.biomarkers were positively associated with the severity of covid-19, demonstrating the diffuse and acute lung injuries in patients. statistical analyses were performed with the spss software (ibm, armonk, ny, usa). differences among groups were analyzed by chi square. a mann-whitney u test was used to compare differences between two groups. a pearson correlation analysis was used to calculate the correlation coefficiency. the data was presented as "mean ± standard deviation (s.d.)" or "mean ± 95% confident interval (ci)". p<0.05 was considered as statistical significance. table 2) . patients showed a significant lymphopenia with a degree associated with the disease severity (mild: 1.6 ± 0.6; severe: 1.4 ± 0.7; critical: 0.9 ± 0.5; in g/l; p<0.001) ( table 2) . il-6 levels dramatically increased in all categories of cases ( table 2) . il-4 and ifn-γ levels increased in critical cases. changes in wbc, il2, il10, tnf-α, and many other metabolic profiles in patients were not in evidence ( table 2, supplementary table 2 ). this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.there were significant increases in levels of he4 (73.6 ± 38. 3 with levels in the normal subjects (fig 1) . the levels of all these biomarkers exhibited significantly gradual increases in patients across cases in all categories ( fig 1, table 2 , p<0.02). nse, scc, and ca199 levels increased significantly only in critical cases as compared with levels in normal subjects, mild and critical cases ( fig 1f, table 2, p<0.05) . we had all female subjects in normal control group of he4, which data had a gender bias. in order to determine whether the gender was a potential factor contributing to the elevation of he4 in patients, we divided the cohort based on genders in each category. both female and male patients with mild covid-19 showed significant higher levels of he4 as compared with the normal subjects (fig 1a, p<0.05) ; they also showed gradual increases in he4 levels in correlation with the disease severity, regardless of genders (fig 1a, p<0.05 ).the number of lymphocytes was inversely correlated with levels of he4 (r= -0.375, p<0.001) in covid-19 patients (fig 2a) , but was not associated with other cancer biomarkers we examined in this study (data not shown). crp levels were positively correlated with he4 (r= 0.631, p<0.001, fig 2b) , cyfra21-1 (r= this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. 0.431, p<0.001, fig 2c) , cea (r= 0.316, p<0.001, fig 2d) , ca125 (r= 0.223, p=0.031, fig 2e), ca153 (r= 0.359, p<0.001, fig 2f) , scc (r= 0.351, p<0.001, fig 2g) , and nse (r= 0.316, p<0.001, fig 2h) , respectively.in this study, we retrospectively summarized a series of clinical laboratory tests on serum from covid-19 patients, including metabolic panels and a set of 13 cancer biomarkers. this is the first report with such a substantial evaluation of cancer biomarkers on a large patient population of covid-19. our data demonstrate that levels of serum he4, cyfra21-1, cea, ca125, ca153, scc and nse are positively associated with crp, a crucial factor in correlation with the severity of the disease. our findings provide insights into the detailed pathological evolution of covid-19 in patients; this will not only aid in understanding the disease's molecular pathology, and facilitate early diagnosis, but will also help in assessing long-term outcomes.in this study, we did not include any patients with cancer diagnoses; therefore, the elevation of these cancer biomarkers was not related to preexisting conditions of tumorigenesis. many studies have shown that cancer biomarkers such as cea and carbohydrate antigens are also elevated in various inflammatory conditions in the lungs. for example, cea is increased in smoking subjects; 14 cyfra21-1 is increased in pulmonary alveolar proteinosis; 15 and ca125 is increased in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 16 he4 levels are correlated with the severity of cystic fibrosis. 17 more interestingly, a recent study this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.has shown that carbohydrate antigens such as ca199 can cause rapid and severe pancreatitis with hyperactivation of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling and promote pancreatic cancer in an animal model. 18 many studies have shown that cancer biomarkers such as cea and carbohydrate antigens and he4 are also elevated in various inflammatory conditions in the lungs. 15-17 a potential mechanism underlying our data is that upregulation of he4, cea, and cyfra21-1 can reflect an acute alveolar injury. crp is an inflammatory marker.the positive correlations between crp and cea or ca biomarkers have been found in other diseases such as gastric and colon cancer, and parkinson's disease. 19, 20 crp is a crucial factor associated with the severity of covid-19. 12, 13 the positive correlations between crp and series cancer biomarkers we showed in this study demonstrate that these cancer biomarkers can present the diffuse and acute lung injuries in covid-19.there are several limitations of this study. first, a long-term follow-up is needed in order to determine whether elevated cancer biomarkers in patients are transient or long-term as a risk of tumorigenesis. second, surveillance of these serum markers during treatment is very important in order to provide a molecular basis for how this disease responds to various treatments. third, the normal control subjects for he4 were all female, which data had a gender bias. data are presented as mean (sd). chi square was used for comparisons. n.s., no significance. *data were measured from the normal subjects in each control group in supplementary table 1 .a workflow of the coronavirus primary screening has been shown in figure 1 . a reliable diagnosis of the viral infection is one the most urgent priorities for public health management of the disease spread. usually in acute respiratory infection, rt-pcr is traditionally employed to identify viruses in respiratory secretions. a robust detection technology is usually based on real-time rt-pcr because it is highly sensitive and specific, although it requires infrastructure, skilled personnel and at least 4-6 hours for analysis. currently available techniques do not provide results before several hours or even days, and the tests require a well-equipped laboratory and trained personnel. indeed, these methods are not efficient to rapidly screen a high number of individuals in places where thousands of people transit per hours. these methods are effective in confirming the infections when symptoms are already present but they are completely inefficient to identify infections at asymptomatic stage. the development of a means for a quick and simple detection of this virus in humans is a worldwide priority considering that infections have been observed in world areas such as africa where the scarce health assistance will not be able to control the spread. indeed, it is important to generate new ideas that will allow the development of new detection prototypes able to quickly identify infected humans and prevent the virus from spreading.a large number of possible host-pathogen biomarkers (transcripts, mirnas, proteins, metabolites) may be analyzed through different omic tools. here, we propose the application of a portable instrument based on the analysis of molecular responses at transcript level. the proposed approach consists in the adaptation of an existing infield portable technology currently used for real-time detection of viral agents in plants, for detection of sars-cov-2 in for destruction of sars-cov-2 before irreversible negative effects on human health has occurred (these approaches may focus on targeting of human immune system); and (c) identification of pathways and bioactive compounds that can stimulate the innate immune responses. indeed, the proposed approach is to identify and analyze biomarkers modulated in either host or pathogen at early stages of infection. when any eukaryotic host is subjected to stress, an "induced stress response" occurs similarly to the host "inflammatory response" to pathogen-associated and pathogen-induced virulence factors. 5 if the induced stress response is enhanced, tissue injury can happen, causing to irreversible effects at asymptomatic stages, because it is often too late to avoid tissue and organ damages once symptoms appear. during the early stages of this condition, the induction of immune stress-related genes and pathways commonly associated with pathogen infection and physiological disorders occur and these genes are typically associated with general early state of stress response. other differentially regulated genes at the presymptomatic stage are stress specific and may work as useful biomarkers for the early diagnosis of the host health conditions. these responses include changes in the key metabolic pathways associated with key indicators of early stages of infection of known pathogens. usually, this stress condition usually anticipates the manifestation of symptoms associated with diseases. for this reason, a focus on the analysis of key genes, transcripts, proteins, metabolites, or pathways could be used to monitor the human health status. these induced biological molecules may be used as biomarkers for both stress identification and recovery. the identification of molecules that are early host responses associated in a reversible stress status using portable instruments is the first stage for asymptomatic diagnosis. the biomarker's identification needs the analysis of large data sets through web-based applications that queries large public databases of information on transcripts, proteins, or metabolites modulated in specific biological conditions (ie, genevestigator).here, we propose the employment of an instrument that is already widely used for plant pathogens 6,7 and could be easily adapted also for the detection of sars-cov-2. the idea is to use a porta- no host genes strictly specific for a specific pathogen. however, a pool of responsive host genes might be employed as host biomarkers to quickly identify early alarm stress state, better than aspecific methods currently used such the measurement of body temperature for fever detection. a biomarker can be defined as a biological characteristic that can be analyzed and considered as an indicator of a particular physiological such as pathogenic processes, or responses to a therapeutic intervention. in omic sciences, a "biomarker profile" includes a series of transcriptomic, proteomic, and/or metabolomic features linked with a particular stress, development of physiological condition. combined, these characteristics could become a biomarker of pathogenic condition assisting in diagnosis and therapy. a systems-based approach could gain insight into underlying biological regulatory network (brn) governing interactions between hosts and pathogens. heterogeneous omic data sets could be integrated to define a biological regulatory network underlying early host and pathogen biomarkers for asymptomatic detection of the viral infections. to assist the biomarkers discovery, the vast amount of transcriptomic data available in public databases in response to human coronaviruses will allow a deep meta-analysis using previously customized bioinformatics pipelines ref. [8] [9] [10] [11] . this work consists of re-analyzing raw data obtained by independent experiments using a normalization and standardization procedure included in a bioinformatics pipeline. this work will provide differentially regulated genes from each study finding commonalities and differences in genes,proteomics may be also used to validate the discovery of transcriptional markers analyzing the same infection stages considered at transcript level. a possible technique could be the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (itraq), typically employed in quantitative proteomics using tandem mass spectrometry to analyze quantitative measurements of protein amount from different sources in a single experiment. briefly, once proteins are extracted from the same collected tissues (nostril tissues), they may be precipitated using proteoextracttm protein precipitation kit (calbiochem), dehydrated, resuspended, and digested with tripsin and generated peptides analyzed using a system composed by qexactive mass spectrometer, an easy-lc and a nanospray ionization source. data could be acquired using a data-dependent ms/ms method and raw data should be analyzed using x!tandem, visualized using scaffold dk/servi ces/netng lyc/). this approach has been successful to determine more than 4500 proteins in plants including both host and pathogen. 7 considering the systemic presence of sars-cov-2, the identification of specific genes from peripheral blood and different tissues would be very helpful to discover tissue-specific host biomarkers. the viral infection is typically perceived by the host before that the viral nucleic acid can be detected by traditional methods such as quantitative real-time pcr.here, we propose the use of the portable device such as bcube®2.0 (developed by hyris ltd).the device is a miniaturized device that is able to perform both temperature cycles and isothermal analysis, enabling a wide array of nucleic acid detection methods such as qpcr and isothermal ampli- gene expression could be conducted collecting samples from human nostrils with tools such as cotton swabs. confirmation may be performed blood samples. rna may be extracted from these collection instruments with a quick procedure using simplified extraction procedures.the typical workflow for the use of the instrument for pathogen detection is shown in figure 4 . results may be provided in approximately 2 hours. at the moment, the developed software and hardware are used to target the pathogen dna, but a next step could f i g u r e 2 components of hyris platform: bcube ® , bapp, bkit, and starter kit f i g u r e 3 additional details of the components of the portable system be the analysis of host xf-regulated genes discovered by meta-analysis works. implementation and validation tests of the results obtained directly by the portable device could be conducted analyzing the same tissues with traditional laboratory equipment. this work would verify the consistency of the field results delivered by the instrument.the proposed instrument fits well when a quick, easy, reliable and inhouse early detection (and confirmation) is required to rapidly decontaminate environments and initiate quarantine of infected individuals.the workflow for a secondary coronavirus screening using bcube ® is f i g u r e 4 typical workflow for the use of bcube ® for detection of pathogens from dann extraction to results readout f i g u r e 5 possible workflow of coronavirus secondary screening using bcube ® portable instrument shown in figure 5 . the system is able to detect not only viruses, but also specific bacteria, proteins, and dna molecules, an increased or reduced concentration of which in a person's saliva, blood and other tissues (ie, nostrils) provide the diagnosis of the sars-cov-2 infections.the most important aspect of this tool is the extreme ease of use and the automatic interpretation of the results. the app has an intuitive interface and can guide the operator through every step of the setup and analysis. initiation in the analysis is simple and the automatic result interpretation engine can assist the operator in determining the outcome.the supplied power source works at both 110 v and 220 v, and the power cord can be easily interchanged with the one compatible with the standard of your destination country. real-time and remote control of the bcubes is allowed thanks to the connection to hyris bdata ® service. the instrument is well suitable to work on boats and other quarantine environments for the possibility to have results in short time. it also fits well in the airports after a quick scan of other symptoms (ie, fever) in order to confirm the presence of the viral infections.we certify that lorenzo colombo, stefano lo priore, isabella della noce and simone romano are employees of hyris ltd. that produces the bcube® instrument described in this article.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8502-767xaims as of the 28th april 2020, the covid-19 pandemic has infiltrated over 200 countries and affected over three million confirmed people. we review different biomarkers to evaluate if they are able to predict clinical outcomes and correlate with the severity of covid-19 disease. methods a systematic review of the literature was carried out to identify relevant articles using six different databases. keywords to refine the search included 'covid-19', 'sars-cov2', 'biomarkers', among others. only studies which reported data on pre-defined outcomes were included. key findings thirty-four relevant articles were identified which reviewed the following biomarkers: c-reactive protein, serum amyloid a, interleukin-6, lactate dehydrogenase, neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio, d-dimer, cardiac troponin, renal biomarkers, lymphocytes and platelet count. of these, all but two, showed significantly higher levels in patients with severe complications of covid-19 infection compared to their non-severe counterparts. lymphocytes and platelet count showed significantly lower levels in severe patients compared to non-severe patients. significance although research is still in its early stages, the discovery of how different biomarkers behave during the course of the disease could help clinicians in identifying severe disease earlier and subsequently improve prognosis. nevertheless, we urge for more research across the globe to corroborate these findings.the role of biomarkers in diagnosis of covid-19 - a systematic review.aims as of the 28th april 2020, the covid-19 pandemic has infiltrated over 200 countries and affected over three million confirmed people. we review different biomarkers to evaluate if they are able to predict clinical outcomes and correlate with the severity of covid-19 disease. methods a systematic review of the literature was carried out to identify relevant articles using six different databases. keywords to refine the search included 'covid-19', 'sars-cov2', 'biomarkers', among others. only studies which reported data on pre-defined outcomes were included. key findings thirty-four relevant articles were identified which reviewed the following biomarkers: c-reactive protein, serum amyloid a, interleukin-6, lactate dehydrogenase, neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio, d-dimer, cardiac troponin, renal biomarkers, lymphocytes and platelet count. of these, all but two, showed significantly higher levels in patients with severe complications of covid-19 infection compared to their non-severe counterparts. lymphocytes and platelet count showed significantly lower levels in severe patients compared to non-severe patients. significance although research is still in its early stages, the discovery of how different biomarkers behave during the course of the disease could help clinicians in identifying severe disease earlier and subsequently improve prognosis. nevertheless, we urge for more research across the globe to corroborate these findings.the role of biomarkers in diagnosis of covid-19 - a systematic review.on december 2019, wuhan city in china, became the epicentre of unexplained cases of pneumonia. on january 2020, chinese scientists identified this as a novel coronavirus, temporarily labelled as, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2)(1). its name was then changed to coronavirus disease 2019 by the world health organization in february 2020 as the disease spread worldwide (2) .it has been suggested the outbreak has a zoonotic origin, and like other respiratory pathogens, it spreads through human-to-human transmission such as coughing and sneezing (3) . although limited, research suggests a possibility of transmission even amongst the asymptomatic (4) .as of the 28 th april 2020, over 200 countries have been affected by the covid-19 disease with over three million confirmed cases leading to over 200,000 deaths. yet it is believed many remain unreported in certain areas of the world(1).j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 6 d-dimer, platelet count, high-sensitivity troponin i (hs-tni) and renal markers. table   1 summarises the study's characteristics.crp is a plasma protein produced by the liver and induced by various inflammatory mediators such as il-6. despite being non-specific, this acute phase reactant is used clinically as a biomarker for various inflammatory conditions; a rise in crp levels are associated with an increase in disease severity (7) .the application of crp in covid-19 has been highlighted by a retrospective singlecentre study in wuhan, china, where the majority of patients in the severe cohort showed significantly higher levels compared to the non-severe cohort (57.9 mg/l vs 33.2 mg/l, p < 0.001) (8) . a second retrospective cohort study found the likelihood of progressing to severe covid-19 disease increased in patients with crp levels greater than 41.8mg/l (9) . both studies suggest crp levels are a strong indicator to reflect the presence and severity of covid-19 infection.furthermore, a study from unpublished observations suggests crp is one of the first biomarkers within blood plasma that changes to reflect physiological complications; if accepted crp will be the most effective biomarker to predict the progression of covid-19 infection. contrastingly, the same study illustrated some cases of infection which showed changes in serum amyloid a (saa) instead of evoking significant crp changes thus requiring further evaluation (10) .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 7 pathologically, computed tomography (ct) scans can identify lung lesions relating to covid-19. nonetheless, a study conducted in china revealed ct scores could not differentiate mild cases from severe. however, compared to erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr), crp levels were significantly greater during early periods of severe cases and proved to be a more sensitive biomarker in reflecting disease development(12).the excellent performance of crp as a biomarker is reflected in the 'area under curve' in the receiver operating analysis of 0.87 (95% ci, 0.10-1.00) where values 83% and 91% represent sensitivity and specificity, respectively. hence compared to ct scans alone, crp values are more reliable for earlier identification of case severity (12). table 2 summarises the studies used in analysing crp and covid-19.cytokine release syndrome (crs) is an over-exaggerated immune response involving an overwhelming release of pro-inflammatory mediators. this mechanism underlies several pathological processes including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) (13). studies investigating the role of cytokines in sars and mers have had also found a link between crs and disease severity (14) .understanding their role in covid-19 disease may help facilitate the design of novel immunotherapies.studies have revealed that levels of il-6, the most common type of cytokine released by activated macrophages, rise sharply in severe manifestations of covid-19 (15) . however, since most studies to date have been observational, it is difficult to j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 8 extrapolate if the rise is significant enough to cause the manifestations seen in severe forms.one meta-analysis reviewing six studies show mean il-6 concentrations were 2.9fold higher in patients with complicated covid-19 compared to those with noncomplicated disease (n=1302; 95% ci 1. 17-7.19) (16) . in its analysis, the outcomes of the studies include icu admission, onset of ards and mortality. since the proportionate rise of il-6 is correlated with disease severity, this study can prove ground-breaking. although clinicians can use this to identify severity earlier and commence oxygen therapy sooner, the varying outcomes makes it somewhat difficult to ascertain what level of il-6 corresponds to what negative outcome.furthermore, many studies recruited participants from the same centre, giving rise to the potential of selection bias. table 3 summarises the studies used in analysing il-6 and covid-19.white blood cells (wbcs), known as leucocytes are a component of blood generated from bone marrow and lymphoid tissue. they are divided into two major groups, granulocytes and agranulocytes. within the granulocyte group are eosinophils, basophils and neutrophils (nc), whereas lymphocytes (lc) and monocytes are present in agranulocytes. a disproportionate number of these cells may reveal an underlying infection and hence can be measured using blood tests, producing a wcc. however, the reliability of wcc as a biomarker for covid-19 remains unproven.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 9 0.001). ncs were predominantly driving this increase as the severe set (4.3 vs 3.2 × 10 9 /l ; p < 0.001). interestingly, the levels of lymphocytes, monocytes, basophils and eosinophils were less, resulting in a greater neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (nlr; 5.5 vs 3.2; p < 0.001). nlr is an infamous biomarker, high in wide-spread inflammatory conditions and can be used to reflect disease severity. however, a larger study is needed to clarify nlr's effectiveness as a biomarker.another conducted in china concludes similar findings of high nc and low lc count in severely affected patients, suggesting nlr could be a potential biomarker for early detection of severe covid-19 (17) .however, other factors may disrupt the accuracy of the wcc results observed.these include glucocorticoid therapy and other underlying viral/bacterial infections (11) .lc is separately addressed in the literature, secondary to nlr. a descriptive study in china reported depleted lc levels in the majority of covid-19 patients (15) .another study has found low blood lymphocyte percentage (lym%) in critically ill patients, suggesting low lc count indicates poor prognosis. however, since the virus can target lymphoid tissue and mechanisms of il-6, other causes of low lc count must be investigated (18) . similar to nlr, the clinical benefits of lc count as a biomarker for covid-19 remains uncertain. table 4 summarises the studies used in analysing wcc and covid-19.in glucose metabolism, the enzyme ldh converts pyruvate to lactate. ldh secretion is triggered by necrosis of the cell membrane, hinting to viral infection or lung journal pre-proof j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 10 damage, such as the pneumonia induced by sars-cov-2 (19) . there is convincing evidence linking ldh levels to the development of covid-19 disease (20) .a study found significantly higher levels of ldh in icu patients than non-icu patients (248 u/l vs 151 u/l, p=0.002). since high levels of ldh continued in the icu patients number of days post-admission (160 u/l vs 218 u/l, p=0.002), ldh may be a predictive biomarker of severe disease. however, the one centre study may be prone to selection bias which could potentially reduce its validity (21).a multi-centre study involving 1099 patients reported supporting evidence correlating extent of tissue damage and inflammation with increasing levels of ldh (22) . furthermore, when ldh levels were correlated with ct scans, significantly higher levels reflected the severity of pneumonia (23) .there is increasing confidence in using ldh as a biomarker to measure severity of covid-19 infection. another study found that there was a significant rise in ldh levels among refractory covid-19 patients (24). table 5 summarises the studies used in analysing ldh and covid-19.d-dimer originate from the lysis of cross-linked fibrin with rising levels indicating the activation of coagulation and fibrinolysis (25) . early studies have associated covid-j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 11 studies have reported that nearly 90% of inpatients with pneumonia had increased coagulation activity marked rising d-dimer levels (28) .furthermore, huang et al. found that levels of d-dimer on admission could be used to triage patients into critical care (5) . the researchers found that median d-dimer levels were higher in icu patients compared to non-icu patients (2.4 mg/l vs. 0.5mg/l; p=0.0042). this, along with the previous study, suggest that d-dimer levels can be used as a prognostic marker and help clinicians monitor those who are likely to deteriorate earlier. however, this study confirmed the diagnosis of covid-19 using lower respiratory tract specimens and did not use paired nasopharyngeal swabs to investigate the viral rna detection rate between the upper and lower respiratory tract specimens. secondly, with a cohort size of 41 patients, it is difficult to assess predictors of disease severity and mortality with multivariable-adjusted methods. table 6 summarises the studies used to analyse d-dimer and covid-19.as seen with previous coronavirus outbreaks, covid-19 infection leads to severe haematological changes leading to thrombocytopenia. a retrospective study which used cox proportional hazard regression analysis found that platelet count is an independent risk factor for mortality among covid-19 patients, where a 50x10 9 /l increase is associated with 40% deceased mortality (hr 0.60, 95%ci: 0.43, 0.84) (30) . here, thrombocytopenia at admission was more likely to occur in non-survivors than in survivors. although many risk factors were accounted for in this study, the possibility for unmeasured confounder cannot be excluded.another study corroborates the previously documented work. the nadir platelet count was significantly associated with mortalityand the lower the nadir, the stronger the association(31). again, thrombocytopenia was more likely to occur in non-survivors than survivors. this study is from adequate sample sizes providing statistical power, however, similar to the previous studies, they are all retrospective making the correlation seen difficult to extrapolate from.testing the platelet count is a routine part of laboratory tests and the literature suggests it has inherent value in providing more detail on the patient's condition. table 7 summarises the studies used in analysing platelet count and covid-19.there is growing evidence of higher mortality rates among those with underlying cardiovascular disease due to covid-19 infection (22) . some have investigated the use of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin i (hs-tni) as a marker of disease progression and mortality. based on sars-cov-2 rna detection, revealed a univariable odds ratio for death at 80.1 (95% ci 10.3-620.4, p<0.0001) for hs-tni(32). this risk was higher compared to other biomarkers such as d-dimer and lymphocyte count. another study of 416 hospitalised patients with covid-19 reported that hs-tni was elevated in 1 in 5 patients on presentation (33) . these patients were more likely to require invasive (22% vs 4%, p<0.001) or non-invasive (46% vs 4% , p<0.001) ventilation, develop ards (59% vs 15%, p<0.001) or acute kidney injury (9% vs 0%, p<0.001).early recognition of myocardial injury indicated by elevated hs-tni aid in appropriate triage to a critical care area and inform the use of inotropes and vasopressors.however, elevated levels are common in hospitalized patients and are likely to be due to non-ischaemic causes of myocardial injury. this may lead to inappropriate use of cardiology consultation and downstream testing and increased risk to cardiac physiology staff. table 8 summarises the studies used in analysing hs-tni and covid-19.there is also evidence that chronic kidney disease is associated with severe forms of covid-19 infection (34) .studies have demonstrated significantly higher levels of renal biomarkers such as serum urea, creatinine and markers of glomerular filtration rate in severe cases (35) .since these results stem from the analysis of 28 patients, extrapolation across larger cohorts is more difficult.a larger study of 701 patients revealed that elevated serum creatinine levels on admission correlated with severity due to significant abnormalities in the coagulation j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 14 pathway (36) . they also found that these patients were more likely to require mechanical ventilation or be placed in intensive care. univariate cox regression analysis found elevated creatinine levels was also associated with in-hospital mortality (hr 2.99, 95% ci: 2.00, 4.47). proteinuria, haematuria and elevated urea levels had similar, if not larger, hazard ratios.interestingly, another study showed a potential role for urinalysis over serum markers of kidney function (37) . here, abnormalities in the routine urine test on admission correlated strongly with disease severity. they go on to suggest that urinalysis may reveal kidney impairment more readily than evaluation of serum renal biomarkers. however, these tests were only carried out on admission and so patients in earlier stages of the infection had changes in serum levels obscured by compensatory kidney function. hence renal abnormalities on admission may indicate higher risks of deterioration, ensuring appropriate triaging. table 9 summarises the studies used in analysing renal markers and covid-19.covid-19 is a rapidly spreading pandemic increasing the burden on medical facilities. symptoms vary from mild fever to ards complicating diagnosis, prognosis, and monitoring. hence it is vital to ascertain a patient's condition in a timely manner.biomarkers are quantitative measurements used clinically for many conditions reflecting pathological development. a summary of the biomarkers discussed in this review can be found in table 10 .when assessing a patient with covid-19 infection, biomarkers can be useful to clinicians in starting treatment and close monitoring. though biomarkers may help j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f improve prognosis and outcomes, their significant variability between patients could affect the findings of the studies.compared to other biomarkers, there is hesitancy in using wcc alone as it is influenced by many factors such as glucocorticoid treatment which increases it.although wcc encompasses many cell types, ncs and lcs are most clinically relevant biomarkers. multiple studies on covid-19 have concurred high nlr in severe cases compared to non-severe cases due to high nc and low lc. the use of lc independently has been suggested as a potential biomarker of covid-19 as patients have consistently low lc, with significant lymphopenia reported in critically ill patients (18) . therefore, further research on wcc accuracy for assessing disease progression is necessary.although, most of the studies referenced in this review are single centred studies originating in wuhan, china, the virus is now a global pandemic thus requiring international studies. as a copious amount of data was collected from the same location, it is possible patients may have been used in more than one study. findings of these studies has discovered changes in biomarker levels and may potentially be useful in creating a therapeutic intervention. for instance, one study has reviewed the use of anticoagulation therapy in patients with coagulopathy or marked rise in d-dimers in the setting of covid-19 (38) . low molecular weight heparin was found to be associated with better prognosis in severe cases. to further asses the role of anti-coagulants as a treatment, we encourage large interventional trails to study this.many studies in this review were limited due to small sample size and selection bias if conducted at one centre. to improve reliability and reproducibility, more research into the prognostic value of biomarkers is necessary.in conclusion, the work to date suggests that there is clear evidence of how the levels of biomarkers may change according to severity of covid-19 infection. this can be used as an adjunct in clinical practice to guide treatment and admission to icu. by doing so, it may improve prognosis and minimise the mortality rates. journal pre-proof j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 33 hs-tni = high sensitivity troponin i the 2019-20 pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) 1 was first reported in wuhan, hubei, china, in december 2019. 2 on march 11, 2020, the world health organization (who) declared the outbreak a pandemic. 3 although there is expected to be a substantial under-reporting of cases (particularly of persons with milder symptoms, asymptomatic cases, and in countries with low testing volume), as of april 4, 2020 over 1m cases have been confirmed with approximately 60,000 deaths from the disease globally and major outbreaks in the us, italy, china, and spain. 4 symptoms of covid-19 are non-specific, and infected individuals may develop fever, cough, fatigue, shortness of breath, or muscle aches with further disease development leading to severe pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), myocardial injury, sepsis, septic shock, and death. 5, 6 the median incubation period is approximately five days, and 97.5% of those who develop symptoms will do so within 11.5 days. 7 a larger analysis of 2449 patients reported hospitalization rates of 20 to 31 percent and icu admission rates of 4.9 to 11.5 percent. 8 this large number of patients requiring intensive care threatens to overwhelm healthcare systems around the world. there is a need for a covid-19 disease severity test to prioritize care for patients at elevated risk of mortality and manage low risk patients in outpatient settings or at home through self-quarantine.biomarker tests provide key information about the health or disease status of an individual, including covid- 19 . in an analysis of 127 hospitalized covid-19 patients in wuhan, china, the most common complications leading to death were acute cardiac injury (58.3%), ards (55.6%), coagulation dysfunction (38.9%), and acute kidney injury (33.3%). 9 biomarkers, such as cardiac troponin i (ctni), c-reactive protein (crp), d-dimer, and procalcitonin (pct) were significantly increased in those that died versus those that recovered with prognostic values (as determined by area under the curve [auc]) of 0.939, 0.870, 0.866, and 0.900, respectively. in another study, data from 82 covid-19 deaths found that respiratory, cardiac, hemorrhage, hepatic, and renal damage were present in 100%, 89%, 80.5%, 78.0%, and 31.7% of patients, respectively, in which most patients had increased crp (100%) and d-dimer (97.1%). 10 the importance of d-dimer as a prognostic factor was also demonstrated with odds of death significantly increased for levels greater than 1µg/ml on admission. 11 a biomarker of cardiac failure, n-terminal pro-b-type natriuretic peptide (nt-probnp) has also been shown to be predictive of death in patients with community acquired pneumonia. 12 a recent study of 416 hospitalized patients with reported 82 patients (19.7%) had cardiac injury, 13 in which patients with myocardial damage had significantly higher levels of crp, pct, creatine kinase-myocardial band (ck-mb), ctni, and nt-. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint probnp. patients with cardiac injury also more frequently required noninvasive mechanical ventilation (46.3% vs. 3.9%) or invasive mechanical ventilation (22.0% vs. 4 .2%) and experienced higher rates of complications such as ards (58.5% vs. 14.7%) compared to patients without cardiac injury. ultimately, patients with cardiac injury had higher mortality than those without it (51.2% vs. 4.5%). given such data, others have recommended elevating treatment priority and aggressiveness for patients with underlying cardiovascular disease and evidence of cardiac injury. 14 this growing body of clinical evidence related to covid-19 disease severity suggests that biomarkers can play a dominant role in a scoring system to identify covid-19 patients with increased risk of severe disease and mortality.while there are multiple commercially available platforms for covid-19 diagnosis based on molecular detection of the viral rna, there remains a significant gap in determining disease prognosis with respect to early identification of individuals that are at elevated risk of mortality.identifying and monitoring those at risk of severe complications is critical for both resource planning and prognostication. likewise, ruling out and/or reducing the admission of patients with very low risk of complications who can be safely managed through self-quarantine would conserve precious medical resources during a surge of new cases in an outbreak. while clinical decision support tools have been developed for sepsis disease severity 15 and are in development for covid-19 disease severity, 16 to our knowledge there are no scoring systems for covid-19 disease severity that are intricately linked to the biomarker tests at the point of care or based on lab-on-a-chip platforms. access to an integrated test and scoring system for use at the point of care and in low-and middle-income countries would help to manage this disease on a global basis.in this study, we describe our most recent work toward developing the programmable bio nano chip (p-bnc) with the capacity to learn 17 and adapting it to the task of assessing covid-19 disease severity. this multiplex and multiclass platform has been demonstrated previously for the detection and quantitation of protein biomarkers, small molecules, and cellular markers in applications such as oral cancer, ovarian cancer, prostate cancer, drugs of abuse, cardiac heart disease, and trauma. [18] [19] [20] [21] previously, we developed the cardiac scorecard system for predicting a spectrum of cardiovascular disease. 22 this scoring system combines multiple risk factors and biomarker measurements to provide personalized reports for a range of disease indications with diagnostic and prognostic models for cardiac wellness, acute myocardial infarction, and heart failure. the new study described here leverages our past experiences developing clinical decision support tools to efficiently adapt our flexible platform for the development of a prognostic test for covid-19.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint this paper describes the customization of a point-of-care diagnostic tool that is suitable for the measurement of biomarkers that can be used to discriminate between covid-19 patients that recover vs. those that die from complications of this terrible disease. the work details both the development of a multiparameter protein assay and the diagnostic models that can lend information related to the covid-19 severity. the model was trained and internally validated using data from 160 hospitalized covid-19 patients from wuhan, china 14 and was evaluated on an external case study of 12 hospitalized patients with a spectrum of covid-19 disease complications from shenzhen, china. to our knowledge, this effort is the first quantitative pointof-care diagnostic panel linked to a clinical decision support tool that could be used to predict disease severity for patients suffering from covid-19 infections. in addition to the new point-ofcare diagnostic panel and decision tools, an app is envisioned for immediate release to help clinicians in the next few weeks manage their covid-19 patients.the design and fabrication of single-use disposable p-bnc cartridges equipped with a dedicated biohazardous waste reservoir used in this study were published previously. 23 to summarize, the cartridges comprised an injection-molded fluidic body and laminate capping layers on top and bottom sides. the upper capping layer was patterned with fluidic channels and through-holes. aluminum blister packs were bonded to the cartridge's upper dsa (double sided adhesive) layer with 1µm super hydrophobic polyvinylidene fluoride (pvdf) membranes (emd millipore, billerica, ma). debris filters were made with 3µm whatman® nuclepore track-etch membrane (ge healthcare, fairfield, ct). a polyethylene terephthalate (pet) capping layer covered the remaining exposed adhesive.while the fully integrated point-of-care instrumentation has been described previously, 23 for this current study the instrument was configured into a modular fixture for experimentation and assay development. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint threaded lens tubes and adapters (thorlabs inc., newton, nj) mounted onto a machined aluminum support base. excitation light was provided by a 490nm led and t-cube led driver (thorlabs inc., newton, nj). optical filters included a 520/15nm brightline® single-band bandpass emission filter (semrock, inc., rochester, new york), a 466/40nm excitation filter, and a 506nm dichroic mirror (edmund optics, barrington, nj). images were captured on a grasshopper®3 camera with a sony imx174 cmos sensor (point grey research, inc., richmond, british columbia, canada). control software and user interface was developed in matlab® 2014a (natick, ma).a multiplex immunoassay was developed for a subset of the proposed biomarkers to demonstrate proof of concept for the covid-19 disease severity panel. spherical agarose sensor beads (2% cross-linked) were synthesized using methods previously reported. 24 beads were then sorted into a narrow size distribution (280 ± 10 μm) using test sieves, cross-linked, and glyoxal activated. activated beads were then functionalized with analyte-specific capturing antibodies using reductive amination with 50mm sodium cyanoborohydride followed by deactivation of unreacted sites in 1m tris buffer with 50mm sodium cyanoborohydride.the ctni and nt-probnp antibodies and standards were purchased from hytest, ltd., cartridges were manually populated with bead sensors and conjugate pad reagents. bead sensors were strategically configured into designated locations within a 4×5 bead support chip for spatial identification. detection antibodies were spotted onto a 2×15mm glass fiber conjugate pad (emd millipore, billerica, ma) which was inserted into the cartridge. all assays were performed in direct sandwich-type immunoassay format at room temperature. for each assay, the sample was wetted over the sensor array for 15 seconds. the sample was then delivered for 10 minutes at 10µl/min followed by a 15 second wash at 200µl/min. the detecting antibody was eluted from . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint the reagent pad for 1 minute at 100µl/min by flowing pbs through the pad originating from the blister. this was followed by a 5-minute final wash using a ramping flow rate. the total time of the assay was approximately 16 minutes consuming a total volume of 1400µl.images were analyzed using a custom image analysis tool developed with matlab as described previously. 23 the fluorescence response of each bead was expressed as the average pixel intensity for a region of interest limited to the outer 10% of the bead diameter where the specific signal is concentrated. bead sensors that were optically obstructed by debris or bubbles were excluded from analysis. likewise, failed assay runs due to leaks were rejected and reassayed. curve fitting routines were processed in matlab® r2017b.beads were arranged column-by-column in the 4×5 chip. two mouse-antibody sensitized once the beads were in place, the silicone coated release liner was removed from the chip, and an optical cover was bonded to the exposed underlying adhesive sealing the analysis chamber.a cocktail of ctni, ck-mb, myo, and nt-probnp standards were prepared in goat serum (meridian life sciences) at concentrations of 500, 100, 20, 4, 0.8, 0.16, and 0.032 ng/ml. standards solutions were processed on the p-bnc assay system in triplicate, and their responses were determined. five matrix blank samples were also processed to determine the variation of the blank response. the upper end of the assay range was determined as the highest concentration achievable without saturating the sensor beads.this study involves the development of a covid-19 severity score using similar methods as described previously. 22 biomarker data from 160 hospitalized covid-19 patients were derived from a recent study in wuhan, china. 14 patients were assigned to two outcomes: patients who . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint were discharged (n=117) and patients that died (n=43). a lasso logistic regression model for covid-19 was trained using the following as predictors: age, sex, ctni, crp, pct, and myo.the maximum biomarker values across all time points were extracted for each patient and log transformed. then, all data were standardized with zero mean and unit variance. missing data were imputed using the multivariate imputation by chained equations (mice) algorithm in statistical software r. 25 ten imputations were generated using predictive mean matching and logistic regression imputation models for numeric and categorical data, respectively. the data were partitioned using stratified 5-fold cross-validation to preserve the relative proportions of outcomes in each fold. model training and selection were performed on each of the 10 imputation datasets. models were selected for the penalty parameter corresponding to one standard error above the minimum deviance for additional shrinkage. model performance was documented in terms of auc and median (interquartile range [iqr]) covid-19 severity scores of patients that died versus those that recovered using pooled estimates. covid-19 severity scores from 5-fold cross-validation, and pooled imputed data sets informed boxplots and scatterplots. biomarker values and covid-19 scores were compared for discharged patients vs. those that died using wilcoxon rank sum test. age was compared using an independent t-test. proportions were compared using the chi-squared test. 26, 27 two-sided tests were considered statistically significant at the 0.05 level.we externally validated the covid-19 severity score on data from a case study of 12 hospitalized covid-19 patients from shenzhen, china. 28 results were presented in a scatter/box plot of covid-19 severity scores on three groups of patients defined as follows: moderate (patients whose only complication was pneumonia), severe (patients with both pneumonia and ards), and critical (patients with one or more of severe ards, respiratory failure, cardiac failure, or shock).the biomarker profiles for covid-19 patients change over the timeline of infection.therefore, there is a need for a series of diagnostic tests that collectively cover/monitor the entire timeline of infection. here, three tests are relevant. the first is a molecular diagnostic that tests for the virus itself or part of the same. these tests include rt-pcr or immunological tests that are specific for a component of the virus such as the coronavirus spike glycoprotein. 29 both assay modalities lend information on the amount of virus present during the initial stages of infection (i.e., days 2 to 20) but lack accurate quantitation information as the samples are often collected from a nasal swab where the sample volume is ill-defined. after this initial infection phase, the . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint virus itself becomes suppressed due to the activation of the humoral response of the host that involves production of anti-virus specific antibodies.the second relevant diagnostic test involves detecting this antibody response as an indicator of exposure and subsequent immune response to the virus. the humoral immune response usually begins with the production of igm antibodies. igm antibodies tend to have low affinity since they are produced before b cells undergo somatic hypermutation; however, igm is pentameric in structure, making it an effective activator of the complement system which is important in controlling infections of the bloodstream. the monomeric igg dominates the later phases of the antibody response. 30 a test for coronavirus exposure and immune response uses viral antigen to detect these antibodies in the bloodstream.throughout this timeline it would benefit care decisions and planning for resource allocation to identify those high-risk patients with underlying, ongoing, or past medical conditions.the sooner these patients are identified, the better is their prognosis through stabilizing measures and close monitoring. as highlighted in the introduction, one of the major diagnostic gaps and the focus of this paper is determining covid-19 disease severity, which is the third relevant diagnostic test associated with covid-19. initial reports suggest that covid-19 is associated with severe disease that requires intensive care in approximately 5% of proven infections. 8 a report from the chinese center for disease control and prevention stated that the case fatality rate was higher for those with cardiovascular disease (10.5%), diabetes (7.3%), chronic respiratory disease (6.3%), hypertension (6.0%), and cancer (5.6%). growing evidence suggests that covid-19 interacts with the cardiovascular system on multiple levels with increased morbidity and mortality in those with underlying cardiovascular conditions. 31 further, evidence of myocardial injury has been observed at higher rates in those that died. 31 in a study of 187 patients, 7.6% of patients (8 of 105) with normal cardiac troponin t levels and without cardiovascular disease died versus 69.4% of patients (25 of 36) with both elevated ctnt and cardiovascular disease. 14 the underlying health of the patient has a strong association with covid-19 outcomes and must be included in clinical decision support tools for determining disease severity.with this perspective in mind, development of a portable assay system suitable for covid-19 disease severity would be extremely important in the coming weeks and months as the global pandemic moves forward. given the broad spectrum of disease severity and rapid clinical decline of patients who develop pneumonia and/or cardiac injury, a point-of-care assay and decision support system could improve triage of patients-and eventually outcomes-for those who need more immediate and aggressive care. incorporating the calculation of the covid-19 severity score into electronic health records (ehr) would provide health providers with actionable . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint information at an early stage so resources can be focused on patients who are expected to be most severely affected. the measurements of the proteins included in the score can either be provided by ehr integration of the point-of-care biosensor system described here or collected from multiple separate test platforms. most widely used ehrs support the construction of custommade decision support systems allowing a fast implementation of the covid-19 severity score based on currently available methods for measuring the proteins used for calculating the score.the ehr integration of the point-of-care biosensor system can follow later once it is validated for this indication. this stepwise approach will allow a fast deployment of the covid-19 severity score followed by an increased testing throughput through the implementation of the point-ofcare biosensor system. this will allow better triage of patients and allow scarce healthcare resources to be focused on the patients most at risk for developing severe symptoms.the p-bnc, a point-of-care biosensor system with the capacity to learn, is adapted here for the application of covid-19 disease severity. figure 1 highlights the key diagnostic infrastructure required to complete the integrated biomarker assays as needed to establish the covid-19 severity score. from a small amount of patient sample (~100 μl serum), the cartridge and instrument perform a multistep assay sequence to 'digitize biology' by converting fluorescence immunoassay signal into biomarker concentrations. statistical learning algorithms trained on data of biomarker studies predict a spectrum of disease. the result is a single value score which can be displayed to patients and providers in a mobile health app or directly on the instrumentation completing the test. previously, we published a general framework for implementing a point-of-care based clinical decision support system. 17, 22 here, we have adapted these methods to the task of predicting mortality in patients with covid-19. it should be emphasized that while the integrated testing and covid-19 severity score reporting here articulated represent what is arguably the most efficient delivery mode, the scaling and regulatory approval for this test ecosystem will take several months to complete. with the imminent arrival of the peak of the covid-19 pandemic, it is important to emphasize that the covid-19 severity score can be generated immediately using biomarker measurements collected from multiple separate test platforms. we anticipate this contribution could have an immediate impact on covid-19 patient management, and we plan to promptly distribute the covid-19 severity score capabilities following additional model refinement and validation.selection of the biomarkers targeted for the development of this covid-19 severity score was based on the following process/criteria and summarized in table 1 . biomarkers were identified as relevant to complications associated with covid-19 including those associated with acute inflammation/infection (crp) and various stages of the cardiovascular disease such as . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint coronary artery disease (crp, pct), acute myocardial infarction (ctni, myoglobin), and congestive heart failure (nt-pro bnp, d-dimer). the biomarker pct, an aid in decision making on antibiotic therapy for hospitalized patients or in patients with suspected or confirmed lower respiratory tract infections, including community-acquired pneumonia, acute bronchitis, and acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, was also selected as a valuable tool in the covid-19 pandemic to identify patients at risk for bacterial coinfection and adverse outcomes.importantly, all the selected biomarkers have reportedly been shown to exhibit significant differences in their levels in covid-19 patients that recover vs. those that die.although the p-bnc is designed to accommodate both soluble and cellular targets using either bead or membrane-based assay configurations, respectively, we opted to solely focus on soluble protein biomarkers. further, we restricted biomarker choices to those that have complementary concentration ranges and those that are stable allowing for their simultaneous measurement. though lymphocytes and cytokines have been associated with covid-19 mortality, neither of these two classes of analytes were selected because of their incompatibility with these selection criteria.the complementary covid-19 assay panels for disease severity index (described here) and surveillance panel (to be featured in future publications) are shown along with their relevant immunoschematics in figure 2 . briefly, bead-based tests for the severity index panel targets the simultaneous measurement of six designated proteins, all compatible for multiplexed detection.in this direct sandwich immunoassay involving six matched pairs of capture/detection antibodies, all six biomarkers are first captured by their corresponding beads and then specifically detected via their matched alexa fluor 488-conjugated detection antibodies presented to the bead array.during the development of these fully quantitative assays, control experiments are conducted to ensure that there is no crosstalk (interference) between each of the assays.a multiplex immunoassay was developed for a subset of the proposed biomarkers to demonstrate proof of concept for the covid-19 disease severity panel. the p-bnc platform can perform powerful and quantitative multiplexed measurements over an extended range.calibration curves are necessary to quantitate the concentration of molecular targets in solution which are critical inputs to the diagnostic algorithm. figure 3 demonstrates this capability with four simultaneously generated calibration curves for ctni, ck-mb, myo, and nt-probnp that cover a concentration range from 0.032 to 500 ng/ml. error bars indicate bead-to-bead precision with four redundant beads measured per sensor class. as shown, the response data for each biomarker exhibits an excellent fit to a five-parameter logistic regression. as part of the multiplexed assay development effort, specificity was confirmed for the four-plex panel, as shown . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint in inset images on figure 3 . here, a single antigen standard at high concentration (1000ng/ml) was processed against a cartridge configured for multiplexed detection. as expected, monoclonal antibodies are highly specific for their target antigen, where high doses of each single antigen generated minimal cross-reactivity on non-target sensors. although this work represents a subset of the full covid-19 panel, the cartridge facilitates multiplexing of up to 20 different biomarkers and can be easily expanded to accommodate the panel and test validity controls. we anticipate that one or more of the selected six biomarkers may be dropped as additional covid-19 clinical data are used to optimize the final covid-19 severity score due to redundancy of patient discrimination information afforded by these biomarkers.having identified a method to measure strategic biomarkers in a multiplexed panel, this next step involves the translation of these test values alongside key clinical metrics into information relevant to covid-19 disease severity. a covid-19 disease severity model was developed based on data from 160 hospitalized patients from wuhan, china. 14 here, 160 patients with hypertension were admitted to the hospital for covid-19 in which 117 were eventually discharged and 43 died. table 3 summarizes the patient characteristics and lab values for both patient groups. interestingly, males accounted for 70% of the deaths vs. 44% of the discharged patients. this study finds significantly higher levels of biomarkers (ctni, ck-mb, myo, crp, and pct) in patients that died vs. those that were discharged. likewise, age was a statistically significant factor with mean (sd) of 63 (13) and 73 (8) in the "discharged" and "died" groups, respectively.a covid-19 severity score was trained and internally validated based on a subset of the targeted biomarkers (ctni, pct, myo, and crp), age, and sex. the disease discrimination potential is displayed in figure 4 . for this analysis, covid-19 severity scores are shown for two patient groups, those patients that recovered vs. those that passed away from the complications. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint one limitation of this study was that all patients in the training dataset had hypertension and are, thus, at an elevated risk for cardiovascular events. since the test panel contains several cardiac biomarkers, it's possible that these training data could lead to overoptimistic results.however, in addition to cardiac biomarkers, the expanded biomarker panel represents diverse pathophysiology (i.e., indicators of infection, inflammation, mortality, thrombotic events, and rhabdomyolysis) which have the potential to significantly improve generalizability. plans to evaluate and optimize the covid-19 severity score model on external data are in place. despite this limitation, the preliminary results demonstrate strong promise for the covid-19 severity score. reporting these preliminary findings now is critically important given the stage of the pandemic.previously we have used the p-bnc platform to develop various wellness and disease severity scores for oral cancer 18, 19, 32 and cardiac heart disease. 22 shown in figure 5 finally, we evaluated the covid-19 severity score on data from a case study of 12 hospitalized covid-19 patients. 28 figure 6 presents a scatter/box plot of covid-19 severity scores on three groups of patients. covid-19 severity scores were found to increase with disease severity. moderate (patients whose only complication was pneumonia), severe (patients with both pneumonia and ards), and critical (patients with one or more of severe ards, respiratory failure, cardiac failure, or shock) groups had median (iqr) covid-19 severity scores of 9 (4-17), 28 (24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) , and 36 (28-83), respectively. although this analysis evaluates a small sample of patients, these preliminary results show potential for the covid-19 severity score to be calibrated to a disease severity scale. in addition to cross-sectional and population-based comparisons, this covid-19 severity score could also be used for longitudinal monitoring of patients. in this manner, an individual's time series measurements could be used to track changes . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint in biomarker-based covid-19 severity score over time. preliminary findings ( figure s3) demonstrate that the average trajectories decrease for the "discharged" group increase for the "died" group, suggesting that the covid-19 severity score could provide valuable lead time in discharging patients with low risk earlier while prioritizing care for those at elevated risk of mortality. future efforts will be used to define various decision cuts points, reference ranges, and change scores to help guide clinical decision making including therapy decisions. future efforts may also adapt this clinical decision support tool for ards resulting from other infectious viral agents such as influenza and varicella-zoster; bacteria such as mycoplasma, chlamydia, and legionella; and parasites such as the malaria causing plasmodium falciparum. 34this study establishes the framework for a point-of-care covid-19 severity score and clinical decision support system. our studies find that the median covid-19 severity score was significantly lower for the group that recovered versus the group that died from covid-19 complications (60.5 versus 96.6, respectively). the auc value for the covid-19 severity score was 0.94, demonstrating strong potential for its utility in identifying patients with increased risk of mortality. plans are now in place to confirm the final selection of biomarkers for an integrated point-of-care covid-19 severity score disease severity test. it is possible that some of the biomarkers may yield redundant information; as such, these redundant biomarkers may be eliminated to create a sparser diagnostic panel with improved generalizability.these lab-on-a-chip diagnostic capabilities have the potential to yield the first quantitative point-of-care diagnostic panel linked to a clinical decision support tool for predicting mortality from covid-19. an experienced team and established translation partnerships are both in place to move these systems into real-world practice in a timely manner. further, the release of an app for immediate impact on covid-19 patient management in the next few weeks is anticipated.future work may also involve developing a test on the same platform for population-based covid-19 community surveillance in clinical settings (ambulances, hospitals, clinics, laboratories) and for public settings that are at risk for community spread (businesses, schools, airports, train stations). the development and distribution of a portable, affordable, widely distributed smart sensor technology with anticipated availability/readiness within months promises to be an important solution for the management of the current coronavirus crisis as well as an adaptable tool to combat future threats of a new virus or biological threat. likewise, in addition to this covid-19 severity score, a sustaining contribution of this work may be in the . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint development of an ards clinical decision support tool for other infectious viral agents, bacteria, and parasites.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 here, two panels are detailed for covid-19: a disease severity panel as featured in the work (b) and a community exposure / surveillance panel as will be described in future efforts (c).. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 6 . covid-19 severity scores evaluated for a case study of 12 hospitalized patients with covid-19 from shenzhen, china. 28 the moderate group contained patients whose only complication was pneumonia. the severe group were patients with pneumonia and ards. the critical group contained patients with one or more of severe ards, respiratory failure, cardiac failure, or shock.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint the 2019-20 pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) 1 was first reported in wuhan, hubei, china, in december 2019. 2 on march 11, 2020, the world health organization (who) declared the outbreak a pandemic. 3 although there is expected to be a substantial under-reporting of cases (particularly of persons with milder symptoms, asymptomatic cases, and in countries with low testing volume), as of april 4, 2020 over 1m cases have been confirmed with approximately 60,000 deaths from the disease globally and major outbreaks in the us, italy, china, and spain. 4 symptoms of covid-19 are non-specific, and infected individuals may develop fever, cough, fatigue, shortness of breath, or muscle aches with further disease development leading to severe pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), myocardial injury, sepsis, septic shock, and death. 5, 6 the median incubation period is approximately five days, and 97.5% of those who develop symptoms will do so within 11.5 days. 7 a larger analysis of 2449 patients reported hospitalization rates of 20 to 31 percent and icu admission rates of 4.9 to 11.5 percent. 8 this large number of patients requiring intensive care threatens to overwhelm healthcare systems around the world. there is a need for a covid-19 disease severity test to prioritize care for patients at elevated risk of mortality and manage low risk patients in outpatient settings or at home through self-quarantine.biomarker tests provide key information about the health or disease status of an individual, including covid- 19 . in an analysis of 127 hospitalized covid-19 patients in wuhan, china, the most common complications leading to death were acute cardiac injury (58.3%), ards (55.6%), coagulation dysfunction (38.9%), and acute kidney injury (33.3%). 9 biomarkers, such as cardiac troponin i (ctni), c-reactive protein (crp), d-dimer, and procalcitonin (pct) were significantly increased in those that died versus those that recovered with prognostic values (as determined by area under the curve [auc]) of 0.939, 0.870, 0.866, and 0.900, respectively. in another study, data from 82 covid-19 deaths found that respiratory, cardiac, hemorrhage, hepatic, and renal damage were present in 100%, 89%, 80.5%, 78.0%, and 31.7% of patients, respectively, in which most patients had increased crp (100%) and d-dimer (97.1%). 10 the importance of d-dimer as a prognostic factor was also demonstrated with odds of death significantly increased for levels greater than 1µg/ml on admission. 11 a biomarker of cardiac failure, n-terminal pro-b-type natriuretic peptide (nt-probnp) has also been shown to be predictive of death in patients with community acquired pneumonia. 12 a recent study of 416 hospitalized patients with reported 82 patients (19.7%) had cardiac injury, 13 in which patients with myocardial damage had significantly higher levels of crp, pct, creatine kinase-myocardial band (ck-mb), ctni, and nt-. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint probnp. patients with cardiac injury also more frequently required noninvasive mechanical ventilation (46.3% vs. 3.9%) or invasive mechanical ventilation (22.0% vs. 4 .2%) and experienced higher rates of complications such as ards (58.5% vs. 14.7%) compared to patients without cardiac injury. ultimately, patients with cardiac injury had higher mortality than those without it (51.2% vs. 4.5%). given such data, others have recommended elevating treatment priority and aggressiveness for patients with underlying cardiovascular disease and evidence of cardiac injury. 14 this growing body of clinical evidence related to covid-19 disease severity suggests that biomarkers can play a dominant role in a scoring system to identify covid-19 patients with increased risk of severe disease and mortality.while there are multiple commercially available platforms for covid-19 diagnosis based on molecular detection of the viral rna, there remains a significant gap in determining disease prognosis with respect to early identification of individuals that are at elevated risk of mortality.identifying and monitoring those at risk of severe complications is critical for both resource planning and prognostication. likewise, ruling out and/or reducing the admission of patients with very low risk of complications who can be safely managed through self-quarantine would conserve precious medical resources during a surge of new cases in an outbreak. while clinical decision support tools have been developed for sepsis disease severity 15 and are in development for covid-19 disease severity, 16 to our knowledge there are no scoring systems for covid-19 disease severity that are intricately linked to the biomarker tests at the point of care or based on lab-on-a-chip platforms. access to an integrated test and scoring system for use at the point of care and in low-and middle-income countries would help to manage this disease on a global basis.in this study, we describe our most recent work toward developing the programmable bio nano chip (p-bnc) with the capacity to learn 17 and adapting it to the task of assessing covid-19 disease severity. this multiplex and multiclass platform has been demonstrated previously for the detection and quantitation of protein biomarkers, small molecules, and cellular markers in applications such as oral cancer, ovarian cancer, prostate cancer, drugs of abuse, cardiac heart disease, and trauma. [18] [19] [20] [21] previously, we developed the cardiac scorecard system for predicting a spectrum of cardiovascular disease. 22 this scoring system combines multiple risk factors and biomarker measurements to provide personalized reports for a range of disease indications with diagnostic and prognostic models for cardiac wellness, acute myocardial infarction, and heart failure. the new study described here leverages our past experiences developing clinical decision support tools to efficiently adapt our flexible platform for the development of a prognostic test for covid-19.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint this paper describes the customization of a point-of-care diagnostic tool that is suitable for the measurement of biomarkers that can be used to discriminate between covid-19 patients that recover vs. those that die from complications of this terrible disease. the work details both the development of a multiparameter protein assay and the diagnostic models that can lend information related to the covid-19 severity. the model was trained and internally validated using data from 160 hospitalized covid-19 patients from wuhan, china 14 and was evaluated on an external case study of 12 hospitalized patients with a spectrum of covid-19 disease complications from shenzhen, china. to our knowledge, this effort is the first quantitative pointof-care diagnostic panel linked to a clinical decision support tool that could be used to predict disease severity for patients suffering from covid-19 infections. in addition to the new point-ofcare diagnostic panel and decision tools, an app is envisioned for immediate release to help clinicians in the next few weeks manage their covid-19 patients.the design and fabrication of single-use disposable p-bnc cartridges equipped with a dedicated biohazardous waste reservoir used in this study were published previously. 23 to summarize, the cartridges comprised an injection-molded fluidic body and laminate capping layers on top and bottom sides. the upper capping layer was patterned with fluidic channels and through-holes. aluminum blister packs were bonded to the cartridge's upper dsa (double sided adhesive) layer with 1µm super hydrophobic polyvinylidene fluoride (pvdf) membranes (emd millipore, billerica, ma). debris filters were made with 3µm whatman® nuclepore track-etch membrane (ge healthcare, fairfield, ct). a polyethylene terephthalate (pet) capping layer covered the remaining exposed adhesive.while the fully integrated point-of-care instrumentation has been described previously, 23 for this current study the instrument was configured into a modular fixture for experimentation and assay development. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint threaded lens tubes and adapters (thorlabs inc., newton, nj) mounted onto a machined aluminum support base. excitation light was provided by a 490nm led and t-cube led driver (thorlabs inc., newton, nj). optical filters included a 520/15nm brightline® single-band bandpass emission filter (semrock, inc., rochester, new york), a 466/40nm excitation filter, and a 506nm dichroic mirror (edmund optics, barrington, nj). images were captured on a grasshopper®3 camera with a sony imx174 cmos sensor (point grey research, inc., richmond, british columbia, canada). control software and user interface was developed in matlab® 2014a (natick, ma).a multiplex immunoassay was developed for a subset of the proposed biomarkers to demonstrate proof of concept for the covid-19 disease severity panel. spherical agarose sensor beads (2% cross-linked) were synthesized using methods previously reported. 24 beads were then sorted into a narrow size distribution (280 ± 10 μm) using test sieves, cross-linked, and glyoxal activated. activated beads were then functionalized with analyte-specific capturing antibodies using reductive amination with 50mm sodium cyanoborohydride followed by deactivation of unreacted sites in 1m tris buffer with 50mm sodium cyanoborohydride.the ctni and nt-probnp antibodies and standards were purchased from hytest, ltd., cartridges were manually populated with bead sensors and conjugate pad reagents. bead sensors were strategically configured into designated locations within a 4×5 bead support chip for spatial identification. detection antibodies were spotted onto a 2×15mm glass fiber conjugate pad (emd millipore, billerica, ma) which was inserted into the cartridge. all assays were performed in direct sandwich-type immunoassay format at room temperature. for each assay, the sample was wetted over the sensor array for 15 seconds. the sample was then delivered for 10 minutes at 10µl/min followed by a 15 second wash at 200µl/min. the detecting antibody was eluted from . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint the reagent pad for 1 minute at 100µl/min by flowing pbs through the pad originating from the blister. this was followed by a 5-minute final wash using a ramping flow rate. the total time of the assay was approximately 16 minutes consuming a total volume of 1400µl.images were analyzed using a custom image analysis tool developed with matlab as described previously. 23 the fluorescence response of each bead was expressed as the average pixel intensity for a region of interest limited to the outer 10% of the bead diameter where the specific signal is concentrated. bead sensors that were optically obstructed by debris or bubbles were excluded from analysis. likewise, failed assay runs due to leaks were rejected and reassayed. curve fitting routines were processed in matlab® r2017b.beads were arranged column-by-column in the 4×5 chip. two mouse-antibody sensitized once the beads were in place, the silicone coated release liner was removed from the chip, and an optical cover was bonded to the exposed underlying adhesive sealing the analysis chamber.a cocktail of ctni, ck-mb, myo, and nt-probnp standards were prepared in goat serum (meridian life sciences) at concentrations of 500, 100, 20, 4, 0.8, 0.16, and 0.032 ng/ml. standards solutions were processed on the p-bnc assay system in triplicate, and their responses were determined. five matrix blank samples were also processed to determine the variation of the blank response. the upper end of the assay range was determined as the highest concentration achievable without saturating the sensor beads.this study involves the development of a covid-19 severity score using similar methods as described previously. 22 biomarker data from 160 hospitalized covid-19 patients were derived from a recent study in wuhan, china. 14 patients were assigned to two outcomes: patients who . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint were discharged (n=117) and patients that died (n=43). a lasso logistic regression model for covid-19 was trained using the following as predictors: age, sex, ctni, crp, pct, and myo.the maximum biomarker values across all time points were extracted for each patient and log transformed. then, all data were standardized with zero mean and unit variance. missing data were imputed using the multivariate imputation by chained equations (mice) algorithm in statistical software r. 25 ten imputations were generated using predictive mean matching and logistic regression imputation models for numeric and categorical data, respectively. the data were partitioned using stratified 5-fold cross-validation to preserve the relative proportions of outcomes in each fold. model training and selection were performed on each of the 10 imputation datasets. models were selected for the penalty parameter corresponding to one standard error above the minimum deviance for additional shrinkage. model performance was documented in terms of auc and median (interquartile range [iqr]) covid-19 severity scores of patients that died versus those that recovered using pooled estimates. covid-19 severity scores from 5-fold cross-validation, and pooled imputed data sets informed boxplots and scatterplots. biomarker values and covid-19 scores were compared for discharged patients vs. those that died using wilcoxon rank sum test. age was compared using an independent t-test. proportions were compared using the chi-squared test. 26, 27 two-sided tests were considered statistically significant at the 0.05 level.we externally validated the covid-19 severity score on data from a case study of 12 hospitalized covid-19 patients from shenzhen, china. 28 results were presented in a scatter/box plot of covid-19 severity scores on three groups of patients defined as follows: moderate (patients whose only complication was pneumonia), severe (patients with both pneumonia and ards), and critical (patients with one or more of severe ards, respiratory failure, cardiac failure, or shock).the biomarker profiles for covid-19 patients change over the timeline of infection.therefore, there is a need for a series of diagnostic tests that collectively cover/monitor the entire timeline of infection. here, three tests are relevant. the first is a molecular diagnostic that tests for the virus itself or part of the same. these tests include rt-pcr or immunological tests that are specific for a component of the virus such as the coronavirus spike glycoprotein. 29 both assay modalities lend information on the amount of virus present during the initial stages of infection (i.e., days 2 to 20) but lack accurate quantitation information as the samples are often collected from a nasal swab where the sample volume is ill-defined. after this initial infection phase, the . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint virus itself becomes suppressed due to the activation of the humoral response of the host that involves production of anti-virus specific antibodies.the second relevant diagnostic test involves detecting this antibody response as an indicator of exposure and subsequent immune response to the virus. the humoral immune response usually begins with the production of igm antibodies. igm antibodies tend to have low affinity since they are produced before b cells undergo somatic hypermutation; however, igm is pentameric in structure, making it an effective activator of the complement system which is important in controlling infections of the bloodstream. the monomeric igg dominates the later phases of the antibody response. 30 a test for coronavirus exposure and immune response uses viral antigen to detect these antibodies in the bloodstream.throughout this timeline it would benefit care decisions and planning for resource allocation to identify those high-risk patients with underlying, ongoing, or past medical conditions.the sooner these patients are identified, the better is their prognosis through stabilizing measures and close monitoring. as highlighted in the introduction, one of the major diagnostic gaps and the focus of this paper is determining covid-19 disease severity, which is the third relevant diagnostic test associated with covid-19. initial reports suggest that covid-19 is associated with severe disease that requires intensive care in approximately 5% of proven infections. 8 a report from the chinese center for disease control and prevention stated that the case fatality rate was higher for those with cardiovascular disease (10.5%), diabetes (7.3%), chronic respiratory disease (6.3%), hypertension (6.0%), and cancer (5.6%). growing evidence suggests that covid-19 interacts with the cardiovascular system on multiple levels with increased morbidity and mortality in those with underlying cardiovascular conditions. 31 further, evidence of myocardial injury has been observed at higher rates in those that died. 31 in a study of 187 patients, 7.6% of patients (8 of 105) with normal cardiac troponin t levels and without cardiovascular disease died versus 69.4% of patients (25 of 36) with both elevated ctnt and cardiovascular disease. 14 the underlying health of the patient has a strong association with covid-19 outcomes and must be included in clinical decision support tools for determining disease severity.with this perspective in mind, development of a portable assay system suitable for covid-19 disease severity would be extremely important in the coming weeks and months as the global pandemic moves forward. given the broad spectrum of disease severity and rapid clinical decline of patients who develop pneumonia and/or cardiac injury, a point-of-care assay and decision support system could improve triage of patients-and eventually outcomes-for those who need more immediate and aggressive care. incorporating the calculation of the covid-19 severity score into electronic health records (ehr) would provide health providers with actionable . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint information at an early stage so resources can be focused on patients who are expected to be most severely affected. the measurements of the proteins included in the score can either be provided by ehr integration of the point-of-care biosensor system described here or collected from multiple separate test platforms. most widely used ehrs support the construction of custommade decision support systems allowing a fast implementation of the covid-19 severity score based on currently available methods for measuring the proteins used for calculating the score.the ehr integration of the point-of-care biosensor system can follow later once it is validated for this indication. this stepwise approach will allow a fast deployment of the covid-19 severity score followed by an increased testing throughput through the implementation of the point-ofcare biosensor system. this will allow better triage of patients and allow scarce healthcare resources to be focused on the patients most at risk for developing severe symptoms.the p-bnc, a point-of-care biosensor system with the capacity to learn, is adapted here for the application of covid-19 disease severity. figure 1 highlights the key diagnostic infrastructure required to complete the integrated biomarker assays as needed to establish the covid-19 severity score. from a small amount of patient sample (~100 μl serum), the cartridge and instrument perform a multistep assay sequence to 'digitize biology' by converting fluorescence immunoassay signal into biomarker concentrations. statistical learning algorithms trained on data of biomarker studies predict a spectrum of disease. the result is a single value score which can be displayed to patients and providers in a mobile health app or directly on the instrumentation completing the test. previously, we published a general framework for implementing a point-of-care based clinical decision support system. 17, 22 here, we have adapted these methods to the task of predicting mortality in patients with covid-19. it should be emphasized that while the integrated testing and covid-19 severity score reporting here articulated represent what is arguably the most efficient delivery mode, the scaling and regulatory approval for this test ecosystem will take several months to complete. with the imminent arrival of the peak of the covid-19 pandemic, it is important to emphasize that the covid-19 severity score can be generated immediately using biomarker measurements collected from multiple separate test platforms. we anticipate this contribution could have an immediate impact on covid-19 patient management, and we plan to promptly distribute the covid-19 severity score capabilities following additional model refinement and validation.selection of the biomarkers targeted for the development of this covid-19 severity score was based on the following process/criteria and summarized in table 1 . biomarkers were identified as relevant to complications associated with covid-19 including those associated with acute inflammation/infection (crp) and various stages of the cardiovascular disease such as . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint coronary artery disease (crp, pct), acute myocardial infarction (ctni, myoglobin), and congestive heart failure (nt-pro bnp, d-dimer). the biomarker pct, an aid in decision making on antibiotic therapy for hospitalized patients or in patients with suspected or confirmed lower respiratory tract infections, including community-acquired pneumonia, acute bronchitis, and acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, was also selected as a valuable tool in the covid-19 pandemic to identify patients at risk for bacterial coinfection and adverse outcomes.importantly, all the selected biomarkers have reportedly been shown to exhibit significant differences in their levels in covid-19 patients that recover vs. those that die.although the p-bnc is designed to accommodate both soluble and cellular targets using either bead or membrane-based assay configurations, respectively, we opted to solely focus on soluble protein biomarkers. further, we restricted biomarker choices to those that have complementary concentration ranges and those that are stable allowing for their simultaneous measurement. though lymphocytes and cytokines have been associated with covid-19 mortality, neither of these two classes of analytes were selected because of their incompatibility with these selection criteria.the complementary covid-19 assay panels for disease severity index (described here) and surveillance panel (to be featured in future publications) are shown along with their relevant immunoschematics in figure 2 . briefly, bead-based tests for the severity index panel targets the simultaneous measurement of six designated proteins, all compatible for multiplexed detection.in this direct sandwich immunoassay involving six matched pairs of capture/detection antibodies, all six biomarkers are first captured by their corresponding beads and then specifically detected via their matched alexa fluor 488-conjugated detection antibodies presented to the bead array.during the development of these fully quantitative assays, control experiments are conducted to ensure that there is no crosstalk (interference) between each of the assays.a multiplex immunoassay was developed for a subset of the proposed biomarkers to demonstrate proof of concept for the covid-19 disease severity panel. the p-bnc platform can perform powerful and quantitative multiplexed measurements over an extended range.calibration curves are necessary to quantitate the concentration of molecular targets in solution which are critical inputs to the diagnostic algorithm. figure 3 demonstrates this capability with four simultaneously generated calibration curves for ctni, ck-mb, myo, and nt-probnp that cover a concentration range from 0.032 to 500 ng/ml. error bars indicate bead-to-bead precision with four redundant beads measured per sensor class. as shown, the response data for each biomarker exhibits an excellent fit to a five-parameter logistic regression. as part of the multiplexed assay development effort, specificity was confirmed for the four-plex panel, as shown . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint in inset images on figure 3 . here, a single antigen standard at high concentration (1000ng/ml) was processed against a cartridge configured for multiplexed detection. as expected, monoclonal antibodies are highly specific for their target antigen, where high doses of each single antigen generated minimal cross-reactivity on non-target sensors. although this work represents a subset of the full covid-19 panel, the cartridge facilitates multiplexing of up to 20 different biomarkers and can be easily expanded to accommodate the panel and test validity controls. we anticipate that one or more of the selected six biomarkers may be dropped as additional covid-19 clinical data are used to optimize the final covid-19 severity score due to redundancy of patient discrimination information afforded by these biomarkers.having identified a method to measure strategic biomarkers in a multiplexed panel, this next step involves the translation of these test values alongside key clinical metrics into information relevant to covid-19 disease severity. a covid-19 disease severity model was developed based on data from 160 hospitalized patients from wuhan, china. 14 here, 160 patients with hypertension were admitted to the hospital for covid-19 in which 117 were eventually discharged and 43 died. table 3 summarizes the patient characteristics and lab values for both patient groups. interestingly, males accounted for 70% of the deaths vs. 44% of the discharged patients. this study finds significantly higher levels of biomarkers (ctni, ck-mb, myo, crp, and pct) in patients that died vs. those that were discharged. likewise, age was a statistically significant factor with mean (sd) of 63 (13) and 73 (8) in the "discharged" and "died" groups, respectively.a covid-19 severity score was trained and internally validated based on a subset of the targeted biomarkers (ctni, pct, myo, and crp), age, and sex. the disease discrimination potential is displayed in figure 4 . for this analysis, covid-19 severity scores are shown for two patient groups, those patients that recovered vs. those that passed away from the complications. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint one limitation of this study was that all patients in the training dataset had hypertension and are, thus, at an elevated risk for cardiovascular events. since the test panel contains several cardiac biomarkers, it's possible that these training data could lead to overoptimistic results.however, in addition to cardiac biomarkers, the expanded biomarker panel represents diverse pathophysiology (i.e., indicators of infection, inflammation, mortality, thrombotic events, and rhabdomyolysis) which have the potential to significantly improve generalizability. plans to evaluate and optimize the covid-19 severity score model on external data are in place. despite this limitation, the preliminary results demonstrate strong promise for the covid-19 severity score. reporting these preliminary findings now is critically important given the stage of the pandemic.previously we have used the p-bnc platform to develop various wellness and disease severity scores for oral cancer 18, 19, 32 and cardiac heart disease. 22 shown in figure 5 finally, we evaluated the covid-19 severity score on data from a case study of 12 hospitalized covid-19 patients. 28 figure 6 presents a scatter/box plot of covid-19 severity scores on three groups of patients. covid-19 severity scores were found to increase with disease severity. moderate (patients whose only complication was pneumonia), severe (patients with both pneumonia and ards), and critical (patients with one or more of severe ards, respiratory failure, cardiac failure, or shock) groups had median (iqr) covid-19 severity scores of 9 (4-17), 28 (24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) , and 36 (28-83), respectively. although this analysis evaluates a small sample of patients, these preliminary results show potential for the covid-19 severity score to be calibrated to a disease severity scale. in addition to cross-sectional and population-based comparisons, this covid-19 severity score could also be used for longitudinal monitoring of patients. in this manner, an individual's time series measurements could be used to track changes . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint in biomarker-based covid-19 severity score over time. preliminary findings ( figure s3) demonstrate that the average trajectories decrease for the "discharged" group increase for the "died" group, suggesting that the covid-19 severity score could provide valuable lead time in discharging patients with low risk earlier while prioritizing care for those at elevated risk of mortality. future efforts will be used to define various decision cuts points, reference ranges, and change scores to help guide clinical decision making including therapy decisions. future efforts may also adapt this clinical decision support tool for ards resulting from other infectious viral agents such as influenza and varicella-zoster; bacteria such as mycoplasma, chlamydia, and legionella; and parasites such as the malaria causing plasmodium falciparum. 34this study establishes the framework for a point-of-care covid-19 severity score and clinical decision support system. our studies find that the median covid-19 severity score was significantly lower for the group that recovered versus the group that died from covid-19 complications (60.5 versus 96.6, respectively). the auc value for the covid-19 severity score was 0.94, demonstrating strong potential for its utility in identifying patients with increased risk of mortality. plans are now in place to confirm the final selection of biomarkers for an integrated point-of-care covid-19 severity score disease severity test. it is possible that some of the biomarkers may yield redundant information; as such, these redundant biomarkers may be eliminated to create a sparser diagnostic panel with improved generalizability.these lab-on-a-chip diagnostic capabilities have the potential to yield the first quantitative point-of-care diagnostic panel linked to a clinical decision support tool for predicting mortality from covid-19. an experienced team and established translation partnerships are both in place to move these systems into real-world practice in a timely manner. further, the release of an app for immediate impact on covid-19 patient management in the next few weeks is anticipated.future work may also involve developing a test on the same platform for population-based covid-19 community surveillance in clinical settings (ambulances, hospitals, clinics, laboratories) and for public settings that are at risk for community spread (businesses, schools, airports, train stations). the development and distribution of a portable, affordable, widely distributed smart sensor technology with anticipated availability/readiness within months promises to be an important solution for the management of the current coronavirus crisis as well as an adaptable tool to combat future threats of a new virus or biological threat. likewise, in addition to this covid-19 severity score, a sustaining contribution of this work may be in the . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint development of an ards clinical decision support tool for other infectious viral agents, bacteria, and parasites.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 here, two panels are detailed for covid-19: a disease severity panel as featured in the work (b) and a community exposure / surveillance panel as will be described in future efforts (c).. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 6 . covid-19 severity scores evaluated for a case study of 12 hospitalized patients with covid-19 from shenzhen, china. 28 the moderate group contained patients whose only complication was pneumonia. the severe group were patients with pneumonia and ards. the critical group contained patients with one or more of severe ards, respiratory failure, cardiac failure, or shock.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 16.20068411 doi: medrxiv preprint saliva is an exocrine secretion produced from the salivary glands and has numerous functions, such as cleansing and protection of the oral cavity, antimicrobial effects and aids in digestion due to the speedy development in the field of salivaomics, saliva is now well accepted as a pool of biological markers that vary from changes in biochemicals, nucleic acids and proteins to the microflora saliva has an immense potential as a diagnostic fluid and offers an edge over other biological fluids as its collection method does not require invasive procedure, economical and is useful for monitoring systemic health development of sensitive and precise salivary diagnostic tools and the formulation of defined guidelines following meticulous testing will allow salivary diagnostics to be utilised as chair side tests for various oral and systemic diseases in the near future the coronavirus disease (covid-19) pandemic is the biggest challenge and global health crisis for the world since world war two rapid and accurate diagnosis of covid-19 is crucial in controlling the outbreak in the community and in hospitals nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs are the recommended specimen types for covid-19 diagnostic testing the collection of these specimen types requires close contact between healthcare workers and patients and poses a risk of transmission of the virus, causes discomfort and may cause bleeding, especially in patients with condition such as thrombocytopenia hence, nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal swabs are not desirable for sequential monitoring of viral load saliva specimens can be obtained easily as the patient is asked to spit into a sterile bottle the collection of saliva is non-invasive and greatly minimizes the exposure of healthcare workers to covid-19 saliva has a high consistency rate of greater than 90% with nasopharyngeal specimens in the detection of respiratory viruses, including coronaviruses saliva has also been used in screening respiratory viruses among hospitalized patients without pyrexia or respiratory symptoms sars-cov can be detected in saliva at high titers salivary diagnostics is a dynamic field that is being incorporated as part of disease diagnosis, clinical monitoring of systemic health and to make significant clinical decisions for patient care more research is required to analyze the potential diagnostic of covid-19 in saliva to develop rapid chair side tests for the detection of covid-19 and it is also pivotal to improve and develop successful strategies for prevention, especially for dentists and healthcare professionals who are involved in performing aerosol-generating proceduresa review of salivary diagnostics and its potential implication in detection of covid-19the coronavirus disease pandemic is the biggest challenge and global health crisis for the world since world war two. rapid and accurate diagnosis of covid-19 is crucial in controlling the outbreak in the community and in hospitals. nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs are the recommended specimen types for covid-19 diagnostic testing. the collection of these specimen types requires close contact between healthcare workers and patients and poses a risk of transmission of the virus, causes discomfort and may cause bleeding, especially in patients with condition such as thrombocytopenia. hence, nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal swabs are not desirable for sequential monitoring of viral load. saliva specimens can be obtained easily as the patient is asked to spit into a sterile bottle. the collection of saliva is non-invasive and greatly minimizes the exposure of healthcare workers to covid-19. saliva has a high consistency rate of greater than 90% with nasopharyngeal specimens in the detection of respiratory viruses, including coronaviruses.saliva has also been used in screening respiratory viruses among hospitalized patients without pyrexia or respiratory symptoms. sars-cov can be detected in saliva at high titers. salivary diagnostics is a dynamic field that is being incorporated as part of disease diagnosis, clinical monitoring of systemic health and to make significant clinical decisions for patient care. more research is required to analyze the potential diagnostic of covid-19 in saliva to develop rapid chair side tests for the detection of covid-19 and it is also pivotal to improve and develop successful strategies for prevention, especially for dentists and healthcare professionals who are involved in performing aerosol-generating procedures.saliva is a hypotonic fluid in nature. the major salivary glands such as the parotid glands, submandibular glands and sublingual glands secrete approximately 90% of saliva. the salivary glands have high permeability and are surrounded by abundant capillaries, blood and acini, which can exchange molecules. hence, biomarkers in the blood circulation can infiltrate acini and ultimately secreted into the saliva [1] . every day, 600 ml of serous and mucinous saliva is secreted from the human salivary glands which contains minerals, electrolytes, buffers, enzymes and enzyme inhibitors, growth factors and cytokines, immunoglobulins (e.g., secretory immunoglobulin a [iga]), mucins and other glycoproteins [2] . saliva has been studied thoroughly as a potential diagnostic tool and it is expected to become a substitute for other biological fluids such as serum or urine in disease diagnosis.advantages of salivary testing for diagnosis are as follows [3] [4] [5] [6] :non-invasive, economical. safer to administer than serum sampling (no needles). real-time diagnostic values. no need for trained medical staff. multiple samples can be obtained easily. collection and screening can be done at home. minimizes the risks of cross-contamination. more economical sampling, shipping and storage compared to serum. requires lesser manipulation during diagnostic procedures compared to serum. commercial availability of screening assays. saliva does not clot and can be manipulated more easily than blood.emerging latest technologies have disclosed large numbers of medically important salivary biomarkers for various disease conditions including cancer, autoimmune, viral, bacterial, cardiovascular, and metabolic diseases [7] . covid-19 is associated with human to human transmission and was recently detected in the saliva of infected patients. saliva can have a significant role in the human-to-human transmission, salivary diagnostics may provide an easy and cost-effective point-of-care platform for quick and early diagnosis of covid-19 [8] .human diseases such as cancer, cardiovascular, metabolic, infectious and neurological diseases, have global impact. diagnosis of these conditions is very demanding and needs supplementing clinical analysis with laboratory testing [4] . saliva is a complex fluid comprising of proteins, enzymes, hormones, antibodies, cytokines and antimicrobial constituents [7] . the process of entry of these constituents from the blood into the saliva is by transcellular, passive intracellular diffusion and active transport, or paracellular routes by extracellular ultrafiltration within the salivary glands or through the gingival crevice [9, 10] . saliva is colourless, odourless and has a relative density of 1.004-1.009 and a ph of 6.6-7.1. salivary fluid is an exocrine secretion comprising of approximately 99% water, containing a variety of electrolytes and proteins, represented by enzymes, immunoglobulins and other antimicrobial factors which are of importance to oral health. saliva protects the teeth and the oro-esophageal mucosa through a number of mechanisms. besides maintaining the integrity of these tissues, saliva also has multiple functions in relation to digestion in the upper gastrointestinal tract. this action occurs due to the presence of the digestive enzyme α-amylase (ptyalin) which divides the starch into maltose, maltotriose, and dextrins. lubrication of oral surfaces, tooth mineralization, buffering, and antimicrobial activity are other beneficial effects of saliva. it is believed that changes in saliva are indicative of wellness of our health.in view of the rapid development made in salivary studies, the concept of salivaomics was proposed. salivaomics involves genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabonomics and microrna (mirna) analysis. wong was responsible for setting up a professional salivaomics knowledge base (skb) that can systematically manage the data of research related to salivaomics [11] . the limitations concerning the usage of saliva for diagnosis due to its low concentration of analytes compared to blood have been overcome with the development of precise molecular methods and nanotechnology [12] .the prevalence of dental caries is directly proportional to the microbial load of streptococcus mutans and lactobacillus in the saliva. samaranayake used paraffin wax to stimulate the production of the salivary samples which were incubated in a selective growth media for up to 24 hours [13] . saliva from populations with high caries activity contained >1 × 10 6 ml -1 of s. mutans and/or 1 × 10 5 ml -1 of lactobacillus whereas populations with low caries activity harboured <1 × 10 5 ml -1 of s. mutans and/or 1 × 10 4 ml -1 of lactobacillus.the presence of both the pathogens in high titres using a commercially available test (crt® bacteria, ivoclar-vivadent inc., amherst, ma, usa) has shown a positive correlation with the presence of caries in children and adults [14] . the prognostication of caries susceptibility was assessed with an experimental assay using biomarkers (genetically determined oligosaccharides profiles present on salivary glycoproteins). saliva also protects against caries since it contains antibacterial agents, can mechanically clear the pathogens and has a buffering capacity to decrease the acid concentration on tooth surfaces. hence, alterations in quantity and composition of saliva can also provide potential tools to detect and monitor caries.periodontal disease is a chronic inflammatory process of the periodontium in response to bacterial plaque deposited on the teeth. bacterial infections forming biofilms, induce gingivitis, destroy the alveolar bone and periodontal ligament, cause apical migration of the epithelial attachment resulting in the formation of periodontal pockets, and induce irreversible loss and exfoliation of the teeth. porphyromonas gingivalis is a 'red complex' bacteria that is closely associated with periodontitis. p. gingivalis saliva kit which is based on an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay have been developed by researchers to specifically detect this bacterium in saliva. the kit can detect both laboratory and clinical isolate strains of p. gingivalis at concentrations of 5 × 10 4 to 5 × 10 5 cfu·ml -1 and yields results quickly within 90 seconds. when compared with real-time polymerase chain reaction the p. gingivalis kit is faster in detection and has a sensitivity and a specificity of 92% and 96%, respectively [15] . isolation of bacterial species from oral specimens using classical in vitro methods is only possible for cultivable species such as porphyromonas gingivalis, treponema denticola and tannerella forsythia present as a complex biofilm in destructive periodontitis.several salivary biomarkers have been studied for the diagnosis and prognostication of periodontal diseases. these include inflammatory mediators, enzymes, epithelial keratins, immunoglobulins, salivary ions and hormones. gingival crevicular fluid (gcf) has been used to detect these potential biomarkers. specifically, the presence of matrix metalloproteinase-8 (mmp-8, an enzyme responsible for tissue destruction) in gcf has been positively linked with periodontal disease progression [16] . in 2010, an immunochromatographic chair-side dip-stick test became commercially available to determine the presence or absence of mmp-8 in the gcf [17] . it has been reported that there is a positive association between salivary soluble tolllike receptor-2 and interleukin-4 and periodontal disease [18] . levels of aspartate aminotransferase (ast) and alkaline phosphatase (alp) are elevated in periodontal diseases. salivary ast can be used as a marker for monitoring periodontal disease.according to researchers, variation in more than 70 genes can be attributed to periodontal diseases [19] . hence, salivary genomics represent another fascinating platform for the diagnosis of periodontitis. after analysing dna obtained from patients' saliva, it was recently validated that genetic mutations of the il-6 gene (cytokine involved in periodontal tissue destruction) are a significant risk factor for chronic periodontitis in caucasians [20] . additional research to isolate genetic, microbial and host-derived risk factors will elucidate more on potential biomarkers for periodontal diseases.almost in all types of cancer the prerequisite to good prognosis is the early diagnosis. salivary constituents such as proteins, mrna, and dna have been used in the diagnosis of oral squamous cell carcinoma (oscc). somatic mutations of tumour-specific dna are responsible for the onset and development of malignancy, which can be detected in the saliva or other body fluids and can also be used as biomarkers to diagnose oral or other tumours. in saliva, tumourspecific dna was positive in 100% of patients with oral tumours whereas, only 47%-70% of patients with other tumours carry tumour-specific dna in the saliva. in contrast, tumourspecific dna was found in 80% of plasma samples from patients with oral tumours and in 86%-100% of patients with tumours in other sites which validates the use of saliva as a potential tool to diagnose oral cancers [21] .oscc is the most common form of cancer affecting oral cavity. researchers have found that salivary levels of specific proteins such as, cd44 (a cell surface glycoprotein involved in cell-tocell interaction), cyfra 21-1 (a fragment of cytokeratin 19), tissue polypeptide antigen (tps), and cancer antigen 125 (ca-125) are increased in patients with oscc and have been suggested as oral cancer biomarkers [22] . the use of 7 oscc-associated saliva rnas (transcriptomes) has shown a prediction accuracy rate of 81%, indicating their potential for oral carcinoma detection [23] .mutations of the tumour suppressor p53 were first described for salivary gland adenomas in 1992 and later in a pilot study of saliva from breast cancer subjects [24] . few studies suggest elevated levels of the cancer antigen, ca15-3 and the oncogene c-erb2, in woman with breast cancer as compared to controls. chen et al. identified the tumour marker c125 in saliva of subjects with malignant ovarian tumours [25] .mutations identified in the egf receptor (egfr) are the tumour-specific biomarkers for nonsmall cell lung carcinoma (nsclc). a unique core technology known as electric field-induced release and measurement depends on a multiplexible electrochemical sensor that can detect egfr mutations in bodily fluids was shown to be effective for the detection of egfr mutations in the saliva of patients with nsclc [26] . this implies that proteomic biomarkers could be the key for the early diagnosis and prognosis of lung cancer.prostate specific antigen (psa) is a useful marker for detecting prostate adenocarcinoma (pa), monitoring the treatment or assessing its recurrence. salivary psa levels correlate with serum psa levels in patients with prostate adenocarcinoma. mir-21 and mir-141 are two tumour biomarkers whose levels are significantly elevated in patients with early-stage and advancedstage prostate cancer, respectively. the expression of both these tumour markers in the saliva can be detected by nano-graphene oxide which makes it a non-invasive approach to diagnose early-stage prostate cancer [27] .sjogren's syndrome (ss) is a chronic autoimmune disorder characterized by reduced secretion of the salivary glands and lacrimal glands and associated endocrine disturbance. salivary secretion from individuals affected with sjogren's syndrome demonstrates elevated levels of antibodies and cytokines such as iga, igg, prostaglandin-e2, and interleukin-6 along with reduction in oral phosphate levels and xerostomia due to reduced salivary flow, which may result in causing infections, caries, difficulty in swallowing and oral pain [28] . salivary protein analysis indicates an increased level of lactoferrin, beta-2 microglobulin, lysozyme c, and cystatin c, and decreased levels of salivary amylase and carbonic anhydrase [29] .cystic fibrosis (cf) is an inherited disorder which is caused due to a mutation in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (cftr) gene. the cftr protein is expressed in the epithelial cells of the parotid gland inflicting its involvement. cf is most frequently seen in caucasians, usually results in early death from respiratory complications. saliva of cf patients has elevated levels of calcium and phosphate, which may explain higher incidence of calculus observed in such individuals. these patients also possess higher salivary levels of cathepsin-d, chloride, potassium and sodium ions with a lower salivary volume and ph compared to healthy individuals. in addition, saliva samples in younger cf patients have been found to have higher levels of proteins, antioxidants and uric acid compared to their normal counterparts [29] .diabetes is a metabolic disease caused by lack of insulin secretion, insulin action or insulin resistance, which impairs the body's ability to process blood glucose. a positive association found between α-2-macroglobulin and hba1c, demonstrated that levels of α-2-macroglobulin in the saliva could reflect the glycaemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus [30] . type 1 diabetic hyperglycemia requires measuring exhaled methyl nitrate [31] . investigations indicated an association between blood glucose levels and exhaled methyl nitrate, presumptively because of interaction of superoxide dismutase with nitric oxide as a byproduct of elevated oxidative reactions. use of gingival crevicular blood as a measure of blood glucose was proposed by strauss et al. in a study of 54 subjects, blood collected from gcf was compared to blood obtained with a finger-stick; results showed good correlation between samples collected from the two sites [32] .cardiovascular disease (cvd) is the group of disorders of heart and blood vessels and includes diseases such as atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction and coronary heart disease. the research done by kosaka et al. revealed significantly elevated levels of salivary inflammatory cytokines including il-1β, il-6, tnf-α and prostaglandin e2 in both atherosclerosis and periodontal diseases. these cytokines can be potential biomarkers for the diagnosis of periodontal disease and atherosclerosis [33] . salivary markers of cardiovascular diseases include c-reactive protein (crp), myoglobin (myo), creatinine kinase myocardial band (ckmb), cardiac troponins (ctn), and myeloperoxidase, when used in combination with an ecg, shows a positive association with myocardial infarct patients as compared to healthy controls [29] .crp protein is an inflammatory mediator that is released in response to acute injury or infection. it can lead to atherogenesis. significantly, salivary crp levels were found to correlate with plasma crp levels obtained from blood samples of a population at risk for cardiovascular complications [34] . cardiac troponin (ctn), a biomarker for the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction can be detected in saliva which is released in response to cardiac cell necrosis [35] . salivary ctn levels were shown to be a sensitive diagnostic tool in patients suffering from acute myocardial infarction [36] . more clinical studies are needed to validate salivary biomarkers for cardiovascular diseases.diagnosis of viral infections presently depends on salivary biomarkers, such as viral dna and rna, antigens and antibodies. there are saliva-based antibody tests to detect several viruses. the raffaele scientific institute in milan used a salivary test named oraquick® hepatitis c virus rapid antibody test, to detect the hepatitis c virus [37] . the dengue virus (denv) rna and non-structural protein 1 antigens are detectable from saliva, which might provide an effective way to diagnose dengue. salivary levels of anti-dengue igm and igg revealed sensitivity of 92% and specificity of 100% in the diagnosis of infection. nefzi et al. found that saliva seems to be more sensitive than the blood in the detection of hhv-6 or human cytomegalovirus [38] . salivary tests using polymerase chain reaction for the detection of human papilloma virus have been established.coronavirus disease (covid-19) is a kind of viral pneumonia with its epicentre in wuhan, china. it is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). the unfolding of sars-cov-2 has been recognised as the third introduction of a highly pathogenic coronavirus into the human population after the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) in the twentyfirst century [39] . similar to sars-cov, covid-19 can be efficiently transmitted between humans via droplets and fomites during close unprotected contact between infector and infectee.coronaviruses are enveloped viruses with a positive sense single-stranded rna genome (26-32 kb) [40] . four coronavirus genera (α, β, γ, δ) have been identified so far, with human coronaviruses (hcovs) detected in the α coronavirus (hcov-229e and nl63) and β coronavirus (mers-cov, sars-cov, hcov-oc43 and hcov-hku1) genera [41] . coronavirus s protein has been reported as a significant determinant of virus entry into host cells. the envelope spike glycoprotein binds to its cellular receptor, ace2 for sars-cov and sars-cov-2, cd209l (a ctype lectin, also called l-sign) for sars-cov, dpp4 for mers-cov.virus genome sequencing of patients with pneumonia hospitalized in the month of december, 2019, disclosed the presence of a formerly unknown β-cov strain in all of them [42] . this isolated novel β-cov shows 88% identity to the sequence of two bat-derived severe acute respiratory syndromes (sars)-like coronaviruses, bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21, and about 50% identity to the sequence of mers-cov [42] . the novel β-cov was named "sars-cov-2" by the international virus classification commission.patients with covid-19 show clinical symptoms including fever, nonproductive cough, dyspnea, myalgia, fatigue, normal or decreased leukocyte counts, and radiographic evidence of pneumonia. one of the important mechanisms for ards is the cytokine storm, the deadly uncontrolled systemic inflammatory response ensuing from the release of large amounts of proinflammatory cytokines (ifn-a, ifn-g, il-1b, il-6, il-12, il-18, il-33, tnf-a, tgf-b, etc.) and chemokines (ccl2, ccl3, ccl5, cxcl8, cxcl9, cxcl10, etc.).rapid and accurate detection of covid-19 is crucial in controlling the outbreak within the community and in hospitals. nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs are the suggested upper respiratory tract specimen types for covid-19 diagnosis. the collection of these specimen types requires close contact between healthcare workers and patients, which jeopardize a risk of transmission of the virus to the healthcare workers. furthermore, the collection of nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal specimens causes discomfort and may cause bleeding, especially in patients with condition such as thrombocytopenia [43] .some virus strains have been detected in saliva as long as 29 days after infection, indicating that a non-invasive platform to rapidly differentiate the biomarkers using saliva may enhance disease detection [44] . the sputum of a lower respiratory tract was produced by only 28% of covid-19 patients, which indicates a strong limitation as specimen for diagnostic evaluation [45] . it has been previously demonstrated that saliva has a high consistency rate of greater than 90% with nasopharyngeal specimens in the detection of respiratory viruses, including coronaviruses [46] .in hong kong, covid-19 testing was performed by public health laboratory services branch for patients who fulfilled the enhanced surveillance criteria [47] . a patient is considered to have confirmed infection if covid-19 was detected in their nasopharyngeal or sputum specimens. saliva was collected and subjected to nucleic acid extraction and real-time reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction for covid-19. rt-qpcr is the gold standard for detecting pathogenic viruses in respiratory secretions and blood. a total of 12 patients with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 infection in hong kong were included. saliva specimens were collected at a median of two days after hospitalization (range, 0-7 days). covid-19 was detected in the initial saliva specimens of 11 patients (91.7%). in 33 patients whose nasopharyngeal specimens tested negative for covid-19, all the saliva specimens also tested negative.recently, researchers from rucdr infinite biologics at rutgers university have successfully validated saliva as being a viable biosample source for covid-19 detection when compared to nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal swabs. according to them, the utilisation of saliva to extract viral rna was in fact a robust source for covid-19 detection and equals in performance to the approved swab-based collection samples. saliva testing will help with the global shortage of swabs for sampling and increase testing of patients, and it will eliminate the requirement of health care professionals to collect samples [48] .the use of saliva will permit specimen collection outside the hospitals where airborne-infection isolation rooms are not available, such as in outpatient clinics or in the community. sars-cov has been shown to infect epithelial cells in salivary gland ducts in rhesus macaques. the presence of covid-19 in patients' saliva suggests the likelihood of salivary gland infection. however, it should be noted that saliva specimens not only contain saliva secreted from major or minor salivary glands but also contain secretions coming down from the nasopharynx or coming up from the lung via the action of cilia lining the airway. more studies are needed to delineate the sources of covid-19 in saliva.in the setting where huge number of individuals require screening, saliva would constitute a practical noninvasive specimen type. since healthcare workers are not required to collect saliva specimens, the use of saliva specimens will eliminate the waiting time, and therefore the results would be available much sooner. this is vital in busy clinical settings. covid-19 may be transmitted via saliva directly or indirectly even among patients without coughing or other respiratory symptoms. saliva specimens have high sensitivity and specificity in the detection of respiratory viruses by an automated multiplex clinical laboratory improvement amendmentswaived point-of-care molecular assay when compared with those of nasopharyngeal aspirate. the use of saliva also reduces the time and cost associated with the collection of specimen [47] . further studies are needed to evaluate the potential diagnostic of covid-19 in saliva and its impact on transmission of this virus, which is pivotal to develop rapid diagnostic tests and effective strategies for prevention.saliva offers many benefits as a diagnostic fluid as it is easy to collect, store and contains extremely good quality dna. thus, saliva can be an ideal alternative for blood. the research in the field of salivaomics has a key role in identifying biomarkers and exploring the role of saliva in diagnosis of diseases. it is anticipated that the development of precise salivary diagnostic tools will make salivary diagnostics a reality in the future. saliva can be provided by patients without any invasive procedures, the use of saliva specimens will decrease the risk of nosocomial transmission of covid-19 and is ideal for situations in which oro-or nasopharyngeal specimen collection may be contraindicated. it can also reduce or eliminate the need for health care professionals for collecting samples. recent research suggests that saliva can be used as a viable biosample for the detection of covid-19, further studies are required to validate the same. salivary diagnostics may play a pivotal role in detection of covid-19 and can offer mass screening of the population.the systematic review is reported following the meta-analysis of observational studies in j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f cardiac injury according to severity of covid-19, or mortality according to cardiac injury, were included. studies of the same hospital with period within range of other studies, or with data that could not be reliably extracted were excluded.th and jl scrutinized the titles and abstracts of the 2961 reports identified and excluded clearly irrelevant studies. two authors (th and jl) then did independent review of the full reports for the remaining 553 studies and extracted data independently from the 28 with relevant information.(efigure 1 in supplementary material) any disagreements were resolved by a third author (yc). when estimates were only presented graphically, we used the software g3data (version 1.51, www.frantz.fi/software/g3data.php) to extract estimates.for analysis of cardiac injury biomarkers, first standard mean differences (smd) were calculated for all biomarkers using mean (sd) values and group size, and pooled using random effects models. then, separate meta-analysis was carried out, with smd using for troponin (troponin i and t, or high sensitivity troponin i and t), and weighted mean differences (wmd) for other biomarkers. summary relative risks (rrs) with 95% cis were estimated for the association between acute cardiac injury and death. the degree of heterogeneity was assessed using the i 2 -index. an i 2 statistic was considered to reflect low likelihood (0%-25%), moderate likelihood (26%-75%), and high likelihood (76%-100%) of differences beyond chance, as was a p value, from a q test of heterogeneity, of less than or equal to 0.05 6 . if the results were homogeneous (i 2 <50% and p>0.05), fixed effects models were utilized, whereas if these results were heterogeneous (i 2 ≥50% or p≤0.05), then random effect models were used. if only median and interquartile range (q25, q75) were reported, then we assumed the median was equal to the mean and that the standard deviation (sd) was (q75-q25)/2. we also conducted meta-regression to assess whether severity differences in cardiac injury biomarkers were modified by patient characteristics: age, sex, smoking, diabetes, hypertension, history of cardiovascular diseases, j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f coronary heart disease, cerebrovascular diseases, chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases, chronic kidney disease, and severity definitions of covid-19. in this meta-regression analysis cardiac injury biomarkers are selected with priority troponin>ck-mb>myogloblin>nt-probnp for each study, for example if one study reported troponin and ck-mb, we used troponin as the outcome and used the standard mean difference model to combine the results. evidence of publication bias was examined using egger's regression test for funnel asymmetry, in addition to visual inspection of the funnel plots.combined means of hstroponin i and nt-probnp were calculated as the sum, over studies, of the mean value of the biomarker and n is the number of participants. data were summarised using inverse variance weighted meta-analysis and a 2-sided p value of less than or equal to 0.05 was deemed significant. statistical analysis was performed with stata, version 15.1. fourteen studies reported data from patients in wuhan, where the epidemic first emerged. those with more severe disease were somewhat older, fewer women than men, and had higher prevalence of coexisting disorders. (table 1) j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f levels were evident in survivors, nt-probnp in survivors was only available in one small study 32 ( figure 5 ).in this systematic review and meta-analysis, we found that there is an increased risk of acute cardiac injury associated with more severe covid-2019 infection and this acute cardiac injury is associated with death. patients with a history of hypertension seem to suffer more from cardiac damage.our results are in line with a previous meta-analysis of covid-19 on cardiac troponin i, which found troponin i significantly increased in covid-19 patients with severe disease compared to those with milder infection. 38 nt-probnp show that cardiac injury biomarkers rise above normal by the midpoint of hospitalization and spike immediately before death, which seems to be most seen in severe cases. this pattern of elevation suggests that cardiac damage may already exist before multiple organ dysfunction syndrome.in a large report containing 44,672 confirmed cases from china, approximately 81% of covid-19 infections were mild cases which did not require hospitalization, with case-fatality rates of 49% in critical cases and 0% in mild ones. 40 in our analysis more severe infection with covid-19 is associated with 14 times higher mortality risk compared to mild infection, and acute cardiac injury mostly indicated by abnormal cardiac biomarker levels, is associated with 4 times higher mortality risk. in one of the included studies abnormal troponin i was associated with an 80 times higher risk of in-hospital death, although the sample size was small. 20 it is possible that direct cardiac damage or cardiac shock partially explain death.based on these results, we are in support of previous suggestions that longitudinal measurement of cardiac damage biomarkers is needed during hospitalization stay for sars-cov-2 infection, which j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f may help to identify a subset of patients with cardiac injury, and thereby predict the progression of covid-19 towards an unfavorable outcome. 38 moreover, studies shall also be planned to determine whether or not cardiac supportive measures, such as echocardiographic testing and heart failure treatments such as mechanical ventilation, inotropic agents, and vasopressors, are beneficial in patients with significant elevation of cardiac injury biomarkers.our meta-analysis has several potential limitations. firstly, there was obvious heterogeneity among studies regarding definitions of severity of covid-19, acute cardiac injury and biomarkers to detect cardiac injury although no significant publication bias were observed (efigure 6). secondly, this meta-analysis was conducted for studies that failed to describe all relevant characteristics of individual patients and it was hard to adjust for potentially confounding factors such as age, gender and use of treatments, such as renin angiotensin aldosterone system inhibitors. finally, all included studies were retrospective and there are risk of bias in the data collected.the severity of covid-19 is associated with acute cardiac injury, and the latter is associated with death. patients with a history of hypertension seem to suffer more from this kind cardiac damage. future studies are needed identify whether cardiac supportive measures and heart failure treatments are beneficial in severe patients infected with covid-19.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f covid-19 is a recent outbreak occurred worldwide and created a colossal dysfunction of various activity all around the world [ moreover, the biomarker isolation and sample preparation are much more comfortable in protein-based biomarker as compared to a nucleic acid or other biomarkers. in the current detection of covid-19, which is rt-pcr required rna isolation, purification and processing step, which increase the time of detection and cost of testing. we can locate out such biomarker through proteomics studies from covid-19 infected patient and find out specific biomarker for covid-19.all around the worldwide several research groups are indulged in developing a rapid diagnostic technique for covid-19 detection, as the current method rt-pcr is time-consuming and costly.to begins, this scenario qiu and his team develop a dual-functional plasmonic photothermalbiosensors, in this, they used plasmonic photothermal (ppt) effect and localized surface plasmon resonance (lspr) with the help of two-dimensional gold nanoislands (aunis) which they functionalized with complementary dna receptors which can perform a sensitive detection of the selected sequences from severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [8] . though this sensor is fast and more accurate as compared to rt-pcr result, still it does not remove the obstacle of virus particles exposure. to improve the detection limit et al, recentlydevelop an immunosensor based on sars-cov-2 spike protein based on graphene sheet on fet based system, this sensor has a better limit of detection [9] . however, it lacks the specificity in longer terms if viral strain gets mutated and change its morphology. these are some of the recent development through different research group for the rapid detection of covid-19 and their various parameters are listed in table 1. however, none of them approaches towards the development of non-invasive biosensor, which can be user friendly and cheaper.rapid and early diagnosis of any diseases is always a major concern for any country. currently, the situation related to covid-19 is enormous, as we do not have any rapid system for early and j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f [7] . in this review article, we have listed out the significant biomarkers which were reported in various paper after the clinical studies in covid-19 patients in china.biomarkers such as serum amyloid a (saa) which secreted in a more substantial amount in covid-19 patient as compared to a healthy patient, serum ferritin is also a considerable biomarkers from these studies which also shows a potential to detect specifically covid-19 as there is difference between secretion range and cut off the range, furthermore biosensor based on this approach will be non-invasive that can be user friendly in use so that the need of highly qualified professional limit can be overcome, apart this others biomarkers which can also be considered are listed in table 2 with the secretion range in healthy patient and covid-19infected patient [5] . lastly, there are some more studies which report some more biomarkers such as il-10, il-6 and il-1beta [4] .journal pre-proofconsidering the urgent need for rapid detection of covid-19 the biomarkers based sensor can plays a pivotal role as it will reduce the time to detect, will be cost-effective, and also reduce the chance of virus transmission while diagnosis, we can look forward to the integration of biosensor the scientific community is in urgent need for reliable biomarkers related to coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) disease progression, in order to stratify high risk patients. the rapid disease spread necessitates the immediate categorization of patients into risk groups following diagnosis, to ensure optimal resource allocation. novel biomarkers are needed to identify patients who will suffer rapid disease progression to severe complications and death. the identification of novel biomarkers is strictly related to the understanding of viral pathogenetic mechanisms, as well as cellular and organ damage. effective biomarkers would be helpful for screening, clinical management, and prevention of serious complications.preliminary studies describe vasculitic processes underlying organ damage in seriously ill patients, induced by the activation of inflammatory cascades, complement activation and pro-inflammatory cytokines (i.e. interleukin (il)-6) [1, 2] . vasculitic damage causes edema and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) in the lung, and plays a significant role in cardiovascular damage (ischemia, deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary thromboembolism) and cerebral injuries (embolism); its severity is unfortunately not easily predictable through currently used laboratory biomarkers such as d-dimer or prothrombin time/activated partial thromboplastin time (pt/aptt) [3, 4] . epidemiological observations have associated a critical role of cardiovascular damage in severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) patients, with ischemic heart disease and hypertension among the most frequent preexisting comorbidities associated with sars-cov-2 mortality [5, 6] . current clinical practice suggests determining il-6, ddimer, lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), and transaminases in addition to routine laboratory tests, in order to identify patients at risk of fatal complications and those who will potentially benefit from anti-il6 immunotherapies with tocilizumab [7] . however, as costly cytokine analysis is not routinely performed in most laboratories, surrogate markers of infection (ferritin, c-reactive protein (crp)) correlated to il-6 will be of increasing interest for prognostic value. beyond d-dimer, prothrombin time (pt) and fibrin degradation product (fdp) [1] , there are no specific predictive parameters of severe ischemic and thrombo-embolic disease. for this reason, it is not easy to cluster patients in risk categories for an appropriate early anticoagulant or fibrinolytic therapy.according to the most recently published diagnosis and treatment program of 2019 new coronavirus pneumonia (trial version seven) [8] , covid-19 patients are divided into mild, moderate, severe, and critical classifications. some hematological parameters, including white blood cell (wbc), lymphopenia, crp, and some biochemical parameters, such as ldh, creatine kinase (ck), and troponin were reported to be associated with covid-19 severity [9, 10] .concerning new predictive parameters of specific cardiovascular risk, very recent data report that homocysteine (hcy) (together with age, monocyte-lymphocyte ratio (mlr), and period from disease onset to hospital admission) may be a specific cardiovascular risk predictive parameter for severe pneumonia observed at chest computed tomography (ct) during the first week of covid-19 infection; however, these observations did not report any additional organ involvement [11] . the aim of this review is to report the current state of knowledge regarding known biomarkers for covid-19 infection, focusing on those potentially predictive of organ damage in patients with severe complications and death.the knowledge of molecular mechanisms related to virus damage on human cells is necessary to define efficacious pharmacologic strategies and to identify novel biomarkers predictive of severe cardiovascular damage or fatality.the main mechanism for sars-cov-2 infection is the binding of the virus to membrane-bound form of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) and the internalization of complex by the host cell.ace2, a glycoprotein and metalloprotease, exists in both membrane-bound and soluble forms [12] . the membrane-bound form contains a transmembrane domain which anchors its extracellular domain to the plasma membrane, whereas in its soluble form, it is cleaved and secreted, as the n-terminal ectodomain is barely measurable in circulation.the significance of circulating ace2 is unclear, although levels may be increased in chronic diseases such as diabetes, chronic kidney disease (ckd), and hypertension [13, 14] . ace2 has kinins, apelin, neurotensin, dynorphin, ghrelin, amyloid, and angiotensin as substrates. the main function of ace2 is to physiologically counterbalance ace and regulate angiotensin ii (ang ii) by converting ang i into ang-(1-9), and by converting ang ii into ang-(1-7), which is tissue-protective [15] .recently, it has been demonstrated that the receptor-binding domain in the novel coronavirus spike (s) protein binds strongly to ace2 receptors [16] . sars-cov-2 uses ace2 and the serine protease tmprss2 for s protein priming. ace2 and tmprss2 are not only expressed in lung, but also in the small intestinal epithelia, in the upper esophagus, liver, colon [17] , in organs involved in blood pressure regulation (blood vessels, heart, kidneys) as well as in the ovaries and testes [15] . this wide distribution of the covid-19 receptor could provoke systemic failure due to direct organ injury [18] .an additional sars-cov-2 mechanism of action was suggested by wenzhong and hualan who demonstrated that the open reading frame (orf8) and surface glycoprotein may both bind to the porphyrin. at the same time, orf1ab, orf10, and orf3a proteins are presumed to coordinate an attack on the heme of the 1-beta chain of hemoglobin to dissociate the iron, forming the porphyrin and reducing the capacity of hemoglobin to carry oxygen and carbon dioxide [19] (not peer-reviewed). this mechanism of the virus inhibits the normal metabolic pathway of heme and provokes disease symptomatology.greater consensus exists on the pathogenetic mechanisms triggered by covid-19 after entering the human body: inflammatory cascades, cytokine storms, and the activation of coagulation cascades. these are common in systemic vasculitis (pulmonary, renal, and cerebral), and lead to severe and even fatal complications, such as sepsis, disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic), and acute cardiovascular events.dic has been identified in the majority of sars-cov-2 infected deceased patients. patients with viral infection may develop sepsis associated with organ dysfunction. dic, most commonly caused by sepsis, develops when monocytes and endothelial cells are activated, and following injury cytokines are released, with the expression of tissue factor and the secretion of von willebrand factor. free thrombin, uncontrolled by natural anticoagulants, can activate platelets and stimulate fibrinolysis. at late stages of novel coronavirus pneumonia (ncp), fibrin-related markers (d-dimer and fdp) were reported to be moderately or markedly elevated in all sars-cov-2 deaths, suggesting a common coagulation activation and secondary hyperfibrinolysis in these patients [1] .a pattern of hematologic, biochemical, inflammatory, and immune biomarker abnormalities has been identified in patients with severe disease compared to mild systemic disease, and warrant inclusion in risk stratification models (table 1) . additionally, authors report the observation of significantly increased hcy in patients with severe covid-19 disease.hematologic biomarkers used to stratify covid-19 patients include wbc count, lymphocyte count, neutrophil count, neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio (nlr), platelet count, eosinophil count, and hemoglobin.yang et al. [20] reported lymphopenia in 80% of critically ill adult covid-19 patients, whereas chen et al. [4] reported a rate of only 25% of patients with mild covid-19 infection. these observations suggest that lymphopenia may correlate with infection severity. qin et al. analyzed markers related to dysregulation of immune response in a cohort of 450 covid-19 positive patients, reporting that severe cases tended to have lower lymphocyte-, higher leukocyte-counts and higher nlr, as well as lower percentages of monocytes, eosinophils, and basophils compared to mild cases [21] . similarly, henry et al. also concluded in a meta-analysis on 21 studies including 3377 covid-19 positive patients that patients with severe and fatal disease had significantly increased wbc, and decreased lymphocyte and platelet counts compared to non-severe disease and survivors [22] .in covid-19 patients, both helper t cells and suppressor t cells were below normal levels, with the lowest helper t cells levels associated with severe cases. further, in severe cases, the percentage of naïve helper t cells were reportedly increased, and memory helper t cells were reportedly decreased. patients with covid-19 also have lower level of regulatory t cells, which are more obviously damaged in severe cases [21, 23] . cytotoxic lymphocytes, such as cytotoxic t lymphocytes (ctls) and natural killer (nk) cells, are necessary for the control of viral infection, and the functional exhaustion of cytotoxic lymphocytes is correlated with disease progression [24] . on confirmed covid-19 cases, laboratory testing showed that mean lymphocyte counts were below normal [3, [25] [26] [27] . changes in lymphocyte populations in patients severely affected by covid-19 indicate a low t cells count, an increase in naïve helper t cells and a decrease in memory helper t cells [23] . the total number of nk, t cells, and b cells was decreased markedly in patients with sars-cov-2 infection [21, 28, 29] . lower cd8þ t cells count tended to be an independent predictor for covid-19 severity and treatment efficacy [29] . xu et al. reported that a decrease of specific t lymphocyte subsets is related to in-hospital death and severe illness. lower counts of t lymphocyte subsets; lymphocyte (<500/ll), cd3 þ t-cell (<200/ll), cd4þ t-cell (<100/ll), cd8þ t-cell (<100/ll), and bcell (<50/ll) were associated with higher risks of inhospital death of covid-19. the warning values to predict in-hospital death of lymphocyte, cd3þ t-cell, cd4þ t-cell, cd8þ t-cell, and b-cell were 559/ll, 235/ ll, 104/ll, 85/ll and 82/ll, respectively [30] .in a study of 32 covid-19 patients, decreased eosinophil count was registered in 66% [31] . eosinophil counts have been positively correlated to lymphocyte count (r ¼ 0.305, p < .001) [32] . in another study of 140 covid-19 patients, eosinopenia was reported in 52.9% (<0.02 â 10 9 /l), and the eosinophil count was positively associated with lymphocyte count in mild (r ¼ 0.449, p<.001) and severe (r ¼ 0.486, p<.001) cases of covid-19 [33] . du et al. reported very low eosinophil counts in 81.2% patients at admission, which may indicate poor prognosis [9] . liu et al. also reported low eosinophil values on initial hospitalization, which reportedly returned to normal before discharge, concluding that increasing eosinophils may be an indicator of clinical covid-19 improvement [34] . however, results from a systematic literature review concluded that "eosinopenia may not be associated with unfavorable progression of covid-19" [35] . therefore, the diagnostic value of eosinopenia in covid-19 requires further investigation with larger patient cohorts to establish the sensitivity and specificity of the eosinophil count.the nlr, calculated simply by the ratio of neutrophils count/lymphocytes count, is an inflammatory marker that can predict the probability of death in patients with various cardiovascular diseases [36, 37] . moreover, nlr has been identified in a meta-analysis as a prognostic biomarker for patients with sepsis [38] . for covid-19 patients, nlr has been shown to be an independent risk factor for severe disease [39] [40] [41] . fifty (75.8%) patients with disease progression during hospitalization had a nlr !2.973 [42] , which may indicate covid-19 infection severity [43] . binary logistic analysis identified elevated nlr (hazard risk (hr): 2.46, 95% confidence interval (ci): 1.98-4.57) as an independent factor for poor covid-19 clinical outcome [44] , which was confirmed by a meta-analysis which reported that nlr values were significantly increased in severe covid-19 patients [45] . nlr elevation may be due to dysregulated expression of inflammatory cytokines, aberrant increase of pathological low-density neutrophil and the upregulation of genes involved in lymphocyte cell death pathway, caused by the mechanism of sars-cov-2 infection [46] .lymphopenia, excessive activation of the inflammatory cascade, and cardiac involvement are all crucial features of covid-19 disease and have high prognostic value. however, the understanding of the underlying mechanisms is still limited [47] . based on the observations derived from clinical practice, it has also been postulated that coronaviruses may directly infect bone marrow precursors, resulting in abnormal hematopoiesis, or trigger an auto-immune response against blood cells [48, 49] .as platelet count is a simple, cheap, and easily available biomarker and has been independently associated with disease severity and mortality risk in intensive care unit (icu) [50] [51] [52] , it has been rapidly adopted as a potential biomarker for covid-19 patients. the number of platelets was reported to be significantly reduced in covid-19 patients [11, 53] and was lower in nonsurvivor patients compared to survivors [54] . low platelet count has been associated with increased risk of severe disease and mortality for covid-19 patients, and can serve as an indicator of clinical disease worsening during hospitalization [55] . another research group found that patients with severe pneumonia induced by sars-cov2 had higher platelet count than those induced by non-sars-cov2 [56] . the patients with significantly elevated platelets and higher platelet-tolymphocyte ratio (plr) during treatment had longer average hospitalization days [57] . damaged lung tissue and pulmonary endothelial cells may activate platelets in the lungs, resulting in the aggregation and formation of microthrombi, thereby increasing platelet consumption [58] .in severe disease, wbcs show lymphocytopenia, affecting both cd4 þ and cd8 þ cells, as well as a decrease in monocytes and eosinophils, and a clear increase in neutrophils and nlr. these simple parameters can be used for early diagnosis and identification of critically ill patients [59, 60] .the main laboratory changes in severe or fatal covid-19 patients were recently explored in a meta-analysis, including three large studies comparing survivors to non-survivors. a significant increase in total bilirubin and ck, together with serum ferritin, wbc count, and il-6 was registered in non-survivors compared to survivors [20, 26, 61] . further, given the strong association between thrombo-embolism and covid 19 and to a lesser extent, myocardial injury, d-dimer, and cardiac markers are crucial in covid-19 patient monitoring.markers of muscular and in particular cardiac injury were elevated in patients with both severe and fatal covid-19. at presentation, non-survivors had significantly higher cardiac troponin levels (weighted mean difference (wmd): 32.7 ng/l), which is probably due to both viral myocarditis and cardiac injury from disease progression to multiple organ failure (mof). in mof, significant elevation in liver enzymes (alanine aminotransferase (alt) and aspartate aminotransferase (ast)) is associated with critical changes in renal function parameters (blood urea nitrogen, creatinine) and coagulation markers [60] .chen et al. observed in a cohort of 799 patients (113 non-survivors and 161 recovered) markedly higher concentrations of alt, ast, creatinine, ck, ldh, cardiac troponin i, n-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide, and d-dimer in non-survivors compared to recovered patients [62] . du et al., in a prospective study of 179 patients with covid-19 pneumonia (including 21 nonsurvivors), identified cardiac troponin i ! 0.05 ng/ml as among the four risk factors predictive of mortality (age !65 years, preexisting concurrent cardiovascular or cerebrovascular diseases, cd3 þ cd8þ t cells ( 75 cell/ ll) [9] .liver function has also been identified as an important predictor for covid-19 patient mortality. a recent study suggested that sars-cov-2 may directly bind to ace2-positive cholangiocytes, and therefore, liver abnormalities in covid-19 patients may be due to cholangiocyte dysfunction and other causes, such as druginduced and systemic inflammatory response-induced liver injuries [63] . regarding the specific and dynamic pattern of liver injury parameters, lei et al., in a wide retrospective multicenter study involving a covid-19 cohort-derived data set of 5771 patients, reported that ast is strongly associated with mortality risk compared to other parameters, reflecting liver injury [64] . this evidence is in contrast with the evidence of alt elevation in other hepatitis-induced liver injury.the increase in inflammation markers is the critical point underlying the systemic vasculitic processes and the defects in the coagulation processes that cause most parenchymal lesions in vital organs. the main inflammatory and immune biomarkers correlated with covid-19 disease are summarized in table 1 .the crp marker was found to be significantly increased in the initial phases of the infection for severe covid-19 patients, also prior to indications of critical findings with ct. importantly, crp has been associated with disease development and is an early predictor for severe covid-19 [65] . the authors also reported by correlation analysis that crp (r ¼ 0.62, p < .01), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr) (r ¼ 0.55, p < .01) and granulocyte/lymphocyte ratio (r ¼ 0.49, p < .01) were positively associated with ct severity scores.the immunological biomarkers of il-6 and serum ferritin are reported to be significantly increased in non-survivors vs. survivors (wmd: 4.6 pg/ml and 760.2 ng/ml, respectively) and as compared to severe vs. non-severe disease (wmd: 1.7 pg/ml and 408.3 ng/ ml, respectively) [60] . the significant increase of inflammatory cytokines, such as il-6, is connected to a so-called "cytokine storm," behind acute lung injury and ards and can lead to further tissue damage and mof [66] . this hyperbolic systemic inflammation relates to lymphopenia and is associated with severe disease [67] . important inflammatory markers include il-6, il-2, il-7, tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-a, interferon-c inducible protein (ip)-10, monocyte chemoattractant protein (mcp)-1, macrophage inflammatory protein (mip) 1-a, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (g-csf), crp, procalcitonin (pct), and ferritin [3, 26, 47, 61, 67, 68] .some of the above-mentioned parameters not only appear to be related to disease severity, but also to mortality. in a retrospective clinical series, non-survivors had higher levels of il-6, ferritin, and crp [26, 61] compared to survivors. current clinical practice suggests that the determination of il-6, d-dimer, ldh, and transaminases in addition to routine laboratory tests, is useful for the stratification of high risk patients and the identification of those who might potentially benefit from anti-il-6 immunotherapies with tocilizumab [7] .pct, a glycoprotein, is the pro-peptide of calcitonin devoid of hormonal activity. under normal circumstances, it is produced in the c-cells of the thyroid gland. in healthy humans, pct levels are undetectable ( < 0.1 ng/ ml). during severe infection (bacterial, parasitic, and fungal) with systemic manifestations, pct levels may rise to over 100 ng/ml, produced mostly by extra-thyroid tissue [69] . although its biological action is largely unknown, the sequence homologies between pct and other human cytokines, such as tnf-a family, il-6, etc., support the hypothesis that pct is a mediator of inflammation [70] .the synthesis of pct can be increased as a result of endotoxins and/or cytokines (e.g. il-6, tnf-a, and il-1b). the extra-thyroid synthesis of pct has been found to occur in the liver, pancreas, kidney, lung, intestine, and within leukocytes. however, the synthesis of pct has been shown to be suppressed within these tissues in the absence of bacterial infection. in contrast, cytokines, such as interferon (inf)-c, which are released following viral infection, lead to down-regulation of pct, thus highlighting another advantage of pct assays [71] . pct levels are either unmodified or only moderately increased in systemic inflammatory response to viral or to noninfectious stimuli (non-viral infections). therefore, pct values were more discriminative than wbc count and crp in distinguishing a bacterial infection from another inflammatory process [72] . as for covid-19 patients, more severe cases showed a more marked increase of pct compared with non-severe cases [33, [73] [74] [75] [76] . a slight increase (much less than 0.5 ng/ml) in pct levels is an important indicator to distinguish between sars-cov-2-positive and sars-cov-2-negative patients [77] and increased pct values have been associated with a nearly fivefold higher risk of severe sars-cov-2 infection (odds ratio (or): 4.76; 95% ci: 2. 74-8.29) . pct value remains within reference ranges in patients with non-complicated sars-cov-2 infection; any substantial increase reflects bacterial coinfection and the development of a severe form of disease and a more complicated clinical picture [78] . pct elevation has also been found in pediatric cases with lower respiratory tract infection, reflecting bacterial coinfection [79] .although initial pct value may be helpful in the determination of illness severity, it may not always be a reliable prognostic indicator. as pct values may be influenced by preexisting comorbid conditions, such as ckd and congestive heart failure, baseline values may be high. however, pct can provide invaluable information if considered within the clinical context [80] .abnormal coagulation parameters are associated with poor prognosis. specifically, markedly elevated d-dimer and fdp are common in covid-19 non-survivor patients [1] .d-dimer appears to be frequently increased in patients with covid-19 (36-43%) [81] and may be related to severe complications and death. however, currently the interpretation of d-dimer during disease monitoring is unclear, as it may not be directly related to disease severity. similarities may exist with troponins (8), whose range does not always correspond to acute cardiac ischemia; not all increases in cardiac troponin require invasive assessments in the absence of clinical symptoms [82, 83] . however, in some largescale studies, pt has been shown to be correlated to disease severity. in a retrospective study involving 296 covid-19 patients (with 17 non-survivors), the nonsurvivor group had higher d-dimer and thrombin time and lower aptt than the survivor group [84] . in a retrospective, multicenter cohort study including 191 covid-19 patients who had either been discharged or had died, factors associated with non-survival were pt, high-sensitive cardiac troponin i, ck, and d-dimer [61] . wang et al. showed that 58% of patients with covid-19 had prolonged pt [68] . tang et al. investigated 207 non-survivor covid-19 patients and revealed that non-survivors had remarkably higher d-dimer and fdp levels and longer pt at admission compared with survivors [1] .the activation of coagulation processes reaches its peak in the dic, which appeared to occur before most of the covid-19 positive patients' death. in fact, such patients may evolve to sepsis, which is one of the most common causes of dic. dic is the result of activation of monocytes and endothelial cells to release cytokines following injury, with expression of tissue factor and secretion of von willebrand factor. circulation of free thrombin, uncontrolled by natural anticoagulants, can activate platelets and stimulate fibrinolysis. at the late stages of ncp, levels of fibrinrelated markers (d-dimer and fdp) are moderately or markedly elevated in all deaths, suggestive of a common coagulation activation and secondary hyperfibrinolysis condition.this evidence could explain the rapid disease progression to death and the limited efficacy of mechanical ventilation in the treatment of covid-19 patients. ards mechanical ventilation protocols are not always of significant benefit and may even cause additional lung damage. conversely, the rapid and positive response of some patients to full anti coagulation therapy can be explained.terpos et al. showed that blood hypercoagulability is common among hospitalized covid-19 patients. they reported that coagulation abnormalities in pt, aptt, fdp, and d-dimer, along with severe thrombocytopenia, are associated with life-threatening dic, which necessitates continuous vigilance and prompt intervention [85] . in large scale studies, d-dimer and pt have been found to be associated with severe disease and death [61, 86] .hcy has been under a lot of speculation since its discovery in 1932. the heating of the amino acid methionine with sulfuric acid led to this amino acid of interest [87] .high plasma levels of hcy significantly increase the incidence of vascular damage in both small and large vessels [88, 89] ; concentrations above the 90th percentile are associated with increased risk of degenerative and atherosclerotic processes [90] in the coronary, cerebral and peripheral circulatory systems. although hcy is an effective cardiovascular risk biomarker, and the cardiovascular complications are critical in hospitalized covid-19 patients, this parameter has not been adopted and studied in this clinical setting and in neither of the published prospective studies focused on laboratory markers useful for clinical evaluation of covid-19.the definition of hyperhomocysteinemia differs between studies [91] . hyperhomocysteinemia is defined as a medical condition characterized by an abnormally high level (>15 lmol/l) of hcy in the blood [92] . total concentration of hcy in plasma of healthy humans (fasting) is low, between 5.0 and 15.0 lmol/l when assessed with the use of high-performance liquid chromatography (hplc), or 5.0-12.0 lmol/l when immunoassay methods are used [93] . when the level is between 16 and 30 lmol/l, it is classified as moderate, 31-100 lmol/l is considered as intermediate and a value >100 lmol/l is classified as severe hyperhomocysteinemia [87, 94] . recent observations related hyperhomocysteinemia to cardiovascular disease, diabetes, ckd, and fatty liver disease [91, 92, 94] .very recent data demonstrated a predictive value of hcy (together with age, mlr, and period from disease onset to hospital admission) for severe pneumonia on chest ct at first week from covid-19 patients, but did not report on additional organ involvement [11] . in the same study, the authors reported that mlr was significantly higher in imaging progression patients compared to that in imaging progression-free ones (p < .001).3.5.2. angiotensin ii, ang-(1-7), ang-(1-9), and alamandine ace2 functions as a regulator of the renin-angiotensin system (ras), modulating endogenous levels of ang i and ang ii. ang ii levels were found to be significantly increased in the kidneys, hearts, and plasma of ace2 null mice [95] . the level of ang ii was also significantly increased in the avian influenza a infected patients, indicating that ang ii is a biomarker for lethality in flu infections [96, 97] . a strong correlation has been found between increases in il-6 and vascular macrophage accumulation and the degree of endothelial dysfunction produced by ang ii [98] .in an animal model, ace2 and ang-(1-7) infusion were shown to be protective via downregulation of rhoa/rho kinase (rock) pathway. this pathway is deeply involved in changes of vascular tone and structure leading to hypertension and cardiovascular-renal remodeling, and it has a relevant role in the induction of lung fibrosis [99] .ace2 converts ang ii to ang-(1-7) and ang i to ang-(1-9). ang-(1-7) and ang-(1-9) produce biological effects through the mas receptor (masr) and at2 receptor (at2r), respectively. ang-(1-7) induces regional and systemic vasodilation, diuresis, and natriuresis. ang-(1-9) increases nitric oxide (no) bioavailability by stimulating bradykinin (bk) release [100] . activation of these pathways mediates anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic effects leading to cardiovascular, renal-protective actions, and acute lung injury protection [101, 102] .alamandine is generated by the catalytic action of ace2 on ang a or through a decarboxylation reaction on ang- (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) in the n-terminal aspartate amino acid residue. alamandine produces the same effects as ang-(1-7), such as vasodilation and antifibrosis [103] . it modulates peripheral and central blood pressure regulation and cardiovascular remodeling [104] .mechanistic evidence from related coronaviruses suggests that sars-cov-2 infection may downregulate ace2, leading to toxic over-accumulation of ang ii that induces ards and fulminant myocarditis [105] . the ang ii level in the plasma samples from sars-cov-2 infected patients was markedly elevated and linearly associated to viral load and lung injury [106] .up to date, there are no data regarding ang-(1-7), ang-(1-9), and alamandine plasma levels in covid-19 patients. following the loss of ace2 function, due to the role of ace2 as the viral binding site by sars-cov-2, we expect elevated level of ang ii and lower levels of ang-(1-7), ang-(1-9), and alamandine in severely infected patients than in mild ones.a large proportion of the primary research is based on asian patients; therefore, further verification is needed in populations in other areas. some biomarkers, such as hcy, have been evaluated in a few scientific reports and further analysis is needed in a large cohort of covid-19 patients. there appears to be geographic variability in the percentage of patients with lymphopenia as shown in a retrospective study [107] . further investigations should be done to assess this geographic variability. this is a review of the current scientific literature with no statistical outcome measures. therefore, these results may not be generalizable to all populations. finally, with covid-19 being a very novel disease, many clinical studies are still ongoing or undergoing publication.since the emergency pandemic situation began, it is of high scientific significance to analyze the discriminative ability of hematologic, biochemical, inflammatory, and immunologic biomarkers in patients with and without the severe or fatal forms of covid-19. it is necessary to determine risk categories following covid-19 diagnosis, to ensure an optimal resource allocation and to improve clinical management and prevention of serious complications.to sum up, we can conclude from the analysis of published studies that hematological (lymphocyte count, neutrophil count, and nlr), inflammatory (crp, esr, il-6), and especially biochemical (d-dimer, troponins, ck) parameters correlate with severe prognosis or exitus in covid-19 patients and can therefore be used as predictive biomarkers. coagulation and liver parameters might play a crucial role in identifying severe cases of covid-19.understanding the weight of the pathophysiological processes of systemic cardiovascular damage (vasculitis, dic, myocardial infarction) and metabolic processes associated to the critical course of the infection, also thanks to autopsy cohorts [68, [108] [109] [110] , sets new light on biochemical biomarkers related to coagulation disorders. these are in fact not only predictive of disease severity, but are also helpful for the therapeutic management, based on drugs preventing the activation of coagulation processes. a laboratory score, taking into account hematological, inflammatory, biochemical and immunological parameters, would help to stratify covid-19 positive patients into risk categories, which would be of outmost importance in the clinical setting and therapeutic management.in addition to above discussed laboratory parameters, which are currently used in clinical practice, novel biomarkers potentially useful for screening, clinical management, and prevention of serious complications are under investigation. these include hcy, ang ii, ang-(1-7), ang-(1-9), and alamandine, which need to be evaluated in larger case series in order to clearly determine their predictive clinical value as indicators of severe prognosis in covid-19 patients.acute respiratory illnesses are extremely common, accounting for more than 500 million outpatient illnesses and 3.6 million hospitalizations per year in the usa alone [1, 2] . viral infection is a common cause of these illnesses but it is usually a diagnosis of exclusion, because current tests to rule in viral infection are often prohibitive in cost and time. a simple, pan-viral test to rule in a viral cause for respiratory symptoms could have a tremendous positive impact by facilitating rapid diagnosis, improving patient care, and enabling more efficient use of medical resources for the millions of patients with respiratory illness [3, 4] .current diagnostic strategies to rule in viral infection require testing for a number of distinct viruses that cause similar symptoms, because tests identify features specific to each virus. common tests use polymerase chain reaction (pcr)-based identification of viral genomes or viral antigen detection [5] . testing for a panel of suspected viruses can be time consuming and/or expensive, and falsely negative if the patient is infected with a virus that is not in the panel. identifying which one of many clinically similar viruses is causing a respiratory illness usually does not impact treatment, because virus-specific therapies are only available for influenza. one promising approach to developing a pan-viral test is to focus on biomarkers indicating that the body is responding to a viral infection.several recent studies have demonstrated that gene expression patterns in blood cells or plasma can indicate the presence of viral infection [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] , and a recent brief report showed that levels of certain host mrnas detected on respiratory swabs correlated with symptomatic viral infection [13] . these findings demonstrate the promise of using the host response to develop a pan-viral diagnostic test. therefore, we performed 2 studies to evaluate whether biomarkers of the antiviral response could identify virus-positive nasopharyngeal swabs, using swabs sent to our health care system for respiratory virus testing. we sought to identify host proteins as well as mrnas that could indicate viral infection in this sample type, because immunoassay-based tests are in common use in laboratory and point-of-care testing.guided by in vitro rna sequencing (rnaseq) experiments on nasal epithelial cells, in our first study we prospectively examined the performance of a signature of 3 host mrnas for predicting viral infection, and we also used these samples to retrospectively identify promising potential protein biomarkers detectable in the swab-associated viral transport medium. in our second study, we prospectively evaluated cxcl10 and cxcl11 proteins and found a high correlation between levels of each of these proteins and the presence of viral infection. here we report our findings, which indicate great potential for developing simple, pan-viral diagnostic tests to identify patients with respiratory virus infection.primary human nasal epithelial cells were obtained commercially (promocell) and grown in begm medium (lonza). hydrocortisone and epinephrine supplements were removed prior to stimulation. cells were transfected with the rig-i ligand slr14 (also known as 14-hp), a generous gift from the pyle lab, using lipofectamine 2000 (invitrogen) then incubated for 7 hours at 37°c [14] .the raw reads of rnaseq experiments were trimmed off sequencing adaptors and low-quality regions by btrim [15] . the trimmed reads were mapped to human genome (grch37) by tophat2 [16] . the counts of reads for each gene were based on ensembl annotation (release 70) and differential expression analysis was done by deseq2 [17] , which calculated the adjusted p values. rnaseq data have been deposited in ncbi's gene expression omnibus (geo), accession number gse 107898.both studies used samples sent to the yale-new haven hospital (ynhh) diagnostic virology laboratory by patients' health care providers. sample collection windows were selected during high test volume winter months, when multiple viruses were circulating, based on availability of personnel to process samples for research. for both studies, samples were included if: (1) direct fluorescent antigen (dfa) testing was ordered; (2) the 9-virus respiratory pcr panel was ordered (for study 2, this was only required for dfa-negative samples); and (3) the samples were of adequate quality to perform dfa testing as determined by microscopy.study 1 included 68 nasopharyngeal (np) swabs collected in viral transport medium during 14 days between 12/2015 and 2/2016. samples were stored for a maximum of 8 hours at 4°c prior to centrifugation and separate storage of cell pellets in lysis buffer and supernatants at −80°c. study 2 included viral transport medium from 151 np swabs sent to the ynhh lab during 1 week in december 2016 and stored at −80°c.all samples were de-identified and coded by the clinical laboratory. the protocol was approved by the yale human investigations committee.the investigator responsible for reverse-transcription quantitative pcr (rt-qpcr) testing and sample scoring (study 1) or immunoassay testing (study 2) (e. f. f.) was blinded to virology testing results until after the biomarkers were measured and samples were scored.samples were collected by patients' health care provider with flocked swabs placed into 3-ml universal viral transport medium (becton dickinson). nucleic acids were isolated from 0.2 ml of transport medium using the nuclisens (boom method) on the easy mag instrument (biomerieux). dfa tests were performed using commercial reagents (light diagnostics simulfluor respiratory screen reagent, millipore corporation). pcr and direct fluorescent antigen testing for a panel of 9 respiratory viruses (table 1) were performed as described previously [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] .coronavirus multiplex pcr assay was adopted from sultani et al, 2015 [25] , for cov-nl63, cov-229e, cov-oc43, and cov-sars, and confirmation of positive samples was performed using singleplex pcr. piv4 testing was performed using a previously reported assay [26] . sources of rna were: study 1, rna from cell pellets; study 2, nucleic acids for clinical virology testing, followed by genomic dna digestion and rt (iscript gdna clear, bio-rad laboratories).rna was isolated from cell pellets using the rneasy kit (qiagen) and reverse-transcribed rna using iscript cdna synthesis kit (bio-rad laboratories), qpcr was performed using itaq universal sybr green (bio-rad laboratories). primers were: frozen viral transport medium was thawed on ice and centrifuged to remove cell debris. chemokine levels were measured using the bio-plex or luminex instrument with milliplex map human cytokine panel iii (hcyp3mag-63k) or bio-plex pro human chemokine panel following manufacturers' instructions (bio-rad laboratories, millipore corporation). cxcl10 and cxcl11 were measured in undiluted and 1:5 dilutions of all samples.data analysis employed sas/stat statistical analysis software and ibm spss statistical analysis software.respiratory epithelial cells can mount vigorous antiviral defense responses upon viral recognition by the cell-intrinsic innate immune system, through rapid induction of antiviral genes [27] . to identify robust biomarkers of the antiviral response in human nasal epithelial cells (hnec), we stimulated hnec in vitro with a small molecule ligand of rig-i, a cytoplasmic receptor for viral rna. although this treatment stimulated rig-i mimicking rna virus infection, analogous sensors for dna viruses trigger many of the same downstream signals [28] .consistent with previous studies of airway epithelial cells responding to viral infection, transcriptional changes were dominated by interferon-stimulated genes (isgs; figure 1 and supplementary table s1 ). these include mrnas associated with respiratory virus infection in other sample types and/ or patient populations, including ifit genes, oas genes, and rsad2/viperin [6, 8, 13, 29] . figure 1 highlights highly induced transcripts evaluated as potential biomarkers in this study. these include multiple chemokines, small secreted proteins that function as chemoattractants to recruit cells of the immune system to infected tissues. transcripts that encode secreted proteins were of particular interest because they could potentially serve as biomarkers of viral infection at both the rna and protein levels and therefore could be useful for developing both pcr-based and immunoassay-based diagnostic tests.next, we investigated whether a transcriptional signature based on 3 of the identified mrnas could predict viral infection in nasopharyngeal swabs. we performed rt-qpcr for biomarkers on rna isolated from 68 np swabs sent to the ynhh lab for respiratory virus testing. chart review revealed that most patients were older adults with multiple comorbidities, presenting with respiratory symptoms and/or fever, and/or altered mental status. top comorbidities were cardiovascular disease (25/68), malignancy (24/68), and asthma/copd (16/68) (see supplementary figure s1 ).we measured levels of 3 mrnas identified by the rnaseq experiment: 2 encoding intracellular proteins (oasl, ifit2) and 1 encoding the chemokine cxcl10. levels of each biomarker correlated highly with virus detection (figure 2a and supplementary figure s2 ). for the mrna signature test, we scored each mrna level as above or below a cutoff determined by the mrna level detected in slr14 stimulated hnec. if at least 2 mrna were above the cutoff for a given sample, the sample was scored as positive for viral infection.all but 5 samples scoring positive on the host response test also tested positive for known respiratory viruses on the 9-virus ynhh panel (table 1 ; figure 2a ). the ynhh virus panel does not include coronaviruses (cov). therefore, we tested rna from all patient samples using a previously described multiplex assay for 4 cov genotypes [25] ; 8/68 specimens were positive for coronavirus oc43. strikingly, all 5 of the biomarker-positive, virus panel-negative samples were positive for cov-oc43 (indicated by asterisks next to bars in virus panel, figure 2a ), and the other cov detections were codetections in samples positive for other viruses.as shown in figure 2b , the overall diagnostic accuracy of the mrna biomarker test was 97% (95% confidence interval [ci], 0.9-1.0) and the positive predictive value was 100% (95% ci, 0.84-1.0). two of 68 samples represented false negatives (virus detected in the absence of isg signature), including 1 rhinovirus (rv) + and 1 human metapneumovirus (hmpv) + sample. of the 16 samples from patients with asthma or copd, 5 were virus positive; 4 were biomarker test positive and 1 was biomarker test negative (hmpv + sample). all 11 virus-negative samples from asthma or copd patients were biomarker test negative. seven distinct viruses were detected in the samples by both conventional and the mrna signature testing ( figure 2c ), to mimic viral infection. primary human nasal epithelial cells (hnec) were transfected with slr14 for 1 hour, then incubated for 7 additional hours at 37°c, followed by rna isolation and transcript analysis by rnaseq. dots represent transcripts significantly different in control versus slr14 stimulated hnec (adjusted p-value of <0.05, log 2 foldchange >1 or <−1). labels highlight transcripts examined in this study as potential nasopharyngeal biomarkers of viral respiratory infection. a more extensive list of differentially expressed transcripts can be found in supplementary table s1. indicating the great potential for a single host-based test to capture infection by diverse viruses.based on chart review, 8 patients had findings indicative of nonviral infection (see supplementary table s2 ). seven were virus negative. these 7 patients were also negative for the host mrna signature described in figure 2 . in addition, 1 patient had radiological evidence of bacterial infection and sputum culture was positive for pseudomonas. this patient also tested positive for coronavirus oc43 and for the host signature for viral infection described in figure 2 . although this study was not designed to assess nonviral infection, these data suggest that the host response signature in figure 2 is specific for viral infection and is not triggered by or inhibited by other infection types.as indicated in figure 1 and supplementary table s1, some of the most highly induced mrnas triggered by rig-i ligand in nasal cells in vitro encode chemokines. to identify which of these chemokines might serve as robust biomarkers of viral infection at the protein level, we measured levels of 8 chemokines identified in the rnaseq experiment, using immunoassay of the viral transport medium. of the 8 chemokines tested, only cxcl9, cxcl10, and cxcl11 levels correlated with the presence of virus, with cxcl10 and cxcl11 showing the most robust correlation (figure 3 ).to further evaluate the usefulness of cxcl10 and/or cxcl11 proteins in predicting respiratory virus infection, we measured levels of both proteins in viral transport medium in a second set of stored samples from december 2016. patients were primarily older adults (72% of patients over the age of 50) and also included young children (15% of patients vs 6% in study 1; supplementary figures s1 and s3 ). cxcl10 and cxcl11 concentrations correlated highly with viral infection ( figure 4a ). samples were initially tested for the 9-virus panel and covs as in study 1, then results were compared to biomarker levels. because several virus-negative samples had very high levels of cxcl10 or cxcl11, we further expanded the test panel by testing for parainfluenza virus type 4 (piv4). three samples tested positive for piv4, including 2 samples with high levels of cxcl10 and cxcl11 in which no other virus was detected. figure 4a shows an expanded view of the 40 samples with the highest levels of cxcl11. detected table 1 ; cov, coronavirus oc43 (only cov detected); npv, negative predictive value; ppv, positive predictive value.viruses that were not in the original test panel (table 1) figures 4b and c) . prevalence of individual viruses differed significantly from study 1, with respiratory syncytial virus most prevalent in study 2 and rv most prevalent in study 1 (figures 2c and 4c) . these findings reveal that cxcl10 or cxcl11 concentration can predict infection with diverse viruses. figure 5 shows the cxcl11 protein concentration in 219 samples (study 1 plus study 2), sorted from highest to lowest concentration, with bars in the virus column indicating virus detections. as shown, high cxcl11 levels correlated strongly with virus detection and low levels correlated with absence of virus, with intermediate levels being indeterminate. based on this pattern, it is possible to envision developing a rule-in/ruleout test using a high cutoff above which samples are predicted to be virus positive, and below which samples are predicted to be virus negative. dashed grey lines in figure 5 represent cutoffs of >80 pg/ml for rule-in, which in this sample set would have a positive predictive value (ppv) of 90% or a cutoff of >50 pg/ml, with a ppv of 86%; dotted black lines indicate a low cutoff of 10 pg/ml, below which this test has a negative predictive value of 94% for absence of virus infection. using cutoffs of >80 pg/ml and <10 pg/ml, about 1/3 of the samples (35%) fall into the indeterminate zone. consistent with the observations from each study (figures 3 and 4a) , we observed a high degree of correlation between cxcl10 and cxcl11 protein concentrations (supplementary figure s5 cxcl11 or cxcl10 measurements could be used to rule in/ rule out virus infection. in sum, these results demonstrate how an immunoassay-based test measuring a single host protein could have high diagnostic utility for managing patients with suspected respiratory infection.in this study, we tested whether mrnas and proteins associated with np swabs could be used to predict the detection of a respiratory virus in samples sent to our hospital laboratory for conventional virology testing. we chose possible biomarkers based on transcripts strongly induced by a virus-like stimulus in primary nasal epithelial cells in vitro. the 3 mrnas we selected all showed predictive value for viral infection in np swabs. surprisingly, we were also able to identify high-performing biomarkers detectable at the protein level by testing chemokines indicated by the in vitro experiment. the mrna and protein biomarkers we identified are all molecules known to be associated with the antiviral interferon response, a key host defense response to both rna and dna viruses in which viral recognition leads to interferon secretion and induction of approximately 300 different antiviral effectors [30] . while this result is not unexpected, interferon-stimulated genes have diverse regulatory mechanisms, are differentially expressed in different host tissues, and are differentially antagonized by different viruses. therefore, identifying which one(s) performed best as pan-viral infection biomarkers in the upper respiratory tract required empirical testing.interestingly, although many different chemokines were induced by rig-i stimulation in vitro, only 1 family of chemokines correlated highly with viral infection in np swab samples: the cxcr3 ligands cxcl9, cxcl10, and cxcl11. these ligands mediate chemotaxis of t cells to sites of viral infection [31] . the consistent correlation of these chemokines with presence of diverse respiratory viruses in np swabs suggests a particularly robust and conserved role for these chemokines in local antiviral defense of the upper respiratory tract.we were able to identify accurate mrna and protein-based tests. we defined an mrna signature with very high diagnostic accuracy by combining the information from 3 biomarkers (figure 2 ; accuracy of 97% (95% ci, 90-100%); sensitivity 91%; specificity 100%). this test compares favorably with a recently reported mrna-based index correlating viperin mrna levels to viral infection [13] . technologies to support practical tests based on measuring host transcripts are under active development [32] . importantly, our findings showed that np swab-associated cxcl10 or cxcl11 protein concentrations can also serve as biomarkers of viral infection. immunoassays are already widely used in diagnostic testing, and these findings open up new possibilities for developing practical tests for diverse patient care settings, including point-of-care.notably, we did observe some discordant samples. biomarkernegative, virus-positive samples could represent infections that are not currently part of an active disease process. recent studies show that while host antiviral responses can be detected in the respiratory tract of asymptomatic virus-infected subjects, the magnitude of transcriptional response (and possibly the presence of a response at the protein level) is greater in symptomatic than asymptomatic subjects [13, [33] [34] [35] . consistently, analysis of rhinovirus-positive samples in study 2 showed a clear correlation between low [cxcl11] and low viral load (supplementary figure s4) . biomarker-positive, virus-negative samples could represent infections with untested viruses. applying technologies such as deep sequencing for viral identification could provide greater estimates of biomarker accuracy in future studies [36] . it will also be important to rule out nonviral biological processes leading to biomarker elevation. for example, elevated cxcr3 chemokines have been reported in chronic respiratory diseases [37] . encouragingly, our initial results indicate specificity of the biomarker test for virus infection in this population. in study 1, 16/68 (23.5%) of patients had copd or asthma and 11 of these patients were virus negative; these patients also tested virus negative by the host mrna biomarker signature (figure 2) .in future studies, it will be important to explore the performance of these biomarkers in different patient populations and clinical settings. this study focused on the patients undergoing respiratory virus testing in our health care system, largely older adults and some young children. in this patient population, biomarker-based testing could provide a simple, cost-effective method to rule in/rule out of viral infection as the cause of symptoms and/or determine which patients require additional virology testing. if these biomarkers perform well in outpatients with acute upper respiratory infection, it is possible to imagine transformative new tests to aid in rapid diagnosis of these common illnesses and promote antimicrobial stewardship. for example, a pan-viral biomarker could potentially be paired with an analogous biomarker of bacterial respiratory infection to distinguish among viral infection, bacterial infection, and viral/bacterial coinfection. in study 1, we observed that nonviral infections did not trigger the virus host response signature (supplementary table s2 ) indicating the potential feasibility of this approach.in addition, biomarker-based tests offer other advantages over traditional virology panels. this includes identifying patients infected with unexpected viruses. for example, in this study, biomarkers identified samples positive for viruses that were not in the original 9-virus test panel (see figures 2 and 4; bars indicated by asterisks in virus column). this illustrates how biomarker tests could be employed for surveillance for unexpected viruses, including emerging respiratory viruses. also, biomarker-based tests offer promise for distinguishing incidental virus detections from active viral infection, an issue coming into focus as incidental respiratory virus detections are increasingly recognized to be highly prevalent in asymptomatic subjects [13, 33, 35, 38, 39] .in sum, our results show that biomarkers of the antiviral response are robustly detected using nasopharyngeal swabs, including protein biomarkers detected with immunoassay, and that even single biomarkers detected using this minimally invasive sample type offer high diagnostic accuracy. these results compel further study of using nasopharyngeal biomarkers for improving our understanding of host/virus interactions, and for improving the diagnosis and management of patients with respiratory illness. benefit the reader, the posted materials are not copyedited and are the sole responsibility of the authors, so questions or comments should be addressed to the corresponding author. covid-19 is caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov2) virus that infects cells via membrane bound angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace 2) receptors. 1 multiple studies have reported the spectrum of clinical manifestations of the disease and highlighted the involvement of the cardiovascular system. 1,2 the prevalence of cardiovascular disease (cvd) in patients with covid-19 is reported to range from 4% to 40% and the evidence is growing that its presence is linked with unfavorable outcomes, including, but not limited to icu admissions and increased mortality. [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] a recent metanalysis showed increased all-cause mortality and risk of severe form of covid-19 infection in patients with underlying cvd. 8 there are several small studies showing elevated biomarkers in covid-19 patients suggesting myocardial injury. however, there are conflicting data regarding the association of cardiac biomarkers with the severity of disease. 4, 9 there is a paucity of data on outcomes in covid-19 patients with underlying congestive heart failure (chf). 10, 11 we conducted this study to delineate the influence of various cardiac conditions (especially chf) on outcomes of patients with covid-19 and to determine the prognostic value of cardiac biomarkers -troponin i, creatine kinase-mb (ck-mb), and n-terminal-prob-type natriuretic peptide (nt-probnp).. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 7, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.06.20147421 doi: medrxiv preprint this systematic review was conducted by following the guidelines laid down by preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma). 12 objectives 1. to evaluate the demographics, and occurrence of cardiac injury and arrhythmias in patients with covid-19.2. to assess the impact of hypertension (htn) and chf on mortality in patients with covid-19 infection.based on their severity of illness (severe or non-severe) and final outcome (alive or deceased).we systematically searched pubmed/ medline (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), embase, and google scholar databases using following search terms or keywords: "(covid) and (clinical); ((heart) or (myocard*)) and (covid); (covid) and (troponin); (coronavirus) and (heart)." two authors (s.l. and t.d.) independently reviewed 3427 citations to identify the number of studies satisfying our inclusion criteria. of these, 702 were duplicates; 1647 were correspondence letters, case reports, and review articles; and 621 articles that were irrelevant to the study question based on their titles and abstracts, and hence, were excluded from the review.abstracts and full-length articles of 457 studies were then evaluated and 38 of them were included for the qualitative synthesis. of these, 17 articles did not report biomarkers of our interest leaving 21 studies to be included for the quantitative assessment ( figure 1 ). one study was later on excluded owing to article retraction, leaving a total of 20 studies for our final meta-. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 7, 2020. . analysis. any conflicts regarding the study selection were resolved by a mutual consensus. 13 all in-vivo studies on animals or tissue samples were excluded.all the published studies between december 2019 and may 2020 that reported the covid-19patients' characteristics, their co-existing comorbidities, and laboratory data stratified on the basis of patient outcome and/or disease severity were included in this systematic review. our exclusion criteria were confined to the articles that either did not report laboratory values of cardiac biomarkers or did not classify patients' outcomes based on the severity of infection or the final patient outcome.data extraction and quality assessment two authors (s.l. and t.d.) extracted the data. we collected the following variables: author(s) names; year of publication; study design; duration of study period; sample population; demographic and baseline characteristics of patients; laboratory biomarkers to identify cardiac injury (namely -ck-mb, cardiac sensitive troponin i, nt-probnp); disease severity (severe/ non-severe); and in-hospital patient outcomes (alive/deceased). the criteria used by authors for classifying patients as severe or non-severe is provided in etable 1 in supplement. acute cardiac injury is often identified in the presence of elevated serum levels of high-sensitivity troponin 14 , however no specific cut-off value exists.we classified patients under the spectrum of "fulminant" based on severity of their disease progression including death, whereas survivors and non-severe cases were collectively classified . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 7, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.06.20147421 doi: medrxiv preprint under "non-fulminant" spectrum of illness. we also compared the relative risk of death during index admission to the hospital between patients with and without pre-existing chf.categorical variables between the patient groups were summarized using the manel-haenszel risk ratios (rr) 15, 16 while the continuous data variables were summarized using the mean difference (md), along with their corresponding 95% ci. these pooled estimates were calculated by using the random-effects meta-analysis model. for calculating tau-square (τ 2 ), we used hartung-knapp-sidik-jonkman (hksj) method over the traditional dersimonian-laird method, as it is known to perform better with fewer number of studies and has lower type-i error rates even when combining studies with unequal sample size. 17 studies that had reported descriptive values as median (interquartile range) were transformed to mean ± standard deviations by using wan method. 18 publication bias was evaluated by constructing funnel-plots of the effect size against its standard error (se) and performing egger's linear regression test of funnel-plot asymmetry. betweenstudy heterogeneity was calculated with higgins i 2 statistic. a two-sided p value < 0.05 was considered statistical significance. we used "meta" and "metafor" packages for conducting our meta-analyses. 19, 20 statistical analyses were conducted by s.l. in r (v3.6.3) and reviewed by s.r and z.s.overall, we collected 5,967 patients from 20 individual study reports. table 1 outlines the details of studies and demographics of patients included in this systematic review. the age of patients ranged from 23-95 years, with a prevalence of females ranging from 19%-52%. the prevalence of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and smoking was observed to be ranging from 10%-82%, . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 7, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.06.20147421 doi: medrxiv preprint 8%-24%, and 4%-14%, respectively. ten studies reported their findings stratified according to patient outcome 6, [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] and 10 studies reported findings in severe and non-severe covid-19 patients. 3, 4, 9, [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] assessment of underlying cardiac conditionswe found that both non-survivors and those who had severe covid-19 infection (fulminant group) had an 8-fold increased risk of acute cardiac injury compared to survivors/non-severe patients (non-fulminant group); pooled rr was 8.52 (95% ci 3.63-19.98) (p<0.001) (figure 2) .a similar trend of increased risk was observed for any cardiac arrhythmia; pooled rr was 3.61 (95% ci 2.03-6.43) (p=0.001) ( figure 2 ).we also found that the risk of death was significantly higher in chf patients; rr 3.38 (95% ci 1.80-6.32) (p=0.004); however, the risk of in-hospital death in patients with underlying hypertension was not found to be statistically significant; rr 1.57 (95% ci 0.97-2.56) (p=0.06) . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 7, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.06.20147421 doi: medrxiv preprintto elicit a better understanding of confounding effects of other variables, we used metaregression models of cardiac biomarkers, adjusting for patient's age, hypertension, diabetes, and smoking status. our regression model showed statistically significant association in the mean difference of serum levels of nt-pro bnp only with diabetes mellitus status of the patients.(etable 2 in supplement).we observed that patients who suffered from severe covid-19 infection and non-survivors (fulminant group) had a substantially higher burden of cardiovascular diseases compared to nonsevere cases and survivors (non-fulminant group). these patients were also found to be at an increased risk of acute cardiac injury and cardiac rhythm irregularities, likely owing to the involvement of myocardium in coronavirus infection which is evidenced by the elevated levels of cardiac biomarkers. our results are consistent with other meta-analyses, which concluded that patients with underlying cardiovascular disorders have a higher propensity to develop severe and fulminant covid-19 infection. 37, 38 furthermore, in a latest study, lala et. al found that the presence of cardiovascular diseases in covid-19 patients increases their susceptibility to develop myocardial damage, and is associated with a higher mortality risk. 39 although, the prior systemic reviews and metanalyses have looked into the combined effect of underlying cardiovascular comorbidities on covid-19 outcomes, this study is novel as we largely focused on impact of isolated chf on covid-19 outcomes. also, prior studies had patients mostly from southeast asia, whereas, we incorporated patients from other geographic regions as well.covid-19 is a novel infectious disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) that binds to angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace 2) receptors . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 7, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.06.20147421 doi: medrxiv preprint to gain entry into the human body. 1,14 these receptors are present on various organs including lung alveolar epithelial cells, vascular endothelial cells and cardiac myocytes and pericytes. [40] [41] [42] the precise mechanisms for myocardial injury in covid-19 cases are unclear at the moment.however, there are 2 proposed hypotheses -myocardial insult could either be due to "cytokine storm" suggested by elevated levels of interleukin-6, lactate dehydrogenase among a few other biomarkers; or due to the direct effect on the myocardium by causing a down-regulation of the expression of ace2 protein expression within the cardiac myocytes. this ace2 protein is speculated to have a protective effect against myocardial and lung injury by reducing this ace2 protein is speculated to have a protective effect against myocardial and lung injury by reducing blood pressure, inflammation and fibrosis. 1, [43] [44] [45] several rhythm abnormalities like atrioventricular block, atrial fibrillation, polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and pulseless electrical activity have been associated with covid-19. 46 the exact mechanism of underlying rhythm abnormalities is still not completely elucidated.myocarditis has been associated with covid-19, and elevation of inflammatory biomarkers can also suggest direct involvement of electrical conduction system. 47 moreover, the medications used in treatment of covid-19 patients can increase qtc-interval and cause life threatening arrhythmias. 48 this presence of inflammatory milieu and direct myocardial insult might have led to increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias as noted in our study.we also observed that presence of heart failure is associated with increased mortality among covid-19 patients. this is consistent with other studies who have shown similar findings. 21 ace 2 counteracts the effect of angiotensin ii in states with excessive activation of reninangiotensin system like heart failure. 1 chf patients are known to have dysregulation of intracellular calcium handling mechanism 49 and covid-19 can cause hypoxia induced excessive . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 7, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.06.20147421 doi: medrxiv preprint intracellular calcium leading to cardiac myocyte apoptosis. 50 this can lead to increased mortality observed in patients with chf.nt-pro bnp has been known to be elevated in patients with chf 51 and its elevation is associated with poor prognosis in patients with sepsis, pneumonia. 52 increased ventricular wall stress due to hypoxia induced pulmonary hypertension, impaired clearance in critically ill patients with renal failure are a few mechanisms which can lead to elevation of nt-pro bnp levels in covid-19 patients. 53 high nt-pro bnp levels had been associated with increased mortality in covid-19 patients. 54 a recent systemic review which predominantly included patient population from china showed a similar finding of increased mortality. 55 although we had patients from different geographical regions of the world, yet these findings were consistent with our study.our systematic review inevitably has certain limitations such as between-study heterogeneity and the potential publication bias. another concerning aspect is the retrospective study designs of included researches, and the lack of individual patient severity and medical information (such as smoking status), because of which we were unable to adjust the confounding effects of comorbidities and other variables.in summary, the presence of chf in patients with covid-19 is associated with increased mortality and worse outcomes during index admission. there is increased risk of acute cardiac injury and cardiac arrhythmia among non-survivors and severe covid-19 patients. elevated cardiac biomarkers like nt-pro bnp and ck-mb are associated with poor prognosis and can . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 7, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.06.20147421 doi: medrxiv preprint help identify "at-risk" covid-19 patients. we suggest close monitoring of severe covid-19 patients with underlying cardiac comorbidities to reduced mortality.none.author(s) declare that they have no conflicts of interest to disclose.none.tarun dalia -https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4115-6189shubham lahan -https:// orcid.org/0000-0002-8192-3629 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 7, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 7, 2020. total studies included in meta-analysis (n=20). cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 7, 2020. . studies marked with asterisk (*) compared outcomes in severe and non-severe cases of covid-19.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 7, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.06.20147421 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 3 . relative risk of in-hospital death between patients -with and without pre-existing congestive heart failure; and -with and without pre-existing hypertension. g . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 7, 2020. . studies marked with asterisk (*) compared severe and non-severe covid-19 cases. ng . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 7, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.06.20147421 doi: medrxiv preprinta new strain of coronavirus (cov) caused a pandemic outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in china, hong kong, singapore, toronto, and taiwan from 2002 to 2003, resulting in 8098 individuals being infected and 774 deaths (1) . as compared to other upper viral respiratory infections (2), sars-cov can rapidly induce pneumonia. the accompanying adult respiratory distress syndrome can quickly progress resulting in rapid death of the patients (3,4) . the most commonly used laboratory diagnostic tests for sars-cov-infection are reverse transcription (rt)-pcr and anti-sars-cov antibody serological tests (5-7), but their roles in monitoring the extent of pneumonia are rather limited. although, serial chest radiography is helpful for monitoring the progress of disease (8, 9) , it is also limited by its subjectivity and variability in the interpretation of the imaging results and occasionally suboptimal quality of portable films taken in isolation ward to avoid the spread of the disease. in a recent article, the discovery of 12 upor downregulated serum biomarkers were reported in sars patients by a novel protein chip array profiling approach (10- 14) with one biomarker appears to be useful in monitoring the extent of pneumonia (15) . in this chapter, how this protein chip array profiling technique is carried out is described. the technique involves four steps with the first step being serum fractionation in ceramic ion exchange sorbent beads. this step separates serum proteins into several fractions aiming at reducing their complexity before protein chip profiling is performed. the second step involves the binding of serum protein biomarkers onto protein chip array surfaces. the third step is desorption of bound serum biomarkers by laser shots in the mass spectrometer generating a time of flight spectrum for each sample. the fourth step concerns with data acquisition, data processing and statistical analyses of the spectra in sars patients in comparison with the control groups. these procedures will be described in full details in the following chapter and summarized in the flow chart diagram as in fig. 1 1. 44 serum samples from 24 sars patients for differential mapping of sars associated biomarkers. fig. 1 . sample fractionation, chip binding, and reading in protein chip array profiling technique. serum samples from sars patients and various control groups were fractionated in q ceramic hyper d f anion exchange sorbent beads. the eluted fractions were in turn spotted onto two types of protein chips, namely, copper imac30 cu(ii) proteinchip array and weak cation-exchange (cm10) proteinchip array. each sample bound protein chip was in turn inserted into a protein biology system ii seldi-tof-mass spectrometer and the protein biomarkers were ionized and desorbed by laser beam. the ions flied to the ion detector generating a biomarker peak intensity 7. 50% sinapinic acid (ciphergen biosystems inc.) in 500 ml/l acetonitrile and 5 ml/l trifluoroacetic acid (sigma-adrich). 8. protein biological system (pbs) iic mass spectrometer reader (ciphergen biosystems). 9. all-in-1 peptide molecular mass standard (ciphergen biosystems inc.). 10. ciphergen proteinchip software 3.0.2 (ciphergen biosystems inc.). the extent of pneumonia in the sars patients with longitudinal follow-up is assessed by a radiologist according to a serial chest radiographic score, modified from a score system initially proposed to assess computer tomography of the chest (16) and summarized as in fig. 2. 1. after x-ray chest radiography is taken, divide the frontal chest x-ray radiograph into six lung zones, namely, left upper zone, left middle zone, left lower zone, right upper zone, right middle zone, and right lower zone. 2. the upper zone (left or right) represents area above carina (including the apex). 3. the middle zone (left or right) represents area from carina to the level of inferior pulmonary veins. 4. the lower zone (left or right) represents area from the lower margin of middle zone to the lung base. 5. score the opacity in each lung zone by a "coarse semiquantitative method" with a five points'scale of grades 0-4. 6. grade 0 represents no opacity involved area. 7. grade 1 represents 5-24% opacity involved areas. 8. grade 2 represents 25-49% opacity involved areas. 9. grade 3 represents 50-74% opacity involved areas. 10 . grade 4 represents 75-100% opacity involved areas. 11. add the grading from each of the six lung zones to provide a 0-24 point summation scale for assessing the extent of pneumonia.1. 8 ml blood is collected from each patient or control subject. 2. incubate the blood for approx 2 h at 4°c to clot the blood cells.3. separate the serum portion from the clotted cells by centrifugation at 230g for 15 min. 4. aliquot the sera for various routine laboratory diagnostic tests. 5. freeze the remaining sera at −70°c for protein chip array profiling analysis.owing to the protein complexity in the serum sample, an initial fractionation in q ceramic hyper d f ion exchange sorbent beads is performed to generate serum fractions for chip binding experiments ( fig. 1) (10,11) . assessing the extent of pneumonia by chest x-ray opacity score. the opacity in each zone (apex+upper, middle, and lower zones) from the left and right regions of the lung was scored by a "coarse semiquantitative method" with a 5 points'scale of grades 0-4 representing involved areas of 0, 5-24, 25-49, 50-74, and 75-100%, respectively. a total score was then calculated by adding up all the grades in the six zones (apex and upper zones were considered as one zone) to provide a 0-24 points'scale with the higher number representing more severe pneumonic disease.1. thaw serum from -70°c freezer immediately before serum fractionation. 2. aliquot 20 μl of serum to each well in a 96-well sample plate. 3. add 30 μl of d1 denaturing buffer to the well containing the serum to denature the serum proteins. 4. shake the sample plate on a micromix 5-01 shaker vigorously (in an amplitude of 7 and form of 20 hg) for 20 min at 4°c to mix the serum with the d1 buffer well.1. add 180 μl of 50% suspension of ion exchange beads to each well of a 96-well silent screen filter plate and drain off the w1 bead-washing buffer by vacuum. 2. wash the ion exchange beads in each well three more times by adding 200 μl of q1 bead equilibration buffer to the beads and draining off the buffer by vacuum. 3. after the last vacuum drain, transfer 50 μl of the denatured serum sample from the well in the sample plate to the corresponding well in the filter plate containing the equilibrated ion exchange beads. 4. add 50 μl of q1 buffer to the well in the sample plate where serum was originally placed and rinse the residual serum by pipetting up and down five times. 5. transfer the 50 μl of the serum rinse to the well in the filter plate containing the mixture of denatured serum sample and ion exchange beads. 6. shake the filter plate vigorously on the micromix shaker (in an amplitude of 7 and form of 20 hg) for 30 min at 4°c to mix the serum and beads well.1. after shaking, place a 96-well f1 collection plate under the filter plate and centrifuge at 1600g for 1 min to collect the flow-through fraction in the wells of the f1 collection plate. 2. add 100 μl of e1 elution buffer (at ph 9.0) to each well in the filter plate containing the serum bound beads and shake vigorously again on orbital shaker (speed and time as before) for 10 min at rt. 3. collect the eluate in the same collection plate f1 by centrifugation at 1600g for 1 min again. 4. this represents fraction 1, which contains both the flow-through fraction at ph 9.0 and the ph 9.0 eluate. 5. add 100 μl of e2 elution buffer (at ph 7.0) to each well in the filter plate and again shake at the same speed and time. 6. collect the eluate in another new f2 collection plate by centrifugation as before. 7. add 100 μl of e2 elution buffer again to each filter well and elute a second time by shaking and centrifugation as before onto f2 collection plate again. 8. this represents fraction 2, which contains the ph 7.0 eluate. 9. elute the serum protein bound beads similarly in turn with e3, e4, and e5 elution buffers as above resulting in fractions 3, 4, and 5 containing ph 5.0, ph 4.0, and ph 3.0 eluates, respectively, in three new f3, f4, and f5 collection plates. 10. final elution is achieved by adding e6 organic solvent elution buffer and centrifugation at 2000g for 5 min giving rise to fraction 6 containing the organic solvent eluate in collection plate f6. 11. freeze fractions 1-6 in collection plates e1-6 at -70°c until the chip binding protocol proceeds.the proteinchip array profiling technique is also called surface enhanced laser desorption and ionization time of flight mass spectrometry (seldi-tof-ms, ciphergen biosystems inc., fremont, ca). the chip array used is a 10 mm wide × 80 mm long metal chip having eight 2-mm spots with a specific chromatographic surface for binding of biomarkers of interest (see fig. 1 ). for imac30 cu(ii) proteinchip array, a pretreatment procedure is required for loading copper ions onto the chip for binding protein biomarkers with affinity to copper ions. this metal loading step is, however, not required for cm10 proteinchip array, which is impregnated with carboxylate ions as weak cation exchanger for biomarker binding. cm10 chips only requires buffer washing instead. both types of chips are tested to be ideal for binding serum proteins/peptides for the study. 9. remove the neutralizing buffer after shaking. 10. rinse the well again with 100 μl of milli-q water by shaking for 1 min at room temperature. 11. add 150 μl of 100 mm sodium phosphate buffer containing 0.5 mol/l nacl (imac30 chip binding buffer) onto each well and shake for 5 min at rt to wash the chip spot. 12. remove the buffer after shaking. 13 . wash with the same imac30 chip-binding buffer one more time. 14. remove the buffer after washing. 15 . proceed immediately to subheading 3.6.1. for sample binding without letting the chip surface to dry. to each chip spot. 11. air-dry the chips for about 10 min. 12. add 1 μl of 50% sinapinic acid and air-dry again. 13 . the chip is ready to be read in the pbs iic mass spectrometer reader.14. remember to process at least one reference control serum concurrently with the patients'samples on each chip for quality control of chip-to-chip variability.1. add 90 μl of 100 mm sodium acetate buffer at ph 4.0 (cm10 chip binding buffer) into each well in the bioprocessor set up containing the cm10 chips. 2. add 10 μl of each ion exchange bead eluate (sample fractions 1-6) to the well for sample binding. 3. mix well by shaking for 30 min at rt. 4. remove the sample fractions. 5. wash the chip spot in the well by adding 150 μl of cm10 chip binding buffer again into each well and shake for 5 min at rt. 6. remove buffer. 7. repeat washing (steps 5 and 6) once more. 8. rinse with water two times by adding 200 μl of milli-q water to each well and discard immediately. 9. remove the chips from bioprocessor and air-dry the chips for 5 min. 10 . add 1 μl of 50% sinapinic acid to each chip spot. 11. air-dry the chip for around 10 min. 12. add 1 μl of 50% sinapinic acid and air-dry again. 13. the chip is ready to be read in the pbs iic mass spectrometer reader. 14. process at least one reference control serum concurrently with the patients'samples on each chip for quality control of chip-to-chip variability as before.the pbs iic seldi-tof mass spectrometer reader is a laser desorption ionization time of flight mass spectrometer equipped with a pulsed ultraviolet nitrogen laser source. when the laser activates the bound serum biomarkers on the chip surface, the biomarkers become desorbed and ionized. ionized molecules fly along the mass spectrometer to the ion detector in a time of flight manner according to their mass over charge ratio (m/z). when the ion signal is detected in the ion detector, signal processing is accomplished by high-speed analog-todigital converter linking to a computer. detected protein biomarkers are displayed in spectral, map or gel view formats by the ciphergen proteinchip software 3.0.2. the following steps show how the chips are read in the mass spectrometer. e. focus lag time at 800 ns. f. mass deflector to auto. g. data acquisition method to seldi quantitation. h. 338 laser shots per sample. 12. click "start running" button from the menu bar. 13. by the time 338 laser shots are fired, the collected data is automatically saved. 14. it is important to first carry out external calibration of the equipment using the all-in-1 peptide molecular mass standard (according to the instruction sheet from the manufacturer) to ensure mass accuracy of the spectra before running the samples. 15. carry out baseline subtraction and calibration for the spectra. 16 . generate labeled peak groups (clusters) across multiple spectra by the biomarker wizard mode. 17. compare peak groups detected in the sars patients with those of the controls by nonparametric two sample mann-whitney u-test in the biomarker wizard mode. 18. biomarker wizard operates in two passes, with the first pass uses low sensitivity settings to detect obvious and well-defined peaks and the second pass uses higher sensitivity settings to search for smaller peaks. 19. this will identify both strong and weak peaks that are significantly increased or decreased in the patients vs the controls. 4. separating the controls into individual groups, a highly significant increase of biomarker at 11,695 is also observed in sars patients vs each control group (fig. 4) .patients, we further monitor the biomarker-11,695 level in a sars patient longitudinally (fig. 5) and correlate the biomarker level with the extent of pneumonia by chest x-ray opacity score (fig. 2) . 6. figure 5 illustrates, in this patient, an elevation of the biomarker-11,695 level preceding the development of pneumonia at the onset of disease (as indicated by an increasing opacity score) followed by a rapid drop of the biomarker level down to the background on recovery from the illness after stringent antiviral and steroid treatments (see note 1 for details of clinical presentation of the patients). 7. on the other hand, fig. 6 shows low biomarker-11,695 level during the whole monitoring period in another sars patient who has low x-ray scores and whose clinical course is relatively mild (see note 2). 8. by means of peptide mapping and tandem ms/ms mass spectrometry, this biomarker is identified to be serum amyloid a protein (saa), which is an acute phase reactant frequently and rapidly induced in abundance at pneumonia (see ref. 15 for the protein id results and ref. 17-20 for the techniques adopted). 9. this serial study demonstrates the potential of the biomarkers discovered by protein chip array profiling in monitoring the disease manifestation in sars patients.clinical and protein chip monitoring of the first sars patient (see fig. 5 ): one day after sars-cov infection was diagnosed, the radiographic score of this patient was increased from 6 to a peak value of >16 and then dropped to 12, 9, and finally to 4 demonstrating a progressive recovery. the biomarker-11,695 level by protein chip array profiling study showed an elevation that peaked earlier than the radiographic score but it then gradually subsided along with the score to a nadir when the patient was discharged. 2. clinical and protein chip monitoring of the second sars patient (see fig. 6 ): the second patient had all the typical clinical symptoms of sars-cov infection with left upper lobe consolidation in chest radiographs. despite negative sars-cov rt-pcr, titer elevation in paired anti-sars cov serum antibody tests performed in two laboratories confirmed the viral infection. he was managed as sars on the next day. the clinical course was uneventful and uncomplicated. his pneumonia had never been extensive and hence his radiographic score showed just a low level of lung involvement from may 8th to 15th and then totally subsided from may 16th onwards. biomarker-11,695 level was essentially low throughout the monitoring period.in early december 2019, the coronavirus disease (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) first emerged in wuhan, china [1] . on january 31st, 2020, the world health organisation declared covid-19 a public health emergency of international concern, and on march 11th, 2020, it was finally characterised as a pandemic [2] . as of may 10th , 2020, a total of over 4 million covid-19 cases and 280,000 deaths have been reported globally, reflecting the raised infectivity and severity of this virus, yet the lack of widespread testing availability means these figures are likely even higher than reported [3] . it is therefore important to predict the risk of morbidity and mortality, especially in vulnerable patients.sars-cov-2 is an enveloped, non-segmented, single-stranded, positive-sense rna virus belonging to the coronaviridae family [4] . sars-cov-2 is a zoonotic virus not too dissimilar to the sars-cov outbreak of 2002 and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus of 2012 [5] [6] [7] [8] . this novel coronavirus enters cells via binding of the viral surface spike protein to the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) 2 protein [9] . ace2 is highly expressed in lung alveolar cells, providing the route of entry for the virus [10] . in addition, ace2 is also widely present in the myocardium, which has raised concerns due to the possibility of direct viral infection of the cardiovascular system [10] .although covid-19 patients present primarily with symptoms of respiratory disease and therefore follow a pneumonia-like treatment plan, it is essential that the cardiovascular system is not ignored and to recognise those presenting with early signs of acute myocardial injury. of the patients hospitalised for covid-19 thus far, the prevalence of cardiovascular comorbidities has been staggering. based on early reports, patients with cardiovascular disease (cvd) may represent 25% of those in an intensive care unit (icu) plus those with hypertension accounting for 58% of patients [11] . additionally, zhou et al. found that myocardial injury, defined by raised serum cardiac troponin i (ctni) levels, in covid-19 patients was associated with over 50% mortality rate [12] . furthermore, heart failure was prevalent in 23% of patients presenting with covid-19, which was also more prevalent amongst patients who died compared to those who survived (51.9% vs. 11.7%) [12] . this demonstrates how essential it is to recognise those presenting with early signs of acute myocardial injury and to initiate a more intensive treatment plan.based on these observations, several theories surrounding the interplay between the pathophysiology of covid-19 and the cardiovascular system have been postulated [13, 14] . namely, covid-19 may exacerbate cardiovascular risk factors and preexisting cvd or may increase susceptibility for the development of new cardiovascular complications. alternatively, cvd or myocardial injury may predispose to worse outcomes in covid-19 patients, which is reflected by a number of studies whereby established cvd is associated with more severe covid-19, leading to higher morbidity and mortality.with such staggering mortality rates reported, it is fundamental during this time-sensitive covid-19 outbreak to identify patients with an increased risk of adverse cvd outcomes and/or myocardial injury. one may achieve this through laboratory investigations of biomarkers such as ctni, brain natriuretic peptide (bnp), d-dimers, and fibrinogen-all of which reflect cardiovascular function and are used as diagnostic tools in addition to assessing the risk of cvd in patients [15] [16] [17] [18] . while these biomarkers are recognised for cvd, there is an emerging prospect that they may aid prognosis in covid-19, especially in patients with cardiovascular comorbidities or risk factors that predispose to worse outcomes. this is crucial as the speed of deterioration of many covid-19 patients means any early biomarkers indicative of severe morbidity or mortality may then help prevent this rapid deterioration. consequently, the aim of this review is to identify cardiovascular prognostic factors associated with morbidity and mortality in covid-19 and to highlight considerations by summarising the evidence for utilising laboratory testing of biomarkers of cardiovascular performance in covid-19 to optimise outcomes.covid-19 patients at risk of serious illness and icu admission tend to be older and to present with similar comorbidities, including heart failure, hypertension, and coronary artery disease [12, 19, 20] . in a meta-analysis of 8 studies (46,248 covid-19 patients in total), cvd was reported as the third most prevalent comorbidity in covid-19 patients (5%, 95% ci 4%-7%), and patients with severe covid-19 symptoms had a higher risk of cvd (or 3.42, 95% ci 1.88-6.22) [21] . whilst these results were limited by significant heterogeneity due to variations in the severity of covid-19 patients and follow-up period, a similarly high prevalence of cvd in covid-19 patients (15%) was observed in the study by huang and colleagues [1, 21] . notably, yang and jin state that covid-19 patients with established cvd are susceptible to more adverse complications-these patients are therefore also at a greater risk of myocardial injury, which mainly manifests as elevated serum ctni levels [22] .ctni is a gold-standard necrotic biomarker for myocardial risk assessment worldwide [15] . it is released virtually exclusively in the myocardium in the presence of myocardial injury irrespective of the mechanism of insult [15] . other biomarkers of myocardial injury that are of diagnostic value include creatine kinase-myocardial band (ck-mb) and bnp, which may provide insight into the severity of symptoms in covid-19. although they are already established for cvd, results from emerging studies, as discussed below, elucidate the potential role of these biomarkers, particularly ctni and cardiac troponin t (ctnt), as predictors of prognosis in covid-19 patients, as shown in table 1 .the predictive potential of troponin proteins for severe morbidity in covid-19 patients has been demonstrated. for instance, huang et al. reported a substantial elevation of ctni (>28 ph/ml) in 5 out of 41 (12%) covid-19 patients [1] . all 5 then developed acute myocardial injury, and 4 out of the 5 were admitted into an icu-this allows the conceptualisation of ctni as a prognostic tool in other diseases such as covid-19 [1] . in addition, a meta-analysis of 4 studies with 341 covid-19 patients reported a significantly higher ctni mean difference in patients with more severe covid-19 symptoms compared with patients with non-severe covid-19 presentation (25.6 ng/l, 95% ci 6.8-44.5 ng/l), although heterogeneity was relatively high, posing a limitation similar to the previously mentioned meta-analysis [23] . nevertheless, shi et al. also identified that 82 out of 416 (19.7%) covid-19 patients presented with myocardial injury, diagnosed by significantly raised serum ctni levels [19] . amongst these patients, there was a significantly higher mortality rate of 51.2% compared to a 4.5% mortality rate in those with normal ctni levels and no myocardial injury, signifying the serious nature of myocardial injury in covid-19 patients [19] . importantly, it demonstrates the potential value of ctni in foreshadowing the outcomes of covid-19 patients.the possible role of ctnt in covid-19 prognosis is also exemplified by guo et al., who reported the elevation of ctnt levels in 52 out of 187 (27.8%) hospitalised covid-19 patients, all of whom developed myocardial injury [20] . in those 52 patients, mortality was a staggering 59.6% compared to 8.9% in those patients with normal serum ctnt levels [20] . whilst covid-19 patients with raised ctnt levels and established cvd had an alarming mortality rate of 69.4%, those with raised serum ctnt levels but no history of cvd still had a relatively high mortality rate of 37.5% [20] . this indicates the prognostic value of detecting elevated ctnt levels in all covid-19 patients, irrespective of the presence of underlying cvd. conversely, patients with normal serum ctnt levels and established cvd had a much lower mortality rate of 13.3% compared to the 59.6% rate in patients with elevated ctnt levels [20] .interestingly, guo et al. also observed a significant positive linear correlation between serum ctnt and plasma c-reactive protein (p < 0.001), suggesting a link between the severity of inflammation observed in covid-19 and myocardial injury [20] . indeed, several myocarditis autopsy findings of inflammatory mononuclear infiltrate in myocardial tissue have been reported in patients with high viral load-these studies also further explore the changes in cardiac inflammatory markers during covid-19 manifestation [24] [25] [26] . it is therefore plausible that, through these inflammatory changes, there is an increased risk of myocardial injury, which manifests as elevated serum ctnt levels and consequently leads to more severe symptoms.whilst ctni and ctnt have demonstrated remarkable potential in predicting covid-19 outcomes, bnp too has shown some prospect in the prognosis of covid-19. guo and colleagues found that raised ctnt levels were significantly associated with elevated serum bnp levels (p < 0.001) [20] . they reported that, alongside the gradual elevation of serum ctnt levels, bnp levels likewise progressively increased in covid-19 patients whose health deteriorated, contrasting the low and stable serum bnp levels in successfully discharged patients [20] . similarly, a case report presented the cardiac involvement in deterioration of a covid-19 patient without preexisting cvd, whereby serum levels of bnp (5647 pg/ml), ctnt (0.24 ng/ml), and ck-mb (20.3 ng/ml) were all elevated-this patient was then admitted to the icu with myocarditis [27] . moreover, shi et al. report significantly raised bnp levels in covid-19 patients with myocardial injury compared to those without (1689 pg/ml vs. 139 pg/ml, p < 0.001)-these patients consequently also had a high mortality rate of 51.2% [19] . as such, the aforementioned findings in these studies are groundbreaking as they reflect the prospect of routinely measuring serum bnp levels in covid-19 patients at admission to reduce mortality and to prevent deterioration where possible.in addition to ctni and bnp, ck-mb may similarly hold prognostic value in covid-19. in the study by wang et al., 36 out of 138 (26.1%) covid-19 patients were admitted to the icu with severe symptoms, all of whom had significantly elevated serum ctni and ck-mb levels (p = 0.004 and p < 0.001, respectively) compared to non-icu patients [11] . perhaps this implies that patients with more severe covid-19 symptoms have adverse outcomes of acute myocardial injury-reflected by the elevation in ck-mb and ctni levels. likewise, this study provides insight into the value of ck-mb, along with ctni, in categorising covid-19 patients with an increased risk of adverse outcomes and admission to icu for health deterioration. the value of ck-mb and ctni in covid-19 is also exemplified in the study by zhou et al., whereby a significant association between elevated ck-mb and ctni levels and in-hospital death was illustrated (p = 0.043 and p < 0.0001, respectively) [12] . similarly, wan et al. found that creatine kinase was significantly higher in covid-19 patients with severe symptoms compared to those with mild symptoms (p = 0.0016) [28] . these studies demonstrate the benefit of utilising ck-mb in determining the patients that require urgent intervention.although bnp and ck-mb have evidently demonstrated some prognostic value in covid-19, it is important to highlight that, in all studies measuring bnp or ck-mb, ctni was also measured and it provided the same, if not a clearer, link between myocardial injury and covid-19 outcomes. additionally, contrasting findings are reported between studies regarding creatine kinase levels and severe covid-19 presentation. for instance, whilst wan et al. found creatine kinase to be significantly elevated in covid-19 patients with severe symptoms, huang et al. found no significant difference in serum creatine kinase levels between icu and non-icu patients (p = 0.31) [1, 28] . therefore, more studies that clearly illustrate a conclusive link between ck-mb and bnp and covid-19 outcomes will provide a better understanding of their prognostic role. it is through the lack of evidence in the literature that one, therefore, postulates ctni may be a preferred option compared to ck-mb and bnp, mainly due to its high sensitivity in detecting worsening prognosis and myocardial injury in covid-19 patients.it is worth noting that raised serum ctni levels are similarly associated with a higher risk of mortality in other diseases such as pneumonia (odds ratio = 9.5), sepsis (odds ratio = 1.92), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (hazard ratio = 4.5), and acute respiratory distress syndrome (hazard ratio = 1.6) [29] [30] [31] [32] . hence, one may logically also predict a correlation between elevated serum ctni levels and a higher risk of mortality in covid-19 patients. studies have clearly illustrated a significant difference in serum ctni levels between covid-19 patients who survived and those who died. ctni levels provide novel insight into a multi-faceted prognostic use of ctni in other diseases than cvd as it has proven to be a reliable marker of mortality in the previously discussed studies. during a crisis such as the current covid-19 pandemic, measuring serum ctni levels may enable healthcare professionals to predict prognosis and to therefore avoid worsening outcomes in vulnerable patients by identifying them at an earlier stage and by providing them with an intensive treatment plan which tackles both the myocardial injury and covid-19. it has been clear from early reports in china that abnormal coagulation is associated with poor prognosis in covid-19 patients. tang et al. clearly illustrated this by retrospectively analysing the coagulation parameters of 183 hospitalised covid-19 patients [37] . strikingly, 70.14% of non-survivors matched the diagnostic criteria for disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic) in later stages of the disease (according to the criteria described by the international society on thrombosis and haematosis) [38] . this contrasts with only one (0.6%) survivor meeting the criteria. hence, abnormal coagulation is a principal factor involved in the deterioration and high mortality seen in covid-19. however, it is less clear if coagulation parameters, as seen in table 2 , could be used to stratify patients on admission, thus highlighting those more likely to develop severe disease in order to prompt swift intensive treatment.thus far, d-dimer has demonstrated promise in its ability to hold prognostic value in covid-19 patients. wang et al. conducted a retrospective single-centre case series including 138 patients with confirmed covid-19 [11] . those who were eventually admitted to icu had significantly increased d-dimer levels (median d-dimer 414 mg/l vs. 166 mg/l, p < 0.0001) on admission compared to those who avoided intensive treatment [11] . this finding was substantiated by a smaller retrospective cohort study that found d-dimer levels were four times the upper limit of normal in patients subsequently admitted to the icu, a level much higher than non-icu patients (median d-dimer level 2.4 mg/l vs. 0.5 mg/l, p = 0.0042, reference range < 0.5 mg/l) [1] . remarkably, a multi-centre retrospective cohort study of 191 patients demonstrated that, even after multi-variant analysis, an increased d-dimer on admission was highly associated with in-hospital death (or 18.42, p = 0.003) [12] . furthermore, 81% of those who did not survive had a d-dimer > 1 µg/ml on admission compared to just 24% of those who survived [12] . this striking evidence greatly supports the prognostic ability of d-dimer. however, those still hospitalised at the end of the study were excluded; thus, only those who had died or been discharged during the study period were counted. therefore, this may have exaggerated the difference between the groups as only those with more severe disease at an earlier stage would be included in the analysis of those who died.nonetheless, in addition to d-dimer being raised on admission, numerous studies from china have demonstrated that, in non-survivors, d-dimer continues to rise throughout the clinical course of the disease [11, 37] . this is compared to a low and stable d-dimer in those who survived. importantly, an increased d-dimer was highly associated with acute myocardial injury, diagnosed via a raised ctni, which as mentioned previously has been correlated with an increased risk of in-hospital death [20] . therefore, it is reasonable to suggest that d-dimer has prognostic value when taken on admission and could also be used to highlight patients who are deteriorating. however, the practicalities of such an implementation would need to be considered. for example, whilst wan et al. found that a raised d-dimer was associated with a more severe disease, the median d-dimer level in the severe cases was still within the normal range on admission [28] . this could present a barrier in confidently triaging patients on their d-dimer level if it is still below the cutoff. although, in this study of 135 patients, there was only one fatality, a death rate much lower than previously reported. therefore, the raised yet normal d-dimer could be explained by a relatively well cohort.prothrombin time (pt) may also hold some predictive value in covid-19 patients. contrasting evidence has surfaced concerning the association of an extended pt with admission to icu. whilst a smaller retrospective cohort study found that those who were admitted to icu had a significantly longer pt on admission (median pt 12.2 s vs. 10.7 s, p = 0.012), wang et al reported no significant difference [1, 11] . although, of the 138 patients included in wang et al.'s analysis, a large proportion was still hospitalised and not discharged (61.6%) [11] . therefore, patients who were not admitted to icu may have deteriorated and subsequently required intensive care; thus, comparing patients by icu admission may be unreliable in this cohort. nevertheless, there is good evidence to support that a prolonged pt is associated with in-hospital death. a large multi-centre retrospective cohort study found that a pt over 16 s was greatly associated with in-hospital death (or 4.62, p = 0.019), whilst tang et al. found that pt time was significantly increased in non-survivors (median pt 15.5 s vs. 13.6 s, p < 0.001) [12] . tang et al. also demonstrated that, from admission, pt continued to rise in those who did not survive, supporting its association with in-hospital death [37] . like d-dimer, an increased pt was also associated with acute cardiac injury, implying that abnormal coagulation parameters on admission are associated with myocardial injury [20] . however, as previously discussed, the pathology of this injury, whether infarction or myocarditis, is still unclear.similar trends have also been noted in platelet counts. there was no difference in the platelet counts on admission of those admitted to icu [1, 11] . however, a reduced platelet count was associated with in-hospital death and cardiac injury. zhou et al. reported a much lower platelet count in those who died (median platelet count, 165.5 × 10 9 /l vs. 220.0 × 10 9 /l, p < 0.001) with 20% of non-survivors having a platelet count less than 100 × 10 9 /l on admission compared to just 1% of those who survived [12] . in addition, those with raised ctni on admission had a significantly lower platelet count compared to those without cardiac injury (median platelet count, 172 × 10 3 /µl vs. 216 × 10 3 /µl, p < 0.001). this further illustrates that abnormal coagulation is associated with cardiac injury in hospitalised covid-19 patients [19] .lastly, a study of 183 patients found that fibrinogen degradation products (fdp) were also significantly raised on admission in patients that did not survive (median fdp 7.6 µg/ml vs. 4.0 µg/ml, p < 0.001) [37] . whilst fibrinogen levels showed no significant difference on admission, it was significantly lower in non-survivors in late hospitalisation [37] . this suggests that a decreasing fibrinogen level is associated with the progression of the disease; thus, it may aid in the identification of deteriorating patients.in light of the striking rate of dic in patients who did not survive, it has been suggested that the use of heparin in covid-19 may be beneficial. therefore, tang et al. conducted a retrospective analysis of covid-19 patients and found that the use of low molecular weight heparin was associated with improved prognosis in severe covid-19 cases with a markedly elevated d-dimer [39] . this further supports the pivotal role that abnormal coagulation plays in the deterioration of covid-19 patients and how coagulation parameters may help in determining the prognosis of patients. furthermore, it demonstrates that a raised d-dimer may also aid treatment optimisation in severe cases of covid-19.evidently, coagulation parameters have demonstrated their prognostic potential in covid-19 patients. however, in all studies that demonstrated an association between covid-19 and coagulation markers, d-dimer consistently provided the clearest link to icu admission and in-hospital death. additionally, as seen in table 2 , it has been the most widely studied biomarker and thus may be the most reliable in predicting the outcome in covid-19 patients.as previously mentioned, sars-cov-2 uses the ace2 receptor for entry into target cells, found commonly in the lungs, heart, and vessels [10] . ace converts angiotensin i to angiotensin ii, which can then activate the angiotensin ii receptor type 1 [40] . angiotensin ii has profound effects not limited to the cardiovascular system, including vasoconstriction; the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as il-6; as well as pro-oxidative effects [41] [42] [43] . numerous studies have demonstrated that the use of ace inhibitors (aceis) and angiotensin ii receptor i blockers (arbs) lead to an increase in expression of the ace 2 receptor [40] . this has sparked debate surrounding the use of acei/arbs due to potentially enhancing the risk of infection by increasing the entry way, ace2.interestingly, it has been revealed recently that the plasma levels of angiotensin ii were raised in infected patients compared to that of healthy controls [26] . this may be in part explained by the reduction of ace2 due to the binding and internalisation of the enzyme caused by the virus. moreover, the level of angiotensin ii in covid-19 patients was strongly associated with viral load and lung injury, suggesting that covid-19 was causing an imbalance in the renin-angiotensin system [26] . this implies that angiotensin ii may be a mediator of the disease, leading to pulmonary vasoconstriction and inflammatory or oxidative organ damage. therefore, it would be not unreasonable to suggest that the use of an acei or arb may be beneficial in the treatment of covid-19. whilst there have been no other studies to date to our knowledge, this suggests that angiotensin ii could be used as a biomarker to stratify patients as those with higher angiotensin ii would have increased risk of organ failure, thus requiring more intensive treatment. furthermore, this could provide an explanation for the increased risk of myocardial injury whilst hospitalised with covid-19. the powerful vasoconstrictive effects of angiotensin ii may increase the demand on the heart whilst potentially inducing oxidative damage. this risk of myocardial injury may then be further increased by the coagulative state mentioned previously. however, further studies are essential to support these findings, especially when considering the small sample size of patients in the study. it is relatively nonspecific [17, 44] .increased d-dimer is associated with • icu admission • in-hospital death • acute myocardial injury +++ [1, 11, 12, 20, 28, 37] pt pt is used to evaluate the extrinsic and common pathways of coagulation. it is the time taken for plasma to clot after adding thromboplastin. pt is increased in dic and can be a sign of liver disease or vitamin k deficiency [45] .increased pt is associated with • in-hospital death • acute myocardial injury • potentially associated with icu admission ++ [1, 11, 12, 20, 37] platelet countnumber of platelets in a volume of blood: decreased in many conditions, namely dic, anaemia, and marrow failure [46] .reduced platelet count is associated with • in-hospital death • acute myocardial injury ++ [11, 12, 19] fibrinogen is an acute phase protein involved in platelet aggregation and is decreased acutely by consumption due to dic or chronically due to hepatic impairment [18] .decreasing fibrinogen levels correlates with deteriorating clinical parameters in covid-19 patients.fdp fdp are fragments released following plasmin-mediated degradation of fibrinogen/fibrin and raised in inflammatory and thrombotic conditions [18] .raised fdp is associated with in-hospital death in covid-19 patients. + [37] angiotensin ii angiotensin ii is a circulating hormone involved in the renin-angiotensin system. it is a regulator of blood pressure through vasoconstriction and sympathetic nervous stimulation [41] .angiotensin ii is raised in infected patients compared to control. raised plasma levels of angiotensin ii associated with • viral load • lung injuryraised levels of d-dimers, prothrombin time (pt), fibrinogen degradation products (fdp), and angiotensin ii and reduced platelet count and fibrinogen levels are all associated with deteriorating clinical parameters in covid-19 patients. prognostic potential is judged by the authors on association with clinical findings and the quality of the literature in support of this. pt, prothrombin time; fdp, fibrinogen degradation products; dic, disseminated intravascular coagulation; icu, intensive care unit.biomarkers of acute myocardial injury have evidently revealed their potential in predicting worsening prognosis for covid-19 patients with and without myocardial injury. ctni provides remarkable prognostic value for patients at increased risk of worsening outcomes and in-hospital mortality, though studies have also shown the association of raised ck-mb and bnp levels with more severe symptoms of covid-19. raised serum ctnt and ctni levels show a clear correlation with deteriorating health and increased mortality in patients with established cvd or cardiovascular risk factors and even in those presenting without a history of cvd. as a result, detecting elevated serum ctnt or ctni levels on admission as a routine procedure may be invaluable to reduce mortality and severe covid-19 patients during a time when icus are operating at maximum capacity. additionally, it may allow healthcare professionals to initiate intensive treatment in those vulnerable patients before covid-19 symptoms worsen.collectively, the evidence presented suggests a common coagulation activation in patients that die from covid-19. d-dimer has demonstrated predictive value for both icu treatment and in-hospital death when taken on admission. furthermore, fdp, pt, and platelets when taken on admission may also highlight those more likely to die in hospital. therefore, the measurement of coagulation parameters on admission may help in the assignment of scarce icu beds. the continued activation of coagulation throughout the clinical course of non-survivors, evidenced by an increasing d-dimer level and pt plus a decreasing fibrinogen level, may help identify deteriorating patients that require extra support or palliative care. furthermore, plasma levels of angiotensin ii may offer a novel method of predicting disease severity. also, the pathogenic role of angiotensin ii in covid-19 and the potential use of ace/arbs needs to be more clearly elucidated.nonetheless, when considering the prognostic potential of these biomarkers, it is poignant to contemplate whether they are causative in the deterioration of covid-19 or simply a consequence of disease progression. additionally, the mechanism concerning the abnormal biomarker levels should be elucidated. for instance, many of the markers of coagulation are raised in inflammatory or hepatic diseases and, thus, are nonspecific (table 2) . hence, whilst it is clear that the body is in a pro-coagulative phase, the cause of this is unclear. further investigation into the role of these biomarkers may permit insight into the pathogenesis of sars-cov-2.similarly, the exact pathology of myocardial injury in covid-19 is unknown, although this review has highlighted possible mechanisms to be explored. firstly, the high association with abnormal coagulation may suggest a causative link. alternatively, a common trigger, such as angiotensin ii, might instigate both coagulation activation and myocardial injury. nevertheless, more studies are required to elucidate the specific mechanism of myocardial injury and its association with severe inflammation in covid-19, along with the subsequent detrimental symptoms that often lead to mortality in vulnerable patients.when reviewing the literature published thus far on covid-19, the requirement for multi-centre studies with larger cohorts and clinical power is abundantly clear. furthermore, due to the high demand for research to published, numerous papers included in the review comprise of patients still not discharged from hospital. consequently, the data has incomplete endpoints, thus reducing the potential clinical translation of their findings. moreover, the evidence presented only concerns patients presenting to hospital, and further studies in outpatient, primary care, or community settings are required to get a full overview of the clinical severity and cardiovascular impact.whilst these cardiovascular biomarkers present excellent prognostic potential, the implementation of their use should be considered. these are routine blood tests done for many well-resourced hospitals; hence, minimal change in practice would be necessary to swiftly implement their use. however, for countries or hospitals with less clinical resources, implementation may be challenging. furthermore, those less equipped are those most likely to benefit from a prognostic test that would aid in the assignment of scarce resources. therefore, the development of a rapid tests which could quickly determine an increase in prominent biomarkers may be extremely beneficial. if this was distributed to countries or hospitals less equipped to treat covid-19, it could greatly support the global battle against this pandemic. il progetto di sequenziamento del genoma umano ha posto le basi per lo sviluppo dei "microarray" a dna, cosa che ha permesso lo studio parallelo su larga scala della produzione di mrna e l'analisi dei polimorfisimi a singolo nucleotide. dopo il completamento nel 2003 del progetto genoma umano, le tecnologie a "microarray" di dna si sono sviluppate molto rapidamente ed evolute in strumenti robusti e affidabili per la ricerca genomica. l'analisi multivariata sistematica dei dati di espressione dell'intero genoma permette la valutazione delle correlazioni tra quadri di espressione genica e stadio e progressione di una malattia, rendendo possibili trattamenti specifici per ogni paziente basati su profili genetici individuali, in un settore noto come "farmacogenomica" o "medicina personalizzata" (figura 1) (1, 2). informazioni dettagliate riguardanti il genotipo o il profilo di espressione genica di un singolo paziente possono essere utilizzate per definire lo stato della malattia, scegliere le terapie più appropriate, aggiustarne il dosaggio secondo il fabbisogno del paziente o iniziare trattamenti preventivi. la medicina personalizzata ha come scopo finale quello di implementare con successo le 5 g: "giusto individuo "target", giusta diagnosi, giusto trattamento, giusto farmaco, giusto dosaggio" (3) . tale scopo può tuttavia essere raggiunto solo integrando le conoscenze genomiche con gli approcci clinici tradizionali, con l'anamnesi personale del paziente e la sua storia familiare, e con i dati clinici più rilevanti, quali i risultati delle tecniche di "imaging" e della diagnostica in vitro.l'analisi dell'espressione genica non è ancora routinariamente applicata nella medicina personalizzata, sebbene gli studi dei profili di espressione genica abbiano dato vita a numerose ipotesi riguardo alla genesi dei tumori e abbiano anche fornito indicazioni potenzialmente prognostiche e predittive. a causa delle modificazioni post-traduzionali, quali glicosilazione, fosforilazione e acetilazione, le proteine sono più eterogenee dei geni che le codificano e tale eterogeneità spesso non è correlata al livello di produzione delle proteine medesime. le modifiche post-traduzionali amplificano la funzione delle proteine in termini di capacità di riconoscimento, trasduzione del segnale e proteolisi, processi che regolano la differenziazione e/o clinical chemistry highlights il meglio di clinical chemistry la proliferazione cellulare. le proteine sono anche prodotte in maniera diversa nel corso delle malattie. molti farmaci usati per trattare una malattia sono quindi diretti contro "target" proteici, come le proteinchinasi, le citochine, i recettori o i loro substrati che hanno dimostrato di giocare un ruolo chiave nello sviluppo della malattia (4) . le analisi proteomiche rappresentano quindi un modo più diretto per generare una serie di dati importanti per comprendere la malattia a livello del singolo individuo. l'analisi di quadri proteici o anche di intere vie di segnale può contribuire ad aumentare le nostre conoscenze sullo sviluppo e la progressione della malattia a livello molecolare, con la conseguente possibilità di porre diagnosi a livello individuale e aggiustare le terapie secondo i fabbisogni dei singoli pazienti. tali analisi dettagliate richiedono tecniche proteomiche "multiplex" a elevata produttività in grado di esaminare una moltitudine di parametri a partire da minime quantità di materiale biologico. le tecniche di "microarray" proteici sono quindi diventate un'area di ricerca molto affascinante (figura 1) (5-8).i "microarray" proteici possono essere raggruppati secondo diversi formati e tipologie di applicazione, come mostrato nelle figure 2 e 3. i "microarray" proteici in fase diretta (fppm) sono i formati più frequentemente utilizzati. consistono in uno strato ordinato di molecole "di cattura" ben definite che permettono la valutazione simultanea di un grande numero di parametri in un singolo campione biologico. esempi di fppm sono i "microarray" ad anticorpi, che sono utilizzati per identificare e quantificare proteine bersaglio di interesse, e "array" di proteine di fusione immobilizzate, utilizzate per studiare le interazioni tra proteine e molecole di legame immobilizzate, quali altre proteine, peptidi, composti a basso pm, oligosaccaridi o dna. gli fppm comportano l'immobilizzazione di molecole di cattura (peptidi, proteine o anticorpi) su di una superficie solida in righe e colonne (formato "microarray") al fine di catturare gli analiti corrispondenti presenti in campioni con matrice complessa, quali siero, plasma o surnatanti di colture cellulari. gli analiti immobilizzati sono visualizzati sia per mezzo di marcatura diretta o tramiteinfluenza di fattori interni ed esterni sullo stato fisiologico della cellula. le tecnologie a "microarray" possono essere applicate per sorvegliare i meccanismi intracellulari di espressione genica e di produzione delle proteine. i "microarray" a dna sono utilizzati per le analisi dei geni e dei loro mrna, mentre i "microarray" proteici sono impiegati per l'analisi della produzione delle proteine e per capirne la funzione.anticorpi secondari marcati. i metodi classici di rilevazione includono fluorescenza, chemiluminescenza e colorimetria. i sistemi di "microarray" planari sono perfettamente adatti per generare "microarray" proteici ad alta intensità, che possono esaminare un gran numero di analiti in un singolo esperimento. gli "array" a biglie forniscono un'alternativa interessante ai "microarray" planari, specialmente quando il numero di parametri da analizzare sia piuttosto limitato. questi sistemi di "array" a biglie sono flessibili, robusti e più automatizzati e permettono ai ricercatori di esaminare migliaia di campioni in un tempo contenuto (10, 11) . sono attualmente disponibili in commercio molti sistemi fppm, che permettono la misura di citochine e chemochine, biomarcatori tumorali e molecole coinvolte in vie di trasduzione del segnale (tabelle 1 e 2).l'altro formato di esame, i "microarray" proteici a fase inversa (rppm), consiste in una moltitudine di differenti campioni, quali tessuti o lisati cellulari, che sono immobilizzati come singole "spot" su un supporto solido. ogni "spot" contiene l'intero proteoma di un tessuto o di una cellula. anticorpi altamente specifici sono utilizzati per cercare la presenza o l'assenza di distinte proteine bersaglio negli "spot" da valutare. questo approccio permette l'identificazione di una serie di proteine prodotte da un ampio numero di tessuti o campioni cellulari, come mostrato nelle figure 2 e 3 (11, 12) . tipicamente, le molecole di interesse, quali fattori trascrizionali o molecole di segnale, sono generalmente presenti in piccolissima quantità e pertanto sono necessari metodi di rivelazione molto sensibili, quali quelli basati sull'amplificazione del segnale con tiramide oppure tecnologie a guide d'onda planari (13, 14) . gli rppm sono stati utilizzati con successo in vari studi sullo sviluppo dei tumori, utilizzando sia cellule che campioni di pazienti.la tabella 3 riassume le principali caratteristiche dei diversi formati di "microarray" proteici.il rimanente di questa rassegna prende in esame gli attuali progressi nell'uso di "microarray" proteici per la scoperta di nuovi biomarcatori e per la loro validazione. verrà inoltre passato in rassegna il loro impiego nella diagnostica in vitro e discussi i possibili impieghi nel campo della medicina personalizzata.le tradizionali tecnologie per l'analisi di dna, mrna e proteine possono analizzare solo un parametro alla volta e pertanto hanno una produttività limitata quando è necessario valutare un grande numero di parametri. l'implementazione dei "microarray" a dna e a proteine ha portato a un'impressionante accelerazione nella scoperta di nuovi biomarcatori, con il fine ultimo di identificarne un numero specifico per le diverse patologie e quindi di combinarli in una tecnologia di screening sufficientemente robusta. questo approcciotipologie di formato dei "microarray" proteici. i "microarray" proteici in fase inversa (rppm) possono essere utilizzati per misurare una serie distinta di parametri su una ampia varietà di tessuti o lisati cellulari oppure per campionare frazioni immobilizzate in modo ordinato su un supporto solido. i "microarray" proteici in fase diretta (fppm) si basano invece su un approccio immunochimico di marcatura diretta o a "sandwich" e possono essere utilizzati per analizzare simultaneamente diversi parametri su differenti campioni.sistemi immunochimici miniaturizzati e in parallelo disponibili commercialmente, basati sulla tecnologia dei "microarray" proteici planari.prodotto applicazione al di là dei miglioramenti nella tecnologia, i ricercatori devono anche identificare e validare la serie più appropriata di biomarcatori e quindi integrarli nei servizi sanitari. la figura 3 riassume le fasi per la scoperta di biomarcatori mediante i "microarray" a proteine e la conseguente possibile applicazione per una medicina personalizzata. evidenze recenti provano che i "microarray" a proteine hanno un incredibile potenziale nel campo della scoperta dei biomarcatori. gli rppm sono stati utilizzati per identificare biomarcatori candidati in pazienti con tumori, nei quali si è provato che la concentrazione di tali molecole correlava con lo stadio e la progressione della malattia (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) . in particolare, i sistemi immunochimici a "sandwich" si sono dimostrati metodi eccellenti per quantificare accuratamente alcuni biomarcatori candidati. sistemi "multiplexing" possono essere facilmente sviluppati utilizzando la tecnologia a biglie. tali sistemi, dotati di alta produttività, sono perfettamente adatti per esaminare biomarcatori tumorali su un gran numero di campioni clinici (21, 22) e permettono di sviluppare nuove conoscenze riguardo alla produzione di proteine plasmatiche o tissutali, fornendo quindi informazioni dettagliate sulle condizioni fisiopatologiche dei pazienti. l'utilizzo di strumenti bioinformatici sofisticati permette l'identificazione di quadri di biomarcatori che possono poi essere utilizzati a fini diagnostici. i dati ottenuti con sistemi immunochimici "multiplex" possono poi essere integrati in modelli diagnostici multivariati con algoritmi tipo "knearest neighbor" e regressione logistica. tali indagini possono significativamente migliorare sensibilità e specificità diagnostica in campo neoplastico, rispetto a quanto finora possibile con analisi su singoli parametri (23) (24) (25) fasi nell'applicazione dei "microarray" proteici alla scoperta di biomarcatori e al loro impiego nella medicina personalizzata.osteopontina, "insulin-like growth factor ii", fattore inibitorio dei macrofagi e antigene carboidratico 125 (ca 125)] per studiare campioni plasmatici di pazienti con tumore ovarico. l'utilizzo di questo pannello su 362 controlli sani e 156 pazienti con tumore ovarico neodiagnosticato ha portato a una sensibilità diagnostica del 95,3% unita a una specificità diagnostica del 99,4% (23). amonkar et al. (25) hanno elaborato un sistema a 11 parametri [ca 125, ca 19.9, "soluble epidermal growth factor receptor" (egfr), proteina c-reattiva, mioglobina, apolipoproteina a-i (apo a1), apoliproteina c-iii, proteina 1α inibitoria dei macrofagi (mip-1α), interleuchina (il) 6, il 18 e tenascina c] e l'hanno utilizzato per differenziare campioni plasmatici di 176 pazienti con tumore ovarico e 187 controlli con condizioni benigne. i dati hanno dimostrato sensibilità e specificità diagnostiche attorno al 90% (24, 25) . utilizzando invece un singolo parametro (ca 125), la sensibilità diagnostica nei primi stadi della malattia non supera il 60% (23) . questi pannelli di possibili biomarcatori richiedono ovviamente ulteriori validazioni su casistiche più ampie prima che possano essere utilizzati nella diagnostica clinica. tuttavia, la crescente lista di potenziali biomarcatori dimostra che i "microarray" a proteine possiedono un grande potenziale per contribuire allo sviluppo di terapie mediche individualizzate. le conoscenze generate tramite tali "microarray" a proteine non solo aiuteranno i clinici ad adattare le terapie secondo i fabbisogni individuali dei pazienti, ma serviranno anche a minimizzare il rischio di effetti avversi causati da un farmaco sbagliato o da un dosaggio farmacologico inappropriato.i "microarray" a proteine rendono possibile una quantificazione parallela e massiva di potenziali nuovi biomarcatori, in brevissimo tempo da un gran numero di campioni biologici. l'analisi per "cluster" di questa serie di dati può quindi mettere in rilievo indizi che correlano con lo stadio della malattia (26) . le tre principali applicazioni dei "microarray" a proteine per la scoperta di nuovi biomarcatori sono rappresentate dall'approccio basato sui dati sperimentali, dall'approccio basato sulle conoscenze e dall'approccio basato sulla biologia dei sistemi.questo approccio comporta un'analisi di tutto il proteoma per identificare una correlazione tra la concentrazione di una particolare proteina e la presenza di una specifica malattia. l'approccio è assolutamente obiettivo dal momento che non vengono fatte alcune assunzioni relativamente alle proteine che possono essere coinvolte nel processo patologico. questo tipo di "microarray" per l'analisi globale delle concentrazioni proteiche è tuttavia ancora agli esordi; infatti, il combinare le attuali tecniche di "array" con anticorpi con la strategia di marcatura diretta dei campioni permette l'analisi di un numero limitato di parametri. inoltre, nonostante gli sforzi fatti per lo sviluppo di anticorpi ricombinanti e le opportunità offerte dalle classiche vie di produzioni di anticorpi, la disponibilità di anticorpi di elevata qualità diretti contro ogni singola proteina di interesse è ancora molto limitata (27, 28) .ciononostante, tecniche ad elevata produttività per l'analisi proteica sono state utilizzate per generare "microarray" per l'intero proteoma con migliaia di proteine ricombinanti (29) (30) (31) (32) . i "microarray" ad alta densità di proteine rappresentano un approccio basato su dati sperimentali che permette di identificare nuovi autoanticorpi che sono specifici per una varietà di malattie (7, 33) . hudson et al. hanno utilizzato un "microarray" a proteine che conteneva 5005 proteine umane per identificare una serie di autoanticorpi capaci di riconoscere 94 antigeni nei sieri di pazienti con tumore ovarico (30) . quattro di questi antigeni sono poi stati confermati con analisi mediante "imunoblot" e "microarray" con tessuti. i ricercatori hanno trovato che la lamina a/c, la proteina 1 di ricognizione strutturaspecifica (ssrp1) e la proteina 1 che lega ral ("ralbinding protein 1") venivano prodotte in maggiori quantità nei tessuti cancerosi rispetto ai tessuti controllo. inoltre, specificità e sensibilità diagnostica della lamina a/c e di ssrp1 combinate erano superiori a quelle del ca 125 nell'identificare il tumore ovarico.lo stesso approccio è stato usato per valutare la risposta immunitaria alle proteine patogeniche. zhu et al. (34) hanno prodotto un "microarray" per le proteine di coronavirus contenente 82 proteine purificate da coronavirus della sindrome respiratoria acuta (sars) e 5 altri coronavirus, con lo scopo di monitorare la risposta immunitaria dei pazienti affetti da sars. sono stati quindi esaminati 400 campioni di siero provenienti dall'epidemia canadese di sars, che includevano casi di sars da coronavirus certa, casi di pazienti con insufficienza respiratoria e lavoratori di area sanitaria in buono stato di salute. l'analisi bioinformatica dei dati ha portato a una corretta classificazione dei campioni nel 91% dei casi (90% di sensibilità diagnostica e 93% di specificità diagnostica) (34) . questo studio ha quindi dimostrato molto bene che i "microarray" a proteine possono essere utilizzati per la identificazione su larga scala di anticorpi specifici per i virus nei sieri dei pazienti. schmidt et al. (35) hanno prodotto un "microarray" contenente 251 proteine, pari al 92% del proteoma del virus vaccinico, e lo hanno utilizzato per esaminare i sieri di 20 soggetti vaccinati e di altri 20 soggetti non vaccinati. questi autori hanno potuto dimostrare che la risposta anticorpale primaria alle singole proteine virali variava da individuo a individuo, ma che il numero totale di proteine riconosciute dagli anticorpi era solo lievemente variato dopo la seconda vaccinazione (35) . questi dati hanno quindi dimostrato che i "microarray" a proteine potrebbero servire a misurare la risposta immune umorale ai vaccini e fornire un semplice approccio per valutare vaccini di nuova produzione.nell'approccio basato sulle conoscenze, che rappresenta un approccio proteomico mirato, i biomarcatori potenzialmente importanti per una determinata patologia vengono ricercati sulla base delle conoscenze scientifiche disponibili. gli svantaggi di questo approccio sono che i risultati ottenibili sono dipendenti dalle attuali conoscenze scientifiche e che c'è quindi il rischio di ignorare biomarcatori sconosciuti. ciò nonostante, l'approccio basato sulle conoscenze è ancora la migliore strategia quando si desidera esaminare analiti quali proteine della fase acuta, molecole di vie di trasduzione del segnale e autoanticorpi (36) (37) (38) . le citochine e le chimochine, che regolano una moltitudine di attività cellulari, incluse la migrazione cellulare, la proliferazione e l'apoptosi, e che quindi giocano un ruolo importante nei processi infiammatori ed in diversi tipi di tumore (39) (40) (41) , sono le principali proteine utilizzate in questi studi (42, 43) .la malattia nodulare tiroidea, che interessa il 50% dei soggetti con più di 50 anni di età, è caratterizzata dalla presenza di uno o più noduli all'interno della ghiandola tiroidea. oltre il 90% dei noduli tiroidei non sono dolorosi o cancerosi, ma, se viene diagnosticato il cancro, il trattamento deve essere iniziato il più presto possibile. la biopsia con ago sottile è il metodo diagnostico standard, ma il 30% dei risultati ottenuti con la biopsia non è soddisfacente. linkov et al. hanno utilizzato la tecnologia xmap, basata sull'uso delle biglie, per identificare un pattern di 19 citochine, chemochine e fattori di crescita plasmatici, che correlano con le patologie tiroidee benigne e maligne (44) . l'analisi univariata dei risultati ottenuti ha provato che 5 fattori [il fattore di crescita epiteliale (egf), il fattore di crescita epatocitario (hgf), il 5, il 8 e rantes ("regulated upon activation, normally t-expressed and presumably secreted")] erano in grado di distinguere i soggetti con malattia alla tiroide dal gruppo di soggetti di controllo. la ulteriore analisi multivariata ha poi dimostrato che un pannello di 4 parametri (il 8, hgf, "monocyte-induced γ− interferon", il 12p40) era in grado di discriminare tra stati benigni e maligni (area sotto la curva roc pari a 0,81; 95% intervallo di confidenza, 0,65-0,90). questo risultato dimostra che gli "array" a proteine che utilizzano pannelli di biomarcatori plasmatici o sierici rappresentano uno strumento promettente di aiuto nella diagnostica delle malattie tiroidee nodulari.sauer et al. hanno utilizzato "array" proteici per meglio caratterizzare biopsie ad ago sottile da pazienti con tumore della mammella al fine di identificare un pannello di biomarcatori utili per definire specifici sottogruppi di pazienti con cancro (45) . alcuni lisati preparati da biopsie a nucleo grosso ("large-core biopsy") di carcinomi invasivi delle mammella erano studiati con metodiche immunochimiche a biglie al fine di valutare la produzione di 54 proteine preselezionate. i risultati ottenuti hanno dimostrato che i profili di 5 proteine nel tessuto tumorale (fattore 2 di crescita dei fibroblasti, fas, fas ligand, inibitore tissutale della metalloproteinasi 1 e rantes) variavano considerevolmente fra i gruppi di pazienti con o senza metastasi linfonodari ascellari. kim et al. hanno utilizzato un approccio simile per distinguere pazienti col tumore della mammella da volontari sani (46) . questi autori hanno selezionato 35 analiti da 4500 campioni di plasma preventivamente esaminati, ottenuti da pazienti con diversi tipi di tumori. tre biomarcatori (egf, ligando solubile di cd40 e pro-apo a1) sono stati trovati con concentrazioni aumentate nei campioni di plasma delle pazienti con tumore mammario. si sono trovati anche 6 biomarcatori [chininogeno ad alto pm, apo a1, molecola solubile di adesione cellulare vascolare 1 (vcam-1), inibitore 1 dell'attivatore del plasminogeno, proteina legante la vitamina d e vitronectina] che erano presenti in concentrazioni plasmatiche diminuite. erano quindi usati diversi algoritmi per generare modelli diagnostici, che hanno permesso di differenziare pazienti con tumore della mammella dai controlli sani, con un elevato grado di accuratezza diagnostica (91,8% mediante "random forest analysis", 91,5% con analisi di supporto tramite vettori e 87,6% mediante analisi discriminante lineare).c'è un gran bisogno di identificare biomarcatori specifici per la sepsi che possano riflettere lo stadio e la gravità di questo stato infiammatorio. bozza et al. hanno impiegato alcuni sistemi immunochimici a "sandwich" miniaturizzati per valutare i valori predittivi dei profili di produzione di diverse citochine nel corso di sepsi (47) . essi hanno scoperto che le concentrazioni di alcune citochine aumentano col progredire della gravità dello stato infiammatorio e in parallelo con la perdita di funzionalità d'organo. in particolare, con riguardo a quest'ultima, si è potuto osservare che le concentrazioni di due su 17 citochine esaminate, il 8 e proteina 1 di chemoattrazione monocitaria (mcp-1), misurate in prima giornata, correlavano significativamente con il punteggio di valutazione di insufficienza d'organo ("sequential organ failure assessment score"). l'aumento entro le prime 24 ore delle concentrazioni plasmatiche di il 6, il 8 e del fattore di stimolazione delle colonie granulocitarie correlava con la disfunzione d'organo, che non recuperava in terza giornata. inoltre, le concentrazioni di 6 citochine (il 1β, il 4, il 6, il 8, mcp-1 e fattore di stimolazione delle colonie granulocitarie) erano in grado di predire una mortalità precoce.torrence et al. hanno usato un modello di topo (mdr1a -/-) affetto da malattia infiammatoria intestinale (ibd) scatenata da infezione da helicobacter bilis per identificare biomarcatori sierici degli stati precoci e tardivi di ibd (48) . l'analisi multivariata dei dati ha dimostrato un aumento di 5 proteine plasmatiche [il 11, il 17, "10-kda interferon γ-inducible protein" (ip-10), linfotactina, mcp-1 e vcam-1] negli stadi precoci della ibd, mentre 11 proteine (il 11, ip-10, aptoglobina, metalloproteinasi il meglio di clinical chemistry clinical chemistry highlights 9 della matrice, mip-1γ, fibrinogeno, iga, mip-3β, vcam-1, apo a1 e il 18) mostravano concentrazioni elevate negli stadi tardivi della malattia. le concentrazioni di tutti questi biomarcatori, tranne l'apo a1, correlavano con i punteggi della graduazione istopatologica. il trattamento con antibiotici migliorava l'andamento clinico della ibd e portava a una progressiva diminuzione nelle concentrazioni plasmatiche di molti di tali biomarcatori. modelli animali di ibd sembrano quindi adatti per identificare nuovi biomarcatori non invasivi per il monitoraggio della progressione della ibd, portando al tempo stesso a meglio comprendere la patogenesi di tale condizione, con evidente vantaggio per lo sviluppo di nuove terapie. le osservazioni su modelli animali debbono naturalmente essere confermate con campioni da pazienti con ibd, prima che si possano trarre conclusioni definitive sulla validità di tali biomarcatori.biomarcatori predittivi e' noto che dal 20% al 40% dei pazienti con artrite reumatoide non rispondono al trattamento con agenti bloccanti il fattore α di necrosi tumorale, quali l'etanercept.questi trattamenti farmacologici inappropriati non solo sono costosi, ma possono indurre gravi effetti collaterali in questo tipo di pazienti (49, 50) . pertanto, l'identificazione di biomarcatori che siano in grado di predire la risposta clinica al trattamento mediante il fattore α di necrosi tumorale potrebbe essere estremamente utile. a tal fine si ritiene che la valutazione di pannelli di citochine plasmatiche potrebbe essere importante per differenziare i "responders" dai "nonresponders". fabre et al. hanno studiato i profili delle citochine plasmatiche in pazienti con artrite reumatoide in terapia con etanercept (49) . e' stato utilizzato il biochip array evidence (randox laboratories) per misurare 10 citochine proinfiammatorie e 2 citochine antiinfiammatorie nei campioni sierici raccolti al tempo 0 e dopo 90 giorni. i ricercatori hanno trovato che la risposta al farmaco era associata a elevate concentrazioni plasmatiche di mcp-1 e egf. inoltre, la combinazione di proteina c-reattiva e egf era in grado di predire gli effetti del trattamento con etanercept a 3 mesi di distanza (sensibilità, 87,5%; specificità, 75%).allen et al. (51) hanno osservato che le concentrazioni plasmatiche delle citochine modulate dal fattore nucleare κb e di diversi fattori di crescita (il 6, il 8, oncogene 1 regolato dalla crescita, fattore di crescita vascolare endoteliale e hgf) cambiavano nei pazienti con carcinoma a cellule squamose del capo-collo che erano stati trattati mediante chemioterapia e radioterapia. tali parametri plasmatici erano determinati nei campioni da pazienti con una diagnosi di carcinoma orofaringeo allo stadio iii o iv al fine di vedere se queste molecole correlassero con risposta al trattamento, recidiva o sopravvivenza (51) . i pazienti venivano trattati mediante chemioterapia e radioterapia combinate, e la relazione tra le concentrazioni plasmatiche di citochine e il tempo di sopravvivenza era analizzata mediante i modelli di analisi proporzionale dei rischi di cox e mediante il test di sopravvivenza di kaplan-meier. l'analisi dettagliata dei dati ottenuti ha dimostrato che le concentrazioni di queste citochine correlavano sia con la risposta alla terapia che con la diminuita sopravvivenza. l'astinenza dal fumo e aumentati livelli del fattore di crescita dell'endotelio vascolare correlavano con un aumento della sopravvivenza. questo approccio si presta parimenti ad essere esteso allo studio di altri tumori a prognosi sfavorevole, dal momento che la sorveglianza dei cambiamenti longitudinali delle concentrazioni delle citochine può integrarsi con le informazioni provenienti dalla sorveglianza clinica e dalle tecniche di "imaging".le chinasi sono un gruppo molto interessante di obbiettivi molecolari per il trattamento dei tumori dal momento che esse sono coinvolte, tra l'altro, nella regolazione della proliferazione e del differenziamento cellulare. un'analisi sistematica di queste proteine di segnale in campioni di vari tumori può rivelare molti agenti causali durante la progressione della malattia (14, 52, 53) . l'utilizzo di tecniche di microdissezione con laser può risolvere il problema della eterogeneità tissutale, rendendo possibile l'isolamento di cellule tumorali pure da sezioni di tessuto (14) . wulfkuhle et al. hanno impiegato rppm insieme a tecniche di microdissezione con laser per effettuare un'analisi sistematica delle vie di segnale cellulari in tessuti di tumori della mammella e in lesioni metastatiche (20) . nel loro lavoro hanno esaminato 25 campioni chirurgici di cancro mammario, andando a ricercare 90 molecole segnale. e' stato possibile definire sottogruppi di campioni di tumori primari della mammella e di lesioni metastatiche in base alla loro produzione di proteine o al grado di fosforilazione sulla base di specifiche vie di trasduzione del segnale, quali quella della famiglia delle egfr, della via di attivazione akt/mtor, della via del fattore di crescita c-kit/abl o della via di attivazione di erk. gli autori hanno proposto che la caratterizzazione dettagliata delle attività di segnale abbia un'enorme potenzialità per la messa a fuoco di regimi terapeutici adattati al singolo paziente. mediante un approccio simile, sheehan et al. (54) hanno disegnato le attività di segnale dei comportamenti epiteliali e stromali di carcinomi del colon. gli autori, sulla base degli schemi di produzione di oltre 60 molecole di segnale, hanno concluso che in questo tipo di tumore ha luogo uno scambio coordinato di informazioni tra epitelio e stroma, ipotizzando che alla base possa esserci una transizione tra epitelio e mesenchima e che tale scambio di informazioni possa dare origine a un epitelio tumorale resistente alle terapie. tali dati, generati con "microarray" proteici, potrebbero avere forte rilievo nella messa a punto di trattamenti terapeutici per il cancro del colon (54) .la biologia dei sistemi è un'area di ricerca interdisciplinare focalizzata allo studio sistematico delle interazioni complesse nei sistemi biologici e allo sviluppo di modelli meccanicistici capaci di predire il comportamento di sistemi dinamici. in confronto agli approcci riduzionistici, che studiano ambiti spaziali o unità organizzative più ristrette per comprendere la natura dei sistemi complessi, l'approccio basato sulla biologia dei sistemi si fonda sull'integrazione di una gran serie di dati di genomica e proteomica, uniti a un'ampia serie di conoscenze biologiche e a tecniche computazionali. il gran numero di parametri, variabili e vincoli nelle reti cellulari richiede l'utilizzo di tecniche di analisi numerica e computazionali. gli sforzi fatti con l'approccio della biologia dei sistemi sono pertanto focalizzati a definire approfondimenti dettagliati in tutti i fattori che regolano una cellula vivente e nei cambiamenti che hanno luogo durante la progressione di una malattia (55) . in questa luce, i "microarray" a proteine hanno dimostrato di essere uno dei metodi di larga scala capaci di fornire dati sperimentali in quantità sufficiente per le valutazioni computazionali (56). knickerbocker et al. hanno studiato la mortalità precoce nei pazienti sottoposti a dialisi renale, applicando i "microarray" a proteine per quantificare una serie di parametri plasmatici nei campioni dei pazienti, combinando questi dati con variabili cliniche, quali indice di massa corporea, pressione diastolica, eventuali altre patologie, e ai metodi di accesso al circolo sanguigno (57) . gli autori sono stati capaci di predire la mortalità precoce nei pazienti in dialisi quando i dati dei biomarcatori molecolari venivano integrati con i dati clinici. un'analisi di questo tipo, basata sull'approccio della biologia dei sistemi, può essere utile per stabilire una prognosi personalizzata ed essere d'aiuto ai clinici nella scelta del miglior trattamento terapeutico per ogni singolo paziente.nell'ultimo decennio, le tecnologie proteomiche hanno portato alla identificazione di un gran numero di potenziali biomarcatori. tuttavia, a causa delle attuali limitazioni nella validazione dei biomarcatori, solo un piccolo numero di essi è stato validato con successo. questi biomarcatori includono l'α-fetoproteina, l'antigene carcinoembrionale e l'antigene prostatico specifico (58, 59) . numerosi aspetti del processo di validazione devono essere migliorati. le attuali tecnologie impiegate per la scoperta dei biomarcatori utilizzano in realtà metodi a bassa produttività (60, 61) . pertanto, si rendono necessarie nuove tecnologie ad alta produttività e dotate di più alta sensibilità, dal momento che generalmente, soprattutto nel caso degli studi clinici, sono disponibili solo piccole quantità di campione (61) . i "microarray" a proteine si sono dimostrati un eccellente approccio per gli studi di validazione dei biomarcatori. negli anni recenti, sono stati sviluppati diversi concetti di automazione per gli "array" a proteine. uno dei formati più avanzati è il sistema immunochimico a biglie, per il quale diverse aziende hanno sviluppato sistemi automatizzati. inoltre, i sistemi a "microarray" planari sono stati adattati alle micropiastre a 96 pozzetti, il che permette ai "microarray" di essere processati mediante sistemi robotizzati standard di pipettamento, anche con sistemi multicanale (22, 57, 62) . per altro, diverse aziende diagnostiche hanno sviluppato altre piattaforme per i "microarray" a proteine, quali il sistema a "biochip" randox evidence e la piattaforma professionale diagnostica impact (roche diagnostics).la più grande sfida nella validazione dei biomarcatori è rappresentata dalla disponibilità di molecole di cattura di elevata qualità, tipicamente anticorpi (22) . a dispetto dei grandi sforzi messi in atto nello sviluppo di nuovi metodi per produrre molecole di cattura di elevata qualità, quali aptameri o anticorpi ricombinanti (36, 63, 64) , il loro potenziale valore nella validazione dei biomarcatori deve essere ancora dimostrato.i "microarray" a proteine sono di grande valore per scopi diagnostici (12, 65) . di fatto, numerosi "microarray" a proteine sono stai approvati dalla us "food and drug administration" (fda) o hanno ottenuto la marchiatura ce per il loro impiego all'interno della comunità europea (9) . la diagnosi delle malattie autoimmuni, in particolare, è al centro della messa a punto di questi "microarray" a proteine, in sistemi quali athena il sistema randox evidence biochip array effettua immunodosaggi "multiplex" miniaturizzati in un formato a "macroarray" con 25 diverse modalità, utilizzando una rivelazione mediante chemiluminescenza. questo sistema a "biochip" completamente automatizzato permette di esaminare campioni da pazienti per una moltitudine di biomarcatori specifici per il settore della fetilità, delle malattie cardiache, dei tumori, delle citochine, dei fattori di crescita, delle molecole di adesione cellulare, della funzionalità tiroidea e delle droghe d'abuso. in particolare, il sistema ha ottenuto l'approvazione della fda per le droghe d'abuso ed è al vaglio della stessa agenzia per l'approvazione degli altri analiti.si può quindi prevedere che un numero crescente di biomarcatori saranno definiti e applicati alla diagnostica in un prossimo futuro. a tal fine è indispensabile che vengano messi in atto sistemi rigorosi di controllo qualità e che il rilascio di dati non richiesti e l'utilizzo dei risultati diagnostici sia disciplinato da opportune regolamentazioni (66, 67) . questi gruppi di biomarcatori forniranno informazioni più individualizzate, che potranno essere di aiuto ai clinici nelle fasi di diagnosi e di selezione delle terapie più appropriate.nel futuro i sistemi di misura "multiplex" a proteine saranno sempre più accettati e implementati in diverse aree diagnostiche. ulteriori sviluppi nella tecnologia dei "microarray" a proteine permetteranno di usare solo una goccia di sangue per esaminare i pazienti al fine di mettere in luce rilevanti informazioni patologiche, direttamente in ambulatorio, prima di prescrivere un dato farmaco. in questa luce, iniziative quali la "fda's critical path initiative" e la "innovative medicines initiative", una cooperazione tra comunità europea e federazione europea delle industrie e associazioni farmaceutiche rappresentano strategie per supportare lo sviluppo di nuovi test per biomarcatori, sia in ambito tipicamente diagnostico che a supporto dei processi di sviluppo di nuovi farmaci (68, 69) .questi sforzi, supportati con fondi pubblici, sono stati concepiti per promuovere la collaborazione tra industrie, responsabili politici, istituti di ricerca e ospedali. tali attività hanno il potenziale per accelerare lo sviluppo dei "microarray" a proteine ai fini diagnostici, affinchè la medicina personalizzata possa divenire una realtà. ciò nondimeno, saranno necessarie evidenze, che dimostrino il reale bisogno clinico dei "microarray" diagnostici a proteine, che tali strumenti forniscono risultati rilevanti da un punto di vista terapeutico e che possono anche portare a una riduzione generale dei costi, prima che tali "array" possano finalmente soddisfare le grandi aspettative che hanno generato.the human genome sequencing project provided the basis for the development of dna microarrays, enabling the massively parallel analysis of mrna production rates and single-nucleotide polymorphisms. after completion of the human genome project in 2003, dna microarray technologies developed very quickly and have since evolved into robust and reliable genomics-research tools. the systematic multivariate analysis of genome-wide expression data sets allows evaluation of correlations between gene expression patterns and the state and progression of disease, making possible patient-specific treatment based on a patient's individual genetic profile, an area that is known as "pharmacogenomics" or "personalized medicine" (fig. 1 ) (1, 2 ) . detailed information about a patient's genotype or gene expression profile can be used to stratify disease state, choose appropriate medication, adjust drug dosage according to a patient's requirements, or initiate preventive treatment. personalized medicine has the ultimate goal of successfully implementing the 5 rs: "right patient/target, right diagnosis, right treatment, right drug/target, and right dose/time" (3 ) . this goal can be achieved, however, only by combining genomic knowledge with traditional clinical approaches, the patient's personal medical and family history, and relevant clinical data, such as imaging and in vitro diagnostics results.gene expression analysis is still not routinely applied in personalized medicine, although gene expression profiling has generated numerous hypotheses relating to tumorigenesis and has provided both potentially prognostic and predictive signatures. owing to posttranslational modifications such as glycosylation, phosphorylation, and acetylation, proteins are more heterogeneous than the genes encoding them, and this heterogeneity often does not correlate with protein production. posttranslational modifications extend the function of proteins in terms of recognition, signal transduction, and proteolysis. these processes regulate cell differentiation and/or proliferation. proteins are also differentially produced in diseases. many drugs used for treating disease are therefore directed against protein targets, such as protein kinases, cytokines, receptors, or their substrates, that have been shown to play a role in disease development (4 ) . proteomics analyses therefore provide a more direct way of generating relevant data sets to improve our understanding of diseases at the level of the individual patient. the analysis of protein panels or even entire signaling networks can contribute to increasing the insights into disease development and progression on the molecular level, which in turn can enable the disease diagnosis at the individual level and the adjustment of therapies to the requirements of individual patients. such detailed analyses require high-throughput multiplexed proteomics techniques capable of screening a multitude of parameters from minimal amounts of sample materials. protein microarrays have therefore become a very active research area ( fig. 1 ) (5) (6) (7) (8) . protein microarray-based assays can be grouped according to different formats and types of applications ( figs. 2 and 3) .forward-phase protein microarray (fppm) 2 assays are the most frequently used formats. they consist of an array of well-defined immobilized capture molecules that allow the simultaneous analysis of a large number of different parameters in a sample. examples of fppm assays are antibody microarrays, which are used to identify and quantify target proteins of interest, and fusion protein arrays consisting of immobilized sets of proteins, which are used to study the interactions between proteins and immobilized binding molecules, such as proteins, peptides, low molecular weight compounds, oligosaccharides, or dna. fppm assays involve the immobilization of capture molecules (peptides, proteins, or antibodies) on a solid surface in rows and columns (microarray format) to capture the corresponding analytes present in complex samples (serum, plasma, or cell culture supernatant). the bound analytes are visualized either by direct labeling of the analytes or via a labeled secondary antibody. standard 2 nonstandard abbreviations: fppm, forward-phase protein microarray; rppm, reversed-phase protein microarray; ca-125, cancer antigen 125; egfr, epidermal growth factor receptor; apo a1, apolipoprotein a1; mip-1␣, macrophage inhibitory protein 1␣; il-6, interleukin-6; ssrp1, structure-specific recognition protein 1; sars, severe acute respiratory syndrome; egf, epithelial growth factor; hgf, hepatocyte growth factor; rantes, regulated upon activated, normally t-expressed and presumably secreted; vcam-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule 1; mcp-1, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1; ibd, inflammatory bowel disease; ip-10, 10-kda interferon ␥-inducible protein; fda, food and drug administration; anca, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody. microarray technology can be applied to monitor intracellular mechanisms of gene expression and protein production. dna microarrays are used for gene and mrna analyses, and protein microarrays are used for the analysis of protein production and function.detection methods include fluorescence, chemiluminescence, and colorimetry. planar microarray-based systems are perfectly suited to generate high-density protein microarrays that screen for a large number of analytes in a single experiment. bead-based array systems provide an interesting alternative to planar microarrays, especially when the number of parameters to be analyzed is comparably low. such bead-based assay systems are flexible, robust, and more advanced with respect to automation and enable scientists to screen thousands of samples within a short time (10, 11 ) . many commercial fppm products are now available, including assays for cytokines and chemokines, cancer biomarkers, and molecules involved in signaling pathways (tables 1 and 2 ). the other assay format, the reversed-phase protein microarray (rppm), consists of a multitude of different samples, such as tissue or cell lysates, that are immobilized as spots in rows on a solid support. each microspot contains the entire proteome of a tissue or cell. highly specific antibodies are used to simultaneously screen these spots for the presence or absence of distinct target proteins. this approach allows the identification of sets of proteins produced in large collections of tissue or cell samples (figs. 2 and 3) (11, 12 ) . typically, the molecules of interest, such as transcription factors or signaling molecules, are generally present only in low quantities. the low abundances of such molecules therefore require high-sensitivity de-tection methods, such as tyramide signal amplification or planar waveguide technology (13, 14 ) . rppms have been successfully used in studies of cancer development, both in cells and in patient samples. table 3 summarizes the main characteristics of the different protein microarray formats.the remainder of this review covers the current progress in the use of protein microarrays for biomarker discovery and validation, reviews their use in in vitro diagnostics, and discusses the use of protein microarrays in the field of personalized medicine.traditional technologies for the analysis of dna, mrna, and proteins can analyze only 1 parameter at a time and therefore are limited in throughput when a large number of parameters need to be identified. the implementation of dna and protein microarrays has led to a tremendous acceleration in biomarker discovery. the ultimate goal is to identify sets of diseasespecific biomarkers and then to combine them with a robust screening technology. this approach will allow clinicians to screen patients before prescribing a particular drug in order to exclude potential adverse effects or determine the most suitable dose. besides making improvements to this new technology, researchers must also identify and validate appropriate sets of biomarkers and subsequently integrate them into rppms can be used to measure distinct sets of parameters in a large collection of tissue or cell lysates or to sample fractions immobilized in an array format on a solid support. fppms are based on a direct-labeling or a sandwich immunoassay approach and are used for the simultaneous analysis of different parameters from different samples.healthcare services. fig. 3 summarizes the work flow of biomarker discovery with protein microarrays and the anticipated application of protein microarray-based assays for personalized medicine. protein microarrays have recently demonstrated their huge potential in the field of biomarker discovery. rppms have been used to identify biomarker candidates in cancer patients that show changes in concentration that correlate with the state and progression of disease (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) . sandwich immunoassays have proved to be an excellent method for accurately quantifying biomarker candidates. multiplexing can easily be achieved with bead-based technologies. highthroughput multiplexed immunoassays are perfectly suited for screening cancer biomarkers in a large cohort of clinical samples (21, 22 ) and provide insights into the details of the production of plasma or tissue proteins, thereby furnishing detailed information about a patient's physiological and pathologic condition. the use of sophisticated bioinformatics tools allows the identification of biomarker patterns that can then be used for diagnostic purposes. data sets generated with multiplexed immunoassays can be integrated into multivariate diagnostic models with such algorithms as k-nearest neighbor and logistic regression. such analyses can markedly improve the diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of cancer diagnostics compared with what was previously possible with single-parameter analysis (23) (24) (25) (mip-1␣), interleukin-6 (il-6), il-18, and tenascin c] and used it to distinguish plasma samples from patients with ovarian cancer from samples from patients with benign conditions. the screening of 176 patients and 187 controls revealed that the 11-plex achieved a diagnostic sensitivity and specificity as high as 90% (24, 25 ) . in contrast, a single parameter, ca-125, currently achieves a diagnostic sensitivity of ͻ60% in early stages of the disease (23 ). these candidate biomarker panels require further validation with larger patient cohorts, however, before they can reliably be used in routine clinical diagnostics. the increasing list of biomarker candidates shows that protein microarrays have a huge potential to contribute to the development of individualized medical therapies. the knowledge generated with such protein microarrays not only will help clinicians adapt therapies to individual patient requirements but also will help minimize the risk of adverse effects caused by an incorrectly chosen drug or drug dose.protein microarrays enable massively parallel quantification of biomarker candidates from large numbers of clinical samples in a very short time. the hierarchical clustering analysis of these data sets can reveal signatures that correlate with the state of the disease (26 ). the 3 major applications of protein microarrays for biomarker discovery include the data-driven approach, the knowledge-driven approach, and the systems biology-driven approach.the data-driven approach involves a proteome-wide analysis to identify a correlation between protein concentrations and a particular disease state. this approach is unbiased in that no assumptions are made about the proteins that might be involved in the disease process; however, the protein microarray approaches developed for global analysis of protein concentrations are still in their infancy. combining the current antibody arrays with a direct sample-labeling strategy allows the analysis of only a limited number of parameters. despite all the efforts made in recombinant antibody technology and classic antibody generation, high-quality antibodies directed against every single protein of interest are still not available (27, 28 ) . nevertheless, high-throughput techniques for protein analysis have been used to generate whole-proteome arrays consisting of thousands of recombinant proteins (29 -32 ) . high-density protein microarrays are a data-driven approach that enables the identification of new autoantibodies that are specific for a variety of diseases (7, 33 ) . hudson et al. used a protein microarray containing 5005 human proteins to identify autoantibody sets capable of recognizing 94 antigens in the sera of patients with ovarian cancer (30 ) . four of these antigens were further confirmed with immunoblot and tissue microarray analyses. the researchers found that lamin a/c, structure-specific recognition protein 1 (ssrp1), and ral-binding protein 1 were produced in larger quantities in cancer tissue than in control tissues. furthermore, the diagnostic specificity and sensitivity of the combined use of lamin a/c and ssrp1 performed better than tumor marker ca-125 alone in identifying ovarian cancer.the same approach was used to assess the immune response to pathogenic proteins. zhu et al. generated a coronavirus protein microarray containing 82 purified proteins from severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus and 5 additional coronaviruses, with the aim of monitoring the immune response of patients infected with sars. approximately 400 serum samples from the canadian sars outbreak were screened. these samples included those from confirmed sars coronavirus cases, patients with respiratory illnesses, and asymptomatic healthcare workers. bioinformatics data analysis allowed classification of the sera with 91% accuracy (90% diagnostic sensitivity and 93% diagnostic specificity) (34 ) . this study demonstrated very well that protein microarrays can be used for large-scale identification of virus-specific antibodies in sera. schmid et al. generated a protein microarray consisting of 251 proteins (92% of the vaccinia virus proteome). the screening of the sera obtained from vaccinated individuals (n ϭ 20) and nonvaccinated individuals (n ϭ 20) revealed that the primary antibody response to individual vaccinia proteins varied from individual to individual, whereas the total number of proteins recognized by antibodies was table 3 . characteristics of the different protein microarrays.bead-based array only slightly altered after the second vaccination (35 ) . these data sets proved that protein microarrays could measure humoral immune responses to vaccines and provide a straightforward approach to evaluating newly developed vaccines.in a knowledge-driven approach, which is a targeted proteomic approach, biomarker candidates relevant to a certain disease are defined according to existing scientific knowledge. the drawbacks of such an approach, however, are that the outcome is only as good as the state of scientific knowledge and that there is a risk, of course, of missing unknown biomarkers. nevertheless, the knowledge-driven approach is still the major strategy when screening for such analytes as acute-phase proteins, signaling molecules, and autoantibodies (36 -38 ) . cytokines and chemokines, which regulate a variety of cell activities, including cell migration, proliferation, and apoptosis, and therefore play an important role in inflammatory diseases and different cancers (39 -41 ) , are the major proteins used in such studies (42, 43 (45 ) . lysates prepared from large-core needle biopsies of invasive breast carcinomas were an-alyzed with bead-based immunoassays with the overall aim of evaluating the production of 54 preselected proteins. the results revealed that the profiles of 5 proteins in the tumor (fibroblast growth factor 2, fas, fas ligand, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1, and rantes) differed considerably between the patient groups with and without axillary lymph node metastasis. kim et al. used a similar approach to distinguish breast cancer patients from healthy volunteers (46 ) . thirty-five analytes were selected from 4500 previously screened plasma samples obtained from patients with various types of cancer. three biomarkers (egf, soluble cd40 ligand, pro-apo a1) were identified at increased concentrations in plasma samples from the breast cancer group. six biomarkers that showed a decreased plasma concentration [high molecular weight kininogen, apo a1, soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (vcam-1), plasminogen activator inhibitor 1, vitamin d-binding protein, and vitronectin] were also identified. different algorithms were then used to generate diagnostic models, which allowed breast cancer patients to be discriminated from the healthy controls with a high level of diagnostic accuracy (91.8% with random forest analysis, 91.5% with support vector machine analysis, and 87.6% with linear discriminant analysis).there is a huge demand for the identification of sepsis-specific biomarkers that can reflect the state and severity of this inflammatory disease. bozza et al. used miniaturized sandwich immunoassays to evaluate the predictive values of cytokine production patterns in a sepsis time course (47 ) . they found that some cytokine concentrations increased as the severity of inflammation and organ dysfunction increased. with regard to the severity of organ dysfunction, the concentrations of 2 the 17 evaluated cytokines, il-8 and monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (mcp-1), measured on day 1 correlated significantly with the sequential organ failure assessment score. increased plasma concentrations of il-6, il-8, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor within the first 24 h correlated with organ dysfunction, which failed to recover on day 3. the concentrations of 6 cytokines (il-1␤, il-4, il-6, il-8, mcp-1, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor) allowed prediction of early mortality.to identify serum biomarkers of early and late inflammatory bowel disease (ibd), torrence et al. used a mouse model (mdr1a ϫ/ϫ mice) for ibd triggered by infection with helicobacter bilis (48 ) . the multianalyte profiling data revealed an increase in 5 plasma proteins [il-11, il-17, 10-kda interferon ␥-inducible protein (ip-10), lymphotactin, mcp-1, and vcam-1] in early-stage ibd. eleven proteins (il-11, ip-10, hapto-globin, matrix metalloproteinase 9, mip-1␥, fibrinogen, iga, mip-3␤, vcam-1, apo a1, and il-18) displayed higher concentrations in a late stage of the disease. the concentrations of all these biomarkers except apo a1 correlated with the histopathologic scores. appropriate antibiotic treatment improved the clinical signs of ibd and led to decreases in the mean plasma concentrations of many of the biomarkers. such ibd animal models seem to be suitable for identifying noninvasive biomarkers for monitoring ibd progression, while at the same time increasing our understanding of ibd pathogenesis, which is a major prerequisite for the development of new therapies. the observations from animal models need to be confirmed with human ibd plasma samples, however, before definite statements can be made on the suitability of such biomarkers.predictive biomarkers. twenty to forty percent of all rheumatoid arthritis patients do not respond to treatment with tumor necrosis factor ␣blocking agents such as etanercept. these inappropriate treatments not only are costly but also have severe side effects in these patients (49, 50 ) . therefore, the identification of biomarkers that can predict a clinical response to an anti-tumor necrosis factor ␣ treatment would be extremely useful. panels of cytokine production in plasma may enable the discrimination of responders from nonresponders. fabre et al. profiled plasma cytokines in rheumatoid arthritis patients undergoing etanercept therapy (49 ) . the evidence biochip array (randox laboratories) was used to measure 10 proinflammatory and 2 antiinflammatory cytokines in serum samples collected on days 0 and 90. the researchers found that high plasma concentrations of mcp-1 and egf were associated with a response to etanercept. in addition, the combination of c-reactive protein and egf proved to be a good way of predicting the effect of etanercept treatment at 3 months (diagnostic sensitivity, 87.5%; diagnostic specificity, 75%).allen et al. observed that the plasma concentrations of nuclear factor b-modulated cytokines and growth factors (il-6, il-8, growth-regulated oncogene 1, vascular endothelial growth factor, and hgf) changed in patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma who had been treated with chemotherapy and radiotherapy. plasma parameters were quantitatively analyzed in samples from patients with a diagnosis of stage iii/iv oropharyngeal carcinoma to discover whether the plasma parameters of these proteins correlated with treatment response, relapse, or survival (51 ) . the patients were treated with combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy, and the relationship between cytokine plasma concentrations and the survival rate was investigated with cox proportional hazards models and kaplan-meier survival analysis. the detailed analysis of the data revealed that the concentrations of these cytokines correlated with both the response to therapy and poorer cause-specific survival. a history of nonsmoking and higher vascular endothelial growth factor concentrations also correlated with an increased survival rate. this approach is envisioned to be extendable to other cancers with a poor predicted outcome, because the monitoring of longitudinal changes in cytokine concentrations can complement the information provided by clinical monitoring and imaging approaches.signaling pathway profiling. kinases are a very interesting group of molecular targets for cancer treatment because they are involved, among other things, in the regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation. a systematic analysis of such signaling proteins in samples of individual tumors may reveal multiple causative players during cancer progression (14, 52, 53 ) . laser capture microdissection can be used to resolve the problem of tissue heterogeneity by enabling the isolation of pure tumor cells from tissue sections (14 ) . wulfkuhle et al. used rppms in combination with laser capture microdissection technology to carry out a systematic analysis of cellular signaling in breast cancer tissue and metastatic lesions (20 ) . twenty-five surgical samples of human breast cancers were screened for the presence of 90 signaling molecules. it was possible to define subgroups of samples of primary breast tumors and metastatic lesions by their protein production or degree of phosphorylation on the basis of the pathwayspecific signaling profiles, such as egfr family signaling, akt/mtor pathway activation, c-kit/abl growth factor signaling, or erk pathway activation. the authors proposed that the detailed characterization of signaling activity has a huge potential with respect to the design of patient-tailored therapeutic regimens. with a similar approach, sheehan et al. profiled the signaling activities of epithelial and stromal compartments of colon carcinomas. the authors inferred from the production patterns of ͼ60 signaling molecules that a coordinated cross talk exists between epithelium and stroma in cancer, suggesting an epithelial-mesenchymal transition. such cross talk could produce a therapy-resistant tumor epithelium. such protein microarray-generated findings could have therapeutic implications for the treatment of colon cancer (54 ) .systems biology is an interdisciplinary research area that focuses on the systematic study of complex interactions in biological systems and the development of mechanistic models for predicting the behavior of the protein microarrays for personalized medicine reviews dynamic system. compared with reductionist approaches, which study smaller spatial scales or organizational units to understand the nature of complex systems, the systems biology-driven approach is based on the integration of large genomic and proteomic data sets in combination with a broad biological knowledge and computational techniques. the large number of parameters, variables, and constraints in cellular networks requires the use of numerical and computational techniques. the efforts made in systems biology approaches are aimed at gaining detailed insights into all factors in a living cell and the changes that occur during disease progression (55 ) . protein microarrays have proved to be one of the large-scale measurement methods capable of delivering experimental data sets in the quantities required for computational approaches (56 ) . knickerbocker et al. analyzed early mortality in patients undergoing kidney dialysis. the researchers applied protein microarrays to quantify sets of plasma parameters in patient samples and combined these data sets with such clinical variables as body mass index, diastolic blood pressure, underlying disease, and method of vascular access (57 ) . the authors were able to predict early mortality in patients undergoing kidney dialysis when the molecular markers were combined with the clinical variables. a systems biologybased analysis of this kind enables an individualized prognosis and supports clinicians in the choice of treatment regimens best suited for an individual patient.within the last decade, proteomics technologies have led to the identification of a huge number of biomarker candidates; however, the current limitation is the validation of biomarker candidates, only a few of which have been successfully validated. these markers include ␣-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and prostate-specific antigen (58, 59 ) . numerous aspects of the validation process need to be improved. the current high-output technologies used for the discovery of biomarkers are low-throughput methods (60, 61 ) . therefore, novel technologies with a higher throughput and a higher analytical sensitivity are required; such technologies must also take into account the fact that only small quantities of sample are typically available, particularly in the case of clinical samples (61 ) . protein microarrays have proved to be an excellent approach for biomarker-validation studies. over the last few years, different automation concepts have been developed for protein arrays. one of the most advanced formats is the bead-based systems, for which different companies have developed automated systems (62 ) . in addition, planar protein microarrays have been adapted to the 96-well microtiter plate format, which allows microarrays to be processed with standard pipetting robots or multichannel pipettes (22, 57, 63 ) . several diagnostics companies have developed other protein technology platforms, such as the randox evidence biochip system and the impact professional diagnostics platform (roche diagnostics) (64 ) .the major challenge in biomarker validation is the availability of high-quality capture molecules, e.g., antibodies (22 ) . despite tremendous efforts in the development of new methods to produce high-quality capture molecules such as aptamers or recombinant antibodies (36, 65, 66 ) , their potential value in biomarker validation still needs to be demonstrated.protein microarrays are excellently suited for diagnostic purposes (12, 67 ) . several diagnostic protein microarray products have been cleared by the us food and drug administration (fda) or ce-marked for use in the eu (9 ) . the diagnosis of autoimmune diseases is the focus of most of these protein microarrays, including the athena multi-lyte test system (zeus scientific; exclusively marketed by inverness medical professional diagnostics), the bio-plex™ 2200 system (bio-rad laboratories), the immuno solid-phase allergen chip (vbc genomics bioscience research), and the quanta plex™ anca profile (inova diagnostics,). the athena multi-lyte anca test system, which performs multiple assays simultaneously from a single sample in a single well, can perform qualitative or semiquantitative detection of igg-class antibodies to 2 separate antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (anca) antigens (myeloperoxidase and oroteinase 3). the intent is to aid the diagnosis of a number of autoimmune vasculitic disorders characterized by increased concentrations of ancas. the company's athena multi-lyte ana test system simultaneously performs antinuclear antibody screening and reflex testing for 9 specific autoantibodies (ssa, ssb, sm, rnp, scl-70, jo-1, dsdna, centromere b, and histone) in a single well.focus diagnostics developed 2 serologic tests (plexus™ herpeselect 1 and 2 igg test kit; plexus ebv multi-analyte diagnostics serology test kit) for the diagnosis of infectious diseases. the fda cleared these tests in 2007 and 2008, respectively. the plexus herpe-select 1 and 2 igg test kit is the first multiplex, typespecific herpes simplex virus serology test that uses luminex xmap technology. it detects antibodies to herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2 and assists clinicians in choosing appropriate treatment and counseling. the second test, the plexus ebv multi-analyte diagnostics serology test kit, is used for detecting the presence or absence of igg and igm antibodies in human blood serum. it is used for the diagnosis of epstein-barr virus infection and epstein-barr virus-associated infectious mononucleosis. the randox evidence biochip array system can perform miniaturized multiplexed immunoassays in a macroarray format containing 25 features, with chemiluminescence used as readout. this fully automated clinical biochip analyzer screens patient samples for a variety of markers specific to fertility, cardiac disease, tumors, cytokines, growth factors, cell adhesion molecules, thyroid function, or drug abuse. the company's drug abuse panel has received fda clearance; the other assays are currently being evaluated by the fda (68 ) .it can be envisaged that a growing number of biomarkers will be defined and applied to diagnostic tests in the future. this goal requires that appropriate quality controls be put in place and that the release of nonrequested test data and the handling of the diagnostic results be implemented and regulated (69, 70 ) . these biomarker patterns will provide more individualized information, which will then provide support to clinicians in the diagnosis and selection of optimal therapies.multiplex protein assays will become more widely accepted and implemented in different diagnostic areas. further advances in protein microarray technology will enable clinicians to use just 1 drop of blood to screen patients for relevant pathologic information in the doctor's office before a particular drug is prescribed. the fda's critical path initiative and the innovative medicines initiative, a partnership between the european community and the european federation of pharmaceutical industries and associations, are strategies for supporting the development of biomarker assays, both for traditional diagnostic purposes and to support the drug-development process (71, 72 ) .these publicly supported efforts have been set up to back the collaboration between companies, policy makers, research institutes, and hospitals. such activities have the potential to accelerate the development of protein microarrays for diagnostic purposes and will lead to personalized medicine becoming a reality. nevertheless, proof will be required that a medical need exists for diagnostic protein arrays, that they provide therapeutically relevant results, and that they generate an overall cost reduction before such arrays can finally fulfill the high expectations they have raised.according to the data in table (s1), the percentage of covid-19 patients with dm was larger than 12% in altogether 51.4% studies included in our review [2, 8, [29] [30] [31] [32] 34, 35, 37, 12, 13, 15, 16, 19, 21, 26, 27] . in 69.2% of the reports, at least 16% of dm patients had an outcome of severe disease, were treated in the icu, or developed acute respiratory distress syndrome -ards [9, 10, 13, 14, 18, 22, 30, 32] . the mortality of dm patients was 10% or higher in 68.8% of the studies [2, 9, [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] 25, 31, 32] . in 43.8% of the reports the overall mortality was greater than 15% [2, 8, 13, [15] [16] [17] [18] 25, 27, 29, 32, 34, 37] . this higher mortality rate is a result of data being provided by three specific studies considering only death cases [27, 29, 37] . in 5 reports the overall mortality was higher than the mortality of dm patients, but they have investigated only elderly [15, 35] , deceased [27, 29, 37] , fatal or recovered [17] , and critically ill patients [32] . in the largest group of 72.314 patients [7] , the overall mortality and the lethality of diabetic patients were nominally lower (in comparison with the most majority of the other studies in table (s1). in this extensive study, provided on a representative sample including a vast variety of subjects, the mortality of patients with dm is more than 3-fold higher in comparison to the overall mortality. for the propose of data acquisition, we have developed a python-based publication mining framework, which based on the python library entrez [38] . the main task of the framework is to mine pubmed [39] for currently available peer-rewired journal articles for a given search query. secondly, the mining algorithm downloads all the available pieces of information for the found entries. more precisely, for every entry, we gathered the author list, title, abstract, journal name, keywords, year of publication, and affiliation of authors. we are focused on 6 queries, which are listed in table (s1). in continuation, we will refer to the acquired and stored information for a given query as a database. final data acquisition has been performed on 17.4.2020. thus, our local datasets hold all the pieces of information for a given query, that are available on pubmed until the date 17.4.2020.during the mining process, data acquired from pubmed for a specific query is stored as a plain txt file and afterward converted into a csv file. during the txt to csv file transformation process, the individual entries of a database are checked for missing of faulty data. since this can occur in any of the data fields of an entry, we unified the corresponding value of such fields. the later allows us to quickly find and adequately treat such entries in the main processing step. additionally, from every database, we have used only entries, which were published from (including) the year 2000 till the day, when publication mining has been performed. our analysis is based on the titles and abstracts listed in a given database. table (s2) lists the queries which have been used and the corresponding size of the generated database. the size of the database refers to the number of articles that are embedded in it. besides, table ( s2) also provides information regarding the number of entries with a missing title or abstract. since our algorithm, which is presented in the continuation, is based on the presence of the abstract or title in the entries of a database, we use all of the downloaded entries.text processing and topic extraction generated unique word frequency was then analyzed and used to extract topic-specific word sequences. the topics listed in table ( s3) are differently expressed in different databases. this is a commonly observed feature in the field of topic modeling [41, 42] . thus, to assess the importance of a topic within a given database, we computed the fraction of entries in a database in which a particular topic emerges either in the abstract or in the title. we compute this metric as the ratio between the number of articles in which a given topic hold and the size of the corresponding database. the computed relative metric enables us to compare the usage of a topic among databases, which differ in their size. furthermore, the metric can be used to quantitatively asses how frequently a topic is used in research articles for a given database. lower values of the computed fraction thus indicate that the topic is either diluted or simply not being used commonly within a database. also, we can use the computed fraction to assess the importance of a topic throughout the databases. this is achieved by computing the mean values of the fraction of entries among the databases and the corresponding relative standard deviation (rstd). those two metrics give a deeper inside into how strong a topic is and how consistent it appears throughout the different databases. the results are shown in table (s4) . a knowledge graph is a graph-based abstraction of the knowledge embedded in the medium from which we extract it. although the term knowledge graph has been first introduced in 1972 it has been reused and applied just recently by google in 2012 and later also by other companies like airbnb, amazon, ebay, facebook, ibm, linkedin, and microsoft [43] . in addition, such a methodology also enables studying differences in the extracted graphs [44] . in our case, we investigate how the topics (see table s3) after the weight normalization process, the size of a given database becomes irrelevant and we can assess how important a given topic pair is within and among different databases. at this step, we have the required information to build the knowledge graph for individual databases. topics are presented as nodes, edges as the connections between the nodes, and weights as the thickness of the connections.knowledge graphs for individual datasets are shown in fig. (s2) . we additionally enrich the information of the graph by adjusting the size of the nodes in accordance with the number of connections that a node has. thus, we can also visually asses which nodes or topics are more interconnected within a given database. since the defined topics are differently expressed in different databases, the weights of the edges take different values. in addition, some topic pair combinations can't even be found within a given database.we acknowledge the fact, that the focus within a research field, can lead to a higher or lower value of the computed weights. however, since we have normalized weight values, we are now able to define more objectively the strength between a topic pair by considering all the computed adjacency matrices. to overcome database specifics that are manifested in the weight values and knowledge graph topologies, we merge the weighted adjacency matrices. during this step, we compare the edge weights between the nodes in all the computed adjacency matrices. for a given node pair, we have 6 different edge weights in a database-specific knowledge network. in the final merged knowledge network, only the edges, which have the highest weight value are accepted. more precisely, for a specific node pair, we analyze the corresponding edge weight in the different database-specific knowledge network and accept the edge with the highest values. the final knowledge graph thus highlights maximal topic-pair occurrence frequencies, when viewed from a different research perspective. the result of this process is shown in the main article in fig. (3) .coronavirus disease 2019 , caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome -coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2), has emerged as a rapidly spreading communicable disease affecting practically all countries across the globe. the overall death rate of covid-19 is rather low at ca. 1.4-2.3 % [1, 2] , depending on the normalisation and estimations of nonsymptomatic patients; however, several risk groups have been identified as being at higher risk of developing a more severe form of the disease and, subsequently, have higher mortality. in particular, cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, chronic respiratory diseases, metabolic syndrome (ms), and diabetes mellitus (dm) appear to play an important role in developing a more severe form of the disease with several complications [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] . the prevalence of particular diseases and their impact on the death rate remains to be elucidated, because the pre-existing diseases are not isolated adequately and may appear simultaneously. dm, for example, is very often related to cardiovascular disorders and hypertension [3] , accompanied by obesity [9] , and, in several cases, also with smoking [6] .clear evidence has been provided that dm is one of the leading risk factors for covid-19 [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] . a more comprehensive review of the growing body of references reporting more severe disease and higher mortality rate of patients with dm is provided in the supplement (see table s1 ). the international diabetes federation (idf), according to the who declaration, has also published a special note on the risk of individuals with dm [10] . it should be noted that, despite the covid-19 epidemic, at the same time, we are facing the epidemic of type 2 diabetes mellitus (t2dm). according to the who global report on diabetes [11] an estimated 422 million adults worldwide were living with dm in 2014, compared to 108 million in 1980. the idf estimates that, in 2019, ca. 463 million adults (20-79 years) were living with dm, and by 2045 this will rise to approx. 700 million [12] . thus, the global increase in dm should be considered as a public health crisis that needs to be considered simultaneously in providing prevention services and treatment tools for covid-19.besides the clinical evidence that dm is an important risk factor for covid-19, we are still lacking research analyses that would give us better understanding of the physiological processes involved in the interrelation between dm and covid-19. we analysed recent publications focused on covid-19 and dm, and make parallels with previous studies analysing the interrelations between dm and the severe acute respiratory syndrome -coronavirus (sars-cov) infection. this is promising because of similarities between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov. the genetic sequence of sars-cov-2 shares more than 80% of the identity of sars-cov [3] , and both viruses use the same receptor, the angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ace2), as the cellular entry point [3, [13] [14] [15] . we have applied data mining analysis of publications in pubmed to investigate the common physiological links between dm, sars-cov-2, and sars-cov. the results revealed three main pathophysiological pathways linking dm and covid-19 via ace2, liver dysfunction, and chronic inflammation. accordingly, the clinical biomarkers are proposed for predicting better an adverse outcome of covid-19, which might help clinicians for taking appropriate measures. we discuss the importance of these findings for patients with dm, and those with dysregulated biomarkers due to their metabolic disorders and prediabetic state, but not yet being diagnosed for dm.we have developed a python-based framework for publication mining and knowledge graph extraction. publication mining on pubmed was performed using the python library entrez [16] . we searched pubmed for selected queries which are related to covid-19 and dm. overall, we acquired 1,121,078 publications in the time span between 01-01-2000 and 17-4-2020. from those publications we extracted query-specific knowledge graphs. the latter are graph-based abstractions of a specific knowledge embedded in the medium from which we extracted them [17] . we have identified 14 topics, which are important either from the perspective of dm or covid-19. these topics are the nodes of the graphs, and by applying text mining techniques on the acquired publications, we can show which topics are related and how strong their interrelations are. lastly, we merged the separated knowledge graphs into one single knowledge graph, highlighting maximal topic-pair occurrence frequencies, when viewed from a different research perspective. a detailed description of the method, topics and queries is provided in the supplement.in the studies investigating cellular and molecular mechanisms that could be responsible for an increased risk of individuals with dm for covid-19, ace2 has appeared as one of the crucial ones [1, 7, 18] . initially, ace2 has been identified from human heart failure and lymphoma cdna libraries [19, 20] , and was later shown to serve as the receptor for the sars-cov [21] [22] [23] [24] . recently, it has been shown that ace2 is also the cellular entry point for the virus sars-cov-2 [3, 14] , and sars-cov-2 has an even higher affinity than sars-cov for ace2 [13] . the expression and distribution of the ace2 in the human body may indicate the potential routes of the infection and the organs most targeted by sars-cov-2. ace2 is expressed differently in tissue and organs. high ace2 expression was identified in the alveolar cells of the lung, oesophagus epithelial cells, absorptive enterocytes from the ileum and colon, cholangiocytes, myocardial cells, kidney proximal tubule cells, bladder urothelial cells, and epithelial cells of the oral mucosa [14] . the high ace2 expression in lungs and kidneys corresponds with the most common acute conditions: acute respiratory distress (ard) and acute renal failure (arf). in one of the largest studies analysing characteristics of 14,860 covid-19 patients dying in italy, ard was observed in most of the patients (96.5%), followed by arf (24.3%) [25] .the expression and distribution of ace2 changes with age, and is influenced by several diseases. in particular, in providing a healthy metabolism, ace2 should be fine regulated, like a label: not too little, not too much, just right [1] . in patients with dm, the expression of ace2 depends on the progression of the disease. in an early phase of dm, the ace2 is upregulated [26, 27] . this increased expression of ace2 is likely to be an adaptive response to counter the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) overactivity, and the ace2 could truly be seen as "good" ace [26] . several studies have shown that the ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas axis plays an important anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrogenic role (for review see ref. [28] ). in later phases of dm, the ace2 is downregulated [27] . one of the reasons that ace2 expression is reduced in patients with dm could be glycosylation [1] . the deficiency of ace2 in the progression of dm causes complications, e.g., diabetic nephropathy [1, 27, 29, 30] , and may also contribute to enhanced oxidative stress in the pancreas, and to decreased glucose tolerance and impaired insulin secretion [26, 31] . therefore, the upregulation of ace2 is promising to restore the positive effects of ace2. experimental evidence exists that an increase in ace2 expression can indeed improve pancreatic beta-cell function in db/db mice [32] . to this end, several drugs, in particular ace inhibitors (acei) and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs), have been developed with the end effect of increasing the ace2.in the context of metabolic syndrome and dm, the ace2 regulation appears as a "doubleedged sword" [1] . on the one hand, the ace2/ang-(1-7) system plays an important antiinflammatory and antioxidant role, protecting the lungs against acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), and ace2 has been shown to be protective against lethal avian influenza a h5n1 infection and others [33, 34] . on the other hand, however, the expression of ace2 is markedly increased in patients with dm (and hypertension), being treated with acei or arbs as an adaptive response to counteract the elevated levels of ang-ii and ang-i [1] . thus, the implementation of ace2-stimulating drugs could facilitate the entry of sars-cov-2 into pneumocytes and other ace2-rich tissues, and, consequently, it might result in more severe and fatal disease, as hypothesised by some researchers [1, 7, 35] . at present this is rather speculative, and the question remains open for further studies to clarify this issue.to investigate a broader context and get a deeper insight into the interrelation between dm and covid-19 via ace2, we applied data mining analysis of publications in pubmed. the analysis is focused on topics which have been found to play a key role in the development and outcome of covid-19 disease. the task of our data mining algorithm was to extract the main topics in the acquired publications by counting the pubmed entries with a particular topic and calculating the frequency of co-appearances of topic pairs in the database. a detailed description of the data mining procedure and the corresponding analysis are given in the supplement. regarding the topic ace2, we have analysed publications separately for the period before 2020, and separately for the year 2020. the results for the period before 2020 are shown in figs. 1a, b. the fraction of articles containing a particular topic in the ace2 database is presented in fig. 1a . in both figs. 1b and 1d, the triangle dm-ace2-covid-19 can be well recognised, highlighting the interrelation between dm and covid-19 via ace2 ("ace2 axis"). importantly, our analysis shows that only a weak direct link exists between dm and covid-19, which obscures the actual interrelation between the two diseases. therefore, data mining can contribute importantly to a deeper insight into the interrelation between the topics; they might not always be strongly connected with a direct link, but via other neighbouring topics that might not be otherwise recognised as trivial "inter-hops". our results show that, in the context of the interrelated topics in pubmed, the ace2 appears as an important link between the topic diabetes and the topic sars in both cases.as expected, because of the recent epidemic, the link between ace2 and sars is much stronger in 2020 (compare figs. 1b and 1d), and sars has replaced the leading topic hypertension before 2020. the topic hypertension remains among the most related topics with ace2 also in 2020, and plays a crucial role in influencing the triangle dm -ace2 -covid-19. this result agrees with the fact that hypertension is the leading comorbidity in covid-19 [25] . it is a blurred line between hypertension and dm because of the fact that ca.70% of patients with dm have hypertension [3] . so, hypertension, together with dm, can be seen as the leading risk factor for complications and fatal outcomes of covid-19 [3] [4] [5] 7 ].artificial intelligence (ai) analysis [36] revealed that a mildly elevated liver enzyme alanine aminotransferase (alt) is the most predictive clinical biomarker in newly infected patients with sars-cov-2 for later development of ards. the ai model that learned from historical data of patients from two hospitals in wenzhou, zhejiang, china, achieved 70% to 80% accuracy in predicting severe cases of covid-19 [36] . several other research groups have also found a relationship between covid-19 and liver injury, in particular, abnormal levels of alt and aspartate aminotransferase (ast) (for review see [5] ). the common observation is that abnormal liver aminotransferase levels are more prevalent in severe cases than in mild cases of covid-19. it appears that a major disease burden might be chronic liver diseases, including chronic viral hepatitis, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (nafld), and other metabolic disorders, including ms and dm [5, 37] .from the physiological point of view, it is of interest to understand why these chronic liver disorders, and, in particular, the elevated alt levels, are so tightly related to covid-19. it should be noted that liver disorders are in very close relation with ms, prediabetes, and dm, and there is a huge body of evidence supporting this close interrelationship. similar to the recent finding of ai [36] that alt is a promising predictor for the severity of covid-19, sattar et al. [38] have reported that alt was recognised as a reliable predictor of dm. in this clinical study by sattar et al. [38] the participants that have developed dm over 5 years of follow-up, the alt, but not ast, levels increased progressively with the increasing number of ms abnormalities, and those with alt in the top quartile had an elevated risk for dm versus those in the bottom quartile. several other studies have also found this high correlation between elevated alt concentrations and the dm, ms, and nafld [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] [44] . interestingly, elevations of alt must not be very high; already mild, but chronic elevations of transaminases often reflect underlying insulin resistance and dm [45] .taken together, if a chronic liver disease, mostly characterised by elevated alt, is one of the major concerns for dm, and the same is true for covid-19, then covid-19 and dm have a "common enemy". to understand the physiological role of this "common enemy", we have applied data mining analysis of publications in pubmed on a broader query list: dm, covid-19, ace2, inflammation, alt, and liver & liver disease (for details see the supplement). the results are shown in fig. 2 . the network presentation shows the main nodes and their connections. the link between sars and alt, via the topic liver & liver disease, is the most evident one, and, hence, fully in agreement with the predictions of the ai investigations by jiang et al. [36] . it should be noted, however, that our analysis carries different information than that of jiang et al. [36] , but the results are complementary, pointing out the important role of alt in covid-19. according to our analysis, this link between alt and covid-19 is not a direct link, and, therefore, intuitively not recognised so easily. the nodes alt and sars are connected through the hub liver & liver disease that is also connected with dm, and provides the connection between dm-alt-sars (see fig. 2 ). we call this connection "liver axis", linking dm and covid-19 via alt, representing a reliable biomarker for liver dysfunctions involved in dm and covid-19. the results presented in fig. 2 demonstrate a comprehensive view of the relationships between the diseases, their pathophysiological pathways, and the corresponding biomarkers. the basic two diseases considered here are covid-19 and dm. we start with the corresponding nodes in the network, i.e. sars and diabetes, and highlight them by colouring the corresponding nodes red. the link between sars and diabetes is rather weak, which means that the two diseases are not very often related in the literature. however, there exist three very important indirect links between sars and diabetes, provided via the three most connected first neighbours of both sars and diabetes, i.e. ace2, liver & liver disease, and inflammation (marked blue in fig. 2 ). among these first most connected common neighbours, we can find the just introduced "liver axis" and the previously discussed "ace2 axis". both axes have their clinical biomarkers, and to reveal them, we look at the next most connected neighbours, marked green in the network (fig. 2 ). in the "liver axis", the most connected node among the next neighbours of liver & liver disease is alt, indicating that alt is an important clinical biomarker for covid-19, which also corresponds with the previously discussed predictions of the ai investigations by jiang et al. [36] . in the "ace2 axes", the next most connected neighbour of ace2 is the node hypertension, and hypertension is indeed the most important clinical biomarker indicating the highest risk for covid-19, as discussed in the previous section [25] .in addition to the "liver axis", discussed in this section, and the "ace2 axis", discussed in the previous section, our analysis also points to the third very important link between dm and covid-19, i.e. inflammation. notably, this is not an acute inflammatory state being coevolved with covid-19, but it corresponds to a pre-existing, chronic low-grade inflammation. the revealed 3 rd axis interconnecting dm and covid-19, i.e. "inflammatory axis", deserves a separate presentation and is discussed in the next section.inflammation represents an important link between dm and covid-19. fig. 2 reveals that inflammation is one of the most connected first common neighbours of both sars and diabetes (marked in blue in fig. 2 ). looking at the next most connected neighbours of the inflammation node (marked in green in fig. 2) , we can recognise three important biomarkers, i.e., fibrosis, interleukin-6 (il-6), and lymphocytes. the serum biomarkers il-6 and the count of lymphocyte are determined routinely, and in patients with covid-19 these biomarkers were shown to be considerably dysregulated [4, 18] . for example, in a group of non-survivors the serum values of il-6 were much higher, 2-5-times, in comparison with the values measured in survivors, and the lymphocyte count was considerably lower, 2-5-times, in the group of non-survivors [4] .to understand the physiological and clinical background of this "inflammatory axis", linking dm and covid-19 better, we provide a short review of publications. a large body of references exists linking dm with chronic inflammation (for a recent review see [46] ); and, on the other hand, several reports for covid-19 show a clear correlation between the severity of the disease and the level of dysregulated biomarkers for systemic inflammation [4, 18, 47] . since the outbreak of covid-19, there has simply not been enough time for extensive research that could explain comprehensively all the physiological mechanisms linking covid-19 with chronic inflammation. however, indirect evidence exists that might help in understanding the link between dm and covid-19 via chronic inflammation. the fact is that both t2dm and the severity of covid-19 are more prevalent in the elderly population. the interrelation between ageing and inflammatory processes has been well established, and we know that inflammation is an important concomitant cause of many major age-associated pathologies, such as cancer, neurodegeneration, and dm [48, 49] . during the process of ageing the immune system becomes compromised, and is associated with an increasing inflammation [50] . in particular, chronic inflammation, the so-called inflammaging, and metabolic function are affected strongly by the ageing processes [49, 51, 52] .although, chronic inflammation is a coevolving process with ageing, and in elderly groups associated with several pathologies, it is not trivial to understand why and to what extent the inflammatory processes are involved in other diseases, and how they influence comorbidity. in particular, the comorbidity is difficult to assess when attributed to the disease connections on the molecular level, such as dysregulated genes, protein-protein interactions, and metabolic pathways as potential causes of comorbidity [49] . from the perspective of genetics, for example, a pair of diseases can be connected if they are both associated with the same genes being dysregulated [49, 53, 54] . we are still lacking data for sars-cov-2; however, for the previous sars-cov infection, it has been shown that the nfkbia gene plays the most important role for comorbidities of this disease [49] . remarkably, in agerelated inflammatory processes leading to chronic inflammatory diseases (cids), the first genes being dysregulated are nfkbia and akt1 [49] . thus, the link between cids and sars-cov infection can be established at the very early stages of the development of cids. the number of shared dysregulated genes between sars-cov infection and cid should be analysed to assess the comorbidity risk of a given cid in a more progressive stage. importantly, it has been found that t2dm shares the highest number of dysregulated genes with sars-cov infection [49] . this gives a solid base for the comorbidity of t2dm for sars-cov infection via inflammation that can, at least from the genetical and epigenetical point of view, be explained by the same gene dysregulations, starting with dysregulations of nfkbia and akt1.these results from genetic studies agree with findings indicating that pi3k-akt activation is induced by insulin [55] , and any defect in the pi3k-akt signalling pathway is associated with insulin resistance and dm [56] . moreover, it has been found that, not only dm, but also obesity, is related to imbalances in the pi3k-akt signalling pathway [57] . this causes additional concern, as, in several countries, obesity is reaching the characteristics of an epidemic that spread out quickly and even more aggressively than dm. therefore, we should be concerned about a broad range of metabolic disorders that lead to chronic inflammatory states, and, in most cases, do not evoke enough attention because of their "silent", i.e. lowgrade, appearance. in the present covid-19 epidemic all these chronic inflammatory states, closely related to metabolic disorders, even though not (yet) treated as dm or any other cids, deserve special attention, and should be considered seriously as an important risk factor for the severity and mortality of patients infected with sars-cov-2.this study has some limitations: the number of published articles that have been analysed for this year is relatively small, and some interrelations could strengthen in the future. in addition, it would be beneficial to add other data repositories in the analysis, including protein-protein interaction networks, in combination with drug information resources for approved drugs. by knowing the therapeutic targets, drug metabolism, and other molecular interaction network information, the knowledge graph could be enriched and expanded to highlight even more complex relationships.the motivation for this study comes from the clinical evidence indicating dm as an important risk factor for covid-19. a large body of clinical reports confirms an adverse development and higher mortality of patients with dm (see supplement, table s1 ). our analyses, based on data mining of publications in pubmed, reveal that dm and covid-19 are interrelated via three main axes: the "ace2 axis", "liver axis", and "inflammatory axis". all these axes are further interrelated, in particular, the "liver axis" and the "inflammatory axis", with common biomarkers, and form a complex network (fig. 2) . we have extracted the most important clinical biomarkers linking dm and covid-19: the hypertension, elevated values of alt and il-6, and a decreased count of lymphocytes, which is in good agreement with the results of other studies reporting the indicators for higher risk of covid-19 [4, 18, 25] .we found it rather surprising that dm and covid-19, and even more generally dm and infections with sars-cov and sars-cov-2, do not coappear more frequently in publications. the data mining analysis showed that the link between these two topics, diabetes and sars, is rather weak (fig. 2) . the whole research todate was obviously concentrated on the "nearest neighbours" of dm and sars separately. our analysis revealed the "common nearest neighbours" of both dm and sars, and shows how data mining and network analysis can contribute to better and deeper insight into the interrelation between the diseases. moreover, we were able to identify the "outer neighbours", in our case the important biomarkers, and when these biomarkers correspond with the clinical data, indicating that they are indeed closely related with the diseases, as in our case, the blood pressure, alt, il-6, lymphocytes count, for example, these sophisticated numerical approaches are justified.the proposed biomarkers can be applied directly in clinical practice. it is recommended that the medical history of newly infected patients with sars-cov-2 should be checked for evidence of pre-existing, long-term, chronic dysregulations of these biomarkers. in general, patients with dm and elderly people are at higher risk. however, not all of them have these dysregulations, whereas, on the other hand, in a world full of stress, less time for preparing good food, and less physical activity, younger populations and people not even being diagnosed for dm, can have considerable dysregulations of these biomarkers, putting them at higher risk for covid-19. therefore, these findings may help in preventing masses of people being unaware of their metabolic disorders and prediabetic state. it is true that, at present, the main concern is covid-19, as the most rapidly spreading epidemic with a readily recognised severe outcome, and with a concern of crashing complete national health systems, also in developed countries. however, we should not forget that some of the most persistent, silently spreading epidemics with a huge and permanently increasing annual rate of morbidity remain obesity, metabolic syndrome, and dm. it is hard to imagine, but for sure we would be less concerned about the covid-19-epidemic if we did not live in the middle of a dm-epidemic.marko marhl conceived the idea of the study and wrote the main part of the paper. vladimir grubelnik designed the figures and participated in the writing of the section results. marša magdič has reviewed references concerning the relationship between dm and covid-19, and edited table s1 with all the references. rene markovič provided the data mining analysis and wrote the supplement. the manuscript was proofread and edited by all authors.this work was supported by the slovenian research agency (research core funding, no. p1-0055).the coronavirus disease 2019 , caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2), has affected over 2,402,250 people worldwide and caused 163,097 deaths as of april 21, 2020. 1 lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome are the most common presentation of covid-19, but cardiac injury is another grim consequence of this multisystem viral disease. evidence of an association between other systemic viral infections such as in uenza 2 and sars 3 and cardiovascular adverse events dates back to the 1930s. 4 early observational studies in china and reports from the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) suggest that patients with pre-existing heart conditions are more likely to develop severe illness from covid-19. 5 a recent study 6 suggests that patients in the icu are three-fold more likely to have pre-existing cardiovascular conditions than non-icu patients.conversely, newer evidence implies new onset myocardial injury caused by 8 possible mechanisms of myocardial injury caused by covid-19, termed acute covid-19 cardiovascular syndrome (acovcs), include heightened myocardial demand in response to the stress of infection, in ammatory cytokines creating a thrombogenic environment as the result of platelet activation and endothelial dysfunction, and direct myocardial damage. 9 , 10 however, current evidence linking myocardial injury as measured by cardiac biomarkers to the severity of disease is con icting, with a few studies 11, 12 13 suggesting an association but several others showing a lack of association. 14 15 given the discrepancy among these reports, it is prudent to investigate the association of cardiac biomarkers with the severity of disease experienced by and the survival or death of covid-19 patients. here we present a meta-analysis of 12 observational studies from china to shed further light on this topic.our meta-analysis was carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the meta-analysis of observational studies in the epidemiology group (moose). 16 we searched medline/pubmed (1966-2020) using the following keywords: ("covid-19" or "covid-19"or "sars-cov-2" or "coronavirus" and "19") and ("clinical study" or "comparative study" or "evaluation studies" or "meta-analysis" or "multicenter study" or "observational study" or "twin study" or "technical report" or "cohort studies" or "cohort" or "case-control" or "cross-sectional" or "observational" or "comparative" or "evaluation"). we also used the 'related article' feature on pubmed, along with a manual search of references, to identify additional studies. we reviewed the full text of all relevant articles. english translations, if necessary, were obtained. titles and abstracts were independently reviewed by three reviewers (as, dd, and mm) and cross-veri ed for inclusion. details of the search strategy are reported in figure 1 .for the analysis of cardiac biomarker levels in patients with covid-19: studies (retrospective and prospective) comparing mean or median troponin and/or bnp in covid-19 patients who were critically ill versus not critically ill, and those who died versus those who survived, were included. adult respiratory distress syndrome was considered a surrogate for critical illness and studies that compared ndings in covid-19 patients who developed ards to patients without ards were included. as these were inhospital outcomes, no speci c follow up period was set as an inclusion criteria.for the analysis of risk of mortality in covid-19 patients based on cardiac injury: studies reporting the risk of mortality with covid-19 based on the presence of cardiac injury by event rates or univariate or multivariate logistic regression analysis were included. cardiac injury, for the purpose of this metaanalysis, was de ned as an increase in troponin i, troponin t, or ck mb. for both groups of studies, the timing of the blood draw during the hospitalization was not a pre-speci ed inclusion criteria.studies were excluded if they (i) only gave descriptive statistics of the biomarkers in one group of patients with covid-19, (ii) were published only in abstract form, (iii) were non-english studies with no english translation, and/or (iv) were studies that reported measures of central tendency in groups other than those under consideration, i.e., died versus survived and critically ill versus not critically ill.for each study included, all data elements reported uniformly across most studies were extracted by two reviewers (as and mm), cross-veri ed by a third (dd), and included in table 1 . the quality of each study and the risk of bias were evaluated using the newcastle-ottawa quality assessment scale for nonrandomized studies. 17 the following characteristics were assessed for sources of bias: (1) patient selection including de nitions of exposure and representation of the larger population; (2) comparability of study groups and controlling for confounding factors by design or analysis; and (3) assessment and documentation of outcome including duration and loss of follow-up. studies were graded as 'poor' if they met four or fewer of the nine criteria, 'fair' if they met ve to six criteria, and 'good' if they met more than six criteria. for uniformity, all studies, regardless of study design, underwent quality bias assessment using the retrospective cohort scoring tool.for the analysis of measures of central tendency of cardiac biomarkers in covid-19 patients who died or were critically ill, median biomarker values were extracted for patients who died or were critically ill and patients who survived and/or were not critically ill, and the weighted mean differences (wmd) and 95% con dence interval (ci) between these two groups were calculated for each study. for the analysis of the risk of mortality with covid-19 infection based on cardiac injury, event rates or univariate and multivariate odds ratios (or) for mortality were extracted. for studies reporting hazard ratio (hr) only, hr was adopted as the best estimate of or. or were transformed logarithmically, then standard error was calculated from log or and the corresponding 95% con dence interval (ci). the inverse variance method was used to achieve a weighted estimate of the combined overall effect. for all the analyses, we assessed the results for heterogeneity in our analysis by examining the forest plots and then calculating a q statistic, which we then compared with the i 2 index. we considered the presence of signi cant heterogeneity at the 5% level of signi cance (for the q test) and values of i 2 exceeding 56% as an indicator of signi cant heterogeneity. 18, 19 we adopted the random effect model to pool wmd or effect sizes. all analyses were performed using comprehensive meta-analysis version 3 (biostat inc., englewood, nj, usa).for meta-regression, we adopted a weighted regression random effect model and carried out a multivariate regression of pre-determined factors using comprehensive meta-analysis version 3. these variables were selected based on traditional factors shown to affect cardiovascular health and on data availability for the majority of the studies included. a two-sided p-value <0.05 was regarded as signi cant for all analyses. data were represented as forest plots, and potential publication bias was assessed with the egger test and represented graphically with begg funnel plots of the natural log of the or versus its standard error.twelve studies with 2,197 patients were included in the study. through the initial database search, 718 studies were investigated for compliance with the inclusion criteria, of which 37 studies were ultimately chosen for consideration. twenty-ve studies were excluded from the meta-analysis for the following reasons: 1) 4 studies were descriptive and only reported biomarkers in all patients and did not compare critical/died versus not critical/alive patients. these studies did not de ne cardiac injury and did not assess or for mortality with cardiac injury; 2) 19 studies did not report the biomarkers being studied; and3) 2 studies reported biomarkers based on increased or normal d-dimers. eleven studies were retrospective, and nine were single center (table 1 ). of the studies that reported time to blood sample collection, the average time reported was at the time of admission to 48 hours after admission. of the studies that reported time to death or discharge, most of the studies reported it as the time from symptom onset to death or discharge. the average time for symptom onset to discharge was 27 days, and from symptom onset to death was 19 days. two studies did not report median/mean cardiac biomarkers by predetermined patient groups, 20, 21 but reported an or for mortality based on cardiac injury. five studies reported biomarkers based on whether the patients survived or died, 20, [22] [23] [24] [25] ve studies reported them based on whether the patient was critically ill or not. [11] [12] [13] [14] 26 of the latter studies, 4 categorized patients as sick based on the need for icu admission, and 1 study based it on evidence of ards. 21 baseline demographics and comorbidities of patients included in the studies are shown in table 2 .troponin:nine studies with a total of 1,355 patients were included for this analysis. five of the studies compared critically ill versus not critically ill patients, and the other 4 studies compared levels in dead versus alive patients. results showed that patients who died or were critically ill had signi cantly higher troponin levels compared to patients who were alive or were not critically ill (wmd-0.58, 95% ci 0.42-0.71, p<0.001). sub-group analysis of the studies evaluating patients who died compared to patients who were alive showed that there was a signi cantly higher troponin level in those who died (wmd-0.60, 95% ci 0.45-0.75, p<0.001). on the other hand, meta-analysis of studies comparing troponin levels in patients who were critically ill to those in patients who were not critically ill showed no difference in troponin levels (wmd-0.28, 95% ci -0.14-0.69, p=0.19, figure 2 ). the difference between these 2 groups of studies, i.e., studies that compared dead and alive and those that compared critically ill and not critically ill patients, was not signi cantly different (p-0.14).the test for heterogeneity for the analysis of the 9 studies was an i 2 of 58.5; therefore, a multivariate meta-regression analysis was performed with age, male gender, diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease. this analysis showed that hypertension (p=0.016, supplemental figure 2 ) and cardiovascular disease (p=0.001), (supplemental figure 3) , contributed to the differences among studies in the reported troponin levels between the compared groups (r=1). speci cally, with increasing incidence of hypertension, there was a higher wmd in the troponin levels in patients who were dead or critically ill compared to levels in patients who were alive or not critically ill. the incidence of cardiovascular disease in the studies, on the other hand, was inversely related to the wmd of troponin between the groups.risk of death based on biomarker proven cardiac injury: we included 4 studies that reported a hazard ratio for death or event rates based on cardiac injury. of these studies, 1 study used ck-mb without providing a de nition. 26 one study 16 used troponin t and de ned cardiac injury as troponin t levels above the 99 th percentile upper reference limit. troponin i levels were used in two studies, and both studies de ned cardiac injury as troponin i levels above the 99 th percentile upper reference limit. 21, 24 for the purpose of the meta-analysis, we extracted adjusted effect sizes, when available. in studies that did not report adjusted effect sizes, unadjusted or was extracted. one study reported number of deaths and total sample size in each group, which was used in the analysis. our analysis showed that cardiac injury was independently associated with signi cantly increased odds of mortality (or-6.641, 95% ci 1.26-35.1, p=0.03).there were 5 studies with 835 patients that reported nt-probnp. three studies compared critically ill versus not critically ill patients, and the other 2 studies compared results from dead and alive patients. analysis of these 5 studies did not show a signi cant difference in bnp levels in patients who died or were critically ill compared to levels in those who were alive or were not critically ill (wmd-0.35, 95% ci -0.15-0.86, p=0.17). similarly, sub-group analysis showed that there was no signi cant difference in patients who died compared to patients who were alive (wmd-0.37, 95% ci -1.01-1.74, p=0.60) and patients who were critically ill and those who were not (wmd 0.35, 95% ci -0.20-0.89, p=0.21). (supplemental figure 1) creatinine kinase (ck):seven studies with a total of 1,018 patients were included in this analysis. four of the studies compared critically ill versus not critically ill patients, and the other 3 studies compared ck levels in dead patients versus alive patients. there was no signi cant difference in the ck levels in patients who died or were critically ill and those in patients who were alive or were not critically ill (wmd 0.20, 95% ci -0.03-0.44, p=0.88). sub-group analysis showed that there was a signi cantly higher ck level in patients who died (wmd-0.47, 95% ci 0.09-0.84, p=0.014) compared to patients who survived, whereas the patients who were critically ill did not have signi cantly higher ck levels compared to the patients who were not critically ill (wmd-0.04, 95% ci -0.26-0.33, p=0.82). (figure 3 ) the difference between these 2 groups of studies (studies comparing dead versus alive and those that compared critically ill versus not critically ill patients) was not signi cantly different.six studies with a total of 957 patients evaluated d-dimer levels in covid-19 patients. four studies compared critically ill versus not critically ill patients, and the other two compared levels from dead patients versus alive patients. analysis of these six studies showed that patients who died or were critically ill had signi cantly hifgher d-dimer levels compared to patients who were alive or were not critically ill (wmd or 0.54, 95% ci 0.4-0.68, p<0.001). sub-group analysis of studies evaluating patients who died compared to patients who were alive showed that there was a signi cantly higher d-dimer level in those who died (wmd-0.51, 95% ci 0.30-0.71, p<0.001). similarly, critically ill patients had a signi cantly higher d-dimer level compared to the patients who were not critically ill (wmd-0.57, 95% ci 0.38-0.76, p<0.001). (supplemental figure 4) ldh:eight studies with a total of 1,219 patients evaluated ldh levels in covid-19 patients. five of the studies compared critically ill versus not critically ill patients, and the other three compared levels from dead patients versus alive patients. analysis of these eight studies showed that patients who died or were critically ill had signi cantly higher ldh levels compared to patients who were alive or were not critically ill (wmd-0.55, 95% ci 0.38-0.73, p<0.001). sub-group analysis showed that there was a trend towards a higher ldh level in those who died (wmd-0.98, 95% ci -0.08-2.04, p=0.07) compared to those who were alive, and that critically ill patients had signi cantly higher ldh levels compared to patients who were not critically ill (wmd-0.54, 95% ci 0.36-0.72, p<0.001). the difference between these two groups of studies, dead versus alive and studies that compared critically ill versus not critically ill patients, was not signi cantly different. (supplemental figure 5) to our knowledge, this is the rst comprehensive meta-analysis focusing on the prognostic value of cardiac biomarkers in patients affected by the sars-cov-2 disease. our study demonstrates that there exists a statistically signi cant association between disease severity and cardiac injury. our analysis showed that troponin levels were higher among patients who died or were critically ill compared to those in patients who survived or were not critically ill. when analyzed by sub-groups, we found that troponin and ck were signi cantly elevated in patients with a fatal outcome compared to those who did not die, but was not signi cantly different in patients who were critically ill and those who were not. interestingly, our analysis found that bnp levels were not signi cantly different in critically ill patients and/or patients who died, compared to not critically ill patients and/or patients who survived.while pre-existing cardiac co-morbidities increase the risk of acute covid-19 cardiovascular syndrome (acovcs), 27,28 recent evidence shows that sars-cov-2 can cause acute myocarditis-like illness in an otherwise healthy patient. 29 the mechanism of cardiac injury caused by sars-cov-2 is not yet understood, but possible mechanisms include cytokine storm as the result of dysfunctional and uncontrolled immunological response, evidenced by increased levels of d-dimer, il-6, crp and ldh, 14, 30 and primary cardiac injury caused by sars-cov-2. the rst case of acute cardiac injury directly linked to myocardial localization of sars-cov-2, demonstrated by endomyocardial biopsy, was reported by tavazzi et al. 31 the viral envelope of sars-cov-2 is studded with glycoproteins called spike proteins composed of two subunits. subunit s1 has a nity for ace2 receptors on the cell surface and subunit s2 fuses with the cell membrane; acting together, these two proteins aid in the endocytosis of the viral particle. 32, 33 cardiac tissue has a signi cantly higher expression of ace2 receptors and is therefore prone to direct cardiac injury in patients with covid-19. 34, 35 a recent study done by liu et al. showed that increased levels of angiotensin-2 (at-2) in the plasma of patients infected with covid-19 showed a linear association with the severity of the disease. 36 sars-cov-2 reduces the expression of ace2 due to internalization as shown in a study by oudit et al., which demonstrated a marked decrease in ace2 expression in the myocardium of mice infected with sars-cov-2. 37 ace2 is responsible for the degradation of at-2 into ang 1-7, which is cardioprotective and has anti-in ammatory and anti-brotic properties. 38 the loss of ace2 shifts the balance towards an accumulation of at-2, which has in ammatory and pro-thrombotic properties. at-2 promotes vasoconstriction and increases the levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, which plays an active role in thrombogenesis and myocardial infarction. 38 this shift in raas axis towards at-2 could possibly explain high d-dimer levels, a biomarker that showed clearly increased levels in both critically ill patients and patients who died compared to levels in not critically ill and alive patients in our meta-analysis.surprisingly, among the cardiac biomarkers (troponin, ck, and bnp) analyzed in this meta-analysis, while none of them had levels signi cantly higher in critically ill patients compared to levels in patients who were not critically ill, the levels of ck and troponin were signi cantly higher in patients who died compared to the levels in those who survived. surprisingly, based on our meta-analysis, bnp levels did not differ in the critically ill or in those who were not critically ill, or in the patients who died and those who lived. in addition to ventricular stretch, bnp is a known marker for many other conditions, including lung disease, pulmonary hypertension, kidney dysfunction, and excessive cortisol levels. covid-19infection causes an assortment of these conditions in the different groups of patients, effectively neutralizing the differences between the groups. troponin was the only cardiac biomarker that was higher in the combined analysis of critically ill and/or dead covid-19 patients compared to not critically ill and/or alive patients. these results suggest that while there could be minimal changes in troponin in critically ill patients due possibly to non-cardiac reasons, signi cant elevation in covid-19 patients may be an indication of direct myocardial injury, which in turn increases the risk of death, thereby making it a crucial tool in predicting death. unfortunately, not many studies reported the mb isofraction of ck. in addition, the in ammatory biomarkers (il-6 and crp; see supplementary figures 6 and 7) and d-dimer levels from the same studies were signi cantly increased in the critically ill patients and the patients who died compared to levels in the control population, suggesting that it might be di cult to use these biomarkers to differentiate patients who are just critically ill from those at risk of dying. however, the difference in il-6 (p-0.04) and crp (p-0.04) levels between patients who died compared to levels in patients who survived was signi cantly higher than in patients who were critically ill and those who were not. finally, ldh was signi cantly higher in critically ill patients compared to those who were not, but not in patients who died compared to those who survived. (see figure 4) limitations our study has several limitations. first, the critical and not critical groups included in our analysis are heterogenous, i.e, we de ned critical as patients who required icu admission as well as those who developed severe lung injury and ards. similarly, the criteria for icu admissions may differ from one hospital to another. second, most studies were conducted in and published from china and therefore the generalizability of this information to other parts of the world and ethnicities is limited. the absence of details regarding the timing of measurement of biomarkers during the hospital stay limits the use of the results as an aid to the 'predictability' of death or critical illness. last, the studies included in the metaanalysis evaluating the risk of mortality with cardiac injury varied in their de nitions of cardiac injury. biomarkers in covid-19 patients. a signi cant difference seen in biomarkers in covid-19 patients who were critically ill b signi cant difference seen in biomarkers in covid-19 patients who died * signi cant difference seen in biomarkers in covid-19 patients who died and/or were critically ill superscripts: total number of articles in each group biomarkers studied: troponin, bnp, ck, crp, ldh, d-dimer, il-6. bnp is not included in the diagram as it did not show a signi cant difference in the critically ill, the dead, nor the combined total of covid-19 patientsthis is a list of supplementary les associated with this preprint. click to download.tables.pdfsince december 2019, a novel member of human coronavirus which newly identified in wuhan, china, is officially named as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) by international committee on taxonomy bilian yu and xin li make equal effort to this paper.the online version of this article (https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1123 9-020-02171 -y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.of viruses, ictv [1] [2] [3] . sars-cov-2, which belongs to the beta-coronavirus 2b lineage in the phylogenetic tree, is a new strain of rna viruses that has not been previously identified in humans [4] . recently, the disease caused by sars-cov-2 was named as covid-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) by world health organization (who). the numbers of infected patients worldwide increase rapidly and has exceeded 100,000.in previous reports [1] [2] [3] , the clinical characteristics of covid-19 patients have been investigated. specifically, covid-19 is usually characterized by lower respiratory tract symptoms with fever, dry cough, and dyspnea, a manifestation similar to those of two other diseases caused by coronaviruses, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome, mers [5, 6] . the reported overall case-fatality rate (cfr) for covid-19 by now was 2.3%, but cases in those aged 70 to 79 years had an 8.0% cfr and cases in those aged 80 years and older had a 14.8% cfr [7] . in some patients, severe pulmonary and extra-pulmonary complications may lead to respiratory failure and life-threatening events. it has been reported that about 50% of the patients had increased d-dimer levels, and abnormal d-dimer levels are associated with poor prognosis [8, 9] . thus, in some stable patients with sudden death, acute organ and embolism and infarction should take into consideration. although the incidence of thrombosis in patients with covid-19 has not been determined, the incidence of deep vein thrombosis (dvt) and pulmonary embolism (pe) was 20.5% and 11.4% respectively in sars cases [10] . in addition, thromboembolisms formation was seen in pathologic studies based on autopsies or biopsies, which greatly resemble those seen in sars and mers coronavirus infection [11, 12] .however, conventional anticoagulation may need to be considered carefully, as there is an increased risk of bleeding in patients with covid-19 [13] . therefore, in our experience, biomarkers, which can identify thrombus formation at earlier stages, might be used to evaluate the formation of thrombus and response to treatment. d-dimers are fibrin degradation products which have been shown to be useful in a clinical decision rule for ruling out pulmonary embolism [14] , highlighting its role as a potentially helpful biomarker. however, the relationship between d-dimer and covid-19 and the level changes during disease development were not fully reported. in this study, we compared the d-dimer levels of covid-19 patients with that of bacterial pneumonia, assessed the use of consecutive d-dimer levels after admission to hospital, and explored its association with markers of inflammation.this was a retrospective study done at two centres in china. the study was conducted in accordance with the principles of the declaration of helsinki and approved by the medical ethics committee of the second xiangya hospital of central south university. the requirement for informed patient consent was waived by the ethics committee for this retrospective study that evaluated deidentified data involving no potential risk to patients and no link between the patients and the researchers. patients with confirmed covid-19 pneumonia who were admitted to tongji hospital of tongji medical college, and patients with confirmed community-acquired bacterial pneumonia in the second xiangya hospital of central south university, were retrospectively enrolled. tongji hospital is one of the designated hospitals for the hospitalization of patients with covid-19 and one of its hospital wards has been entrusted by the second xiangya hospital of central south university since february 2020.76 patients with confirmed covid-19 pneumonia enrolled in our department were screened. 57 severe cases were included in our study (admission date from february 9 to february 15, 2020). patients with secondary infection including bacteria and fungus, or patients lack of results of pre-treatment laboratory examination were excluded. the diagnosis of covid-19 was determined with at least two positive results of real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) assay for sars-cov-2. patients absent of or with negative sars-cov-2 test results were also excluded from this study. the covid-19 pneumonia has been classified to four types clinically by guidelines for diagnosis and treatment of covid-19 infection by the national health commission [15] . the classification of the four clinical types is as follow: (1) mild: symptoms very mild, no pneumonia manifestation in ct; (2) ordinary: fever, respiratory tract symptoms, and pneumonia manifestation in ct scan; (3) severe: respiratory distress (respiratory rate > 30/min), oxygen saturation ≤ 93% at rest, and pao 2 /fio 2 ≤ 300 mmhg; (4) critical: respiratory failure need mechanic ventilation, shock, and combined multi-organs failure. all patients were clinically classified as severe at the time of admission. 46 patients with laboratory-identified bacterial pneumonia by pathogenic detection were collected between august 1, 2019, and march 1, 2020. the padua prediction score is a risk assessment model used to identify medical patients at high risk for venous thromboembolism (vte). demographic information, clinical characteristics including medical history, exposure history, comorbidities, signs, and symptoms, chest computed tomographic (ct) scan or x-ray results, and laboratory findings of each patient were obtained from the electronic medical record system of these two centres and analyzed by three independent researchers.all medical laboratory data including the numbers of leukocytes, lymphocytes, and eosinophils; percentages of lymphocyte and eosinophils; concentrations of d-dimer, highsensitivity c-reactive protein (hscrp), procalcitonin (pct), and serum creatine kinase were generated by the clinical laboratory of tongji hospital and the second xiangya hospital. the samples for laboratory tests were collected on admission and during the hospital stay. peripheral venous blood was collected for routine blood test using automatic hematology analyzer. the biochemical parameters such as liver and renal function were measured by roche automated clinical chemistry analyzer (roche diagnostics, mannheim, germany). serum pct was measured by the luminescence immunoassay, and hscrp was measured with a latex particle-enhanced immunoturbidimetric assay (roche diagnostics). it is worth mentioning that coagulation tests were detected using a sta-r max coagulation analyzer and original reagents (diagnostica stago, saint-denis, france) in both hospitals. the laboratory data for some patients were missing due to the absence of types of tests or delayed results.continuous measurements were expressed as mean ± sd if they are normally distributed or median (iqr) if they are not, and their differences were compared by the student's t-test or mann-whitney u-test or kruskal-wallis test or wilcoxon signed rank test. besides, categorical variables were expressed as count (%) and compared by χ 2 test or fisher's exact test. the relationship among biomarkers were assessed using spearman's correlations analysis. we used spss (version 25.0) and graph pad prism (version 7.0) for all analyses. two-tailed p values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.the study population included 57 hospitalized patients with covid-19 and 46 hospitalized patients with community acquired pneumonia (cap). for covid-19 patients, the median age was 65 years (iqr 54-72), and 44% were men. for cap patients, the median age was 64 years (iqr 60-70), and 59% were men ( table 1) .on admission, no matter in covid-19 patients or cap patients, most patients had fever, cough, shortness of breath, myalgia, chest distress, diarrhea, inappetence and fatigue. besides, there were numerous differences in laboratory findings (table 2) . compared with covid-19 patients, cap patients were more likely to have higher white blood cell (wbc) and neutrophil counts (n), as well as higher procalcitonin (pct), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr) and fibrinogen (fib), conversely, lower activated partial thromboplastin time (aptt), and there were no significant differences in other biomarkers levels between two groups.to investigate whether d-dimer levels is associated with levels of inflammatory factors, we performed spearman's table 4 ). at the same time, we also analyzed the correlations between these indicators after treatments in covid-19 patients, and found that there were still great correlations between d-dimer and the same biomarkers as above, their correlation coefficients r > 0.3 (p < 0.05). however, due to the absence of following-up data, we couldn't analyze these relationships between post-treatment biomarkers levels in cap patients.more importantly, we found that in covid-19 patients the correlation between d-dimer levels and hscrp levels before treatments was related to the levels of hscrp, while the levels of hscrp exceed 10 mg/l, the correlation between table 5 ).to explore the difference of d-dimer levels between covid-19 patients and cap patients, we divided the levels of untreated hscrp into two groups both in covid-19 patients and cap patients, one group for hscrp levels < 30 mg/l, and another group for hscrp ≥ 30 mg/l, according to the median hscrp level in 103 patients. we found that no matter in covid-19 patients or cap patients, the higher hscrp levels, the higher d-dimer levels (figs. 1a,  2a) . besides, this trend also existed in other biomarkers levels, including pct, fib and inr (figs. 1b-f, 2b-f). as shown in table 2 , hscrp levels were 15.6 (3.8-40.0) mg/l in covid-19 patients, and 82.8 (12.3-127.8) mg/l in cap patients, thus, we also grouped covid-19 patients or cap patients at their median level of hscrp respectively, and found that all the trends remained unchanged (figs. s2, s3) . interestingly, it was worth mentioning that compared with covid-19 patients, the levels of hscrp were higher in cap patients, whereas the levels of d-dimer were lower in cap patients (fig. 3a, b) .as previous described, d-dimer levels were truly related with biomarkers of inflammation, especially with hscrp. we then analyzed the specific relationship between d-dimer levels and hscrp levels in covid-19 patients, and found that both hscrp levels and d-dimer levels decreased after treatments (fig. 4a, b) . moreover, we analyzed their relationship before and after treatments stratified by untreated hscrp quartiles, as expected, after therapy, hscrp levels were significantly decreased in the 2nd, 3rd and 4th quartiles of untreated hscrp (fig. s1a-d) , and there were also a downward trend in d-dimer levels at different quartiles ( fig. s1e-h) .however, considering that the values stratified by untreated hscrp quartiles might be higher or lower cutoff values which could bias the results, and as previously described, hscrp levels were significantly decreased in the 2nd quartile, we then divided all patients into two groups based on the cutoff value 10 mg/l of untreated hscrp levels: hscrp < 10 mg/l, ≥ 10 mg/l. obviously, after treatments, the decrease of d-dimer levels was synchronous with the decrease of hscrp levels (fig. 4c-f ).in addition, it's worth mentioning that there were 53 patients were cured or turned into mild cases, whereas 4 patients were died in our study. more important, we found that in deceased patients, both the untreated hscrp or (table s1) , conversely, both hscrp and d-dimer levels significantly decreased in patients with a good clinical prognosis after therapy.as we know, d-dimer is one of the markers for thrombosis. however, the synchronous decline of d-dimer and hscrp suggests that the elevated d-dimer levels in covid-19 patients is related to inflammation, which limits its role in the prediction of thrombosis. further analysis showing low correlation between padua vte score and d-dimer levels (spearman's r = 0.264, p > 0.05) weakened the role of d-dimer in the prediction of thrombosis. subsequently, in order to investigate whether the levels of d-dimer also decreased significantly in those patients with a significant decrease in hscrp levels, we then analyzed the relationship between the extent of decline in hscrp and d-dimer levels after treatments. interestingly, it was worth mentioning that some patients had a significant decrease in hscrp levels, whereas their d-dimer levels were increased (fig. 5) , highlighting the possibility for aggressive coagulation therapy. therefore, for these patients, the anticoagulant therapy was strengthened, and the low molecular weight heparin was changed from the preventive dose to the therapeutic dose. fig. 3 on admission, comparison between the levels of d-dimer and hscrp in covid-19 patients and cap patients. a changes in levels of d-dimer between two groups and b changes in levels of hscrp between two groups. ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05 fig. 4 changes in hscrp and d-dimer levels after treatments in covid-19 patients. changes in hscrp and d-dimer levels after treatments in all patients, a hscrp levels, b d-dimer levels. changes in hscrp and d-dimer levels after treatments at different untreated hscrp levels, and the untreated hscrp levels were divided into two groups: hscrp < 10 mg/l group; hscrp ≥ 10 mg/l group. c hscrp, d d-dimer, while hscrp < 10 mg/l, e hscrp, and f d-dimer, while hscrp ≥ 10 mg/l. ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05in this analysis of our enrolled patients with covid-19 and bacterial pneumonia, we demonstrated that covid-19 patients with significantly higher d-dimer levels, which highlighting the possibility of more obvious activation of the coagulation system. although d-dimer levels correlated with inflammatory markers and tended to normalize in convalescent stage in most of the patients, the anomalous rise might be an indicator of active anticoagulant therapy. although it has been reported that d-dimer is significantly increased in patients with covid-19 and is related to prognosis [16, 17] , this is the first report about the relationship between d-dimer levels and the markers of inflammation in covid-19 as well as the variation during disease progression.elevated d-dimer levels have been reported in a limited number of studies involved in both sars and cap patients [18] [19] [20] [21] . as demonstrated in our study, similar to sars and cap patients, the d-dimer levels of covid-19 patients was also elevated. the reasons responsible for the elevated d-dimer levels are only partially explained. it is well known that d-dimer are produced during fibrin breakdown and serve as a marker of fibrinolytic activity. a relationship between proinflammatory cytokines and markers of activation of the coagulation cascade, including d-dimer, has been demonstrated in critical patients or patients with sepsis [22, 23] . there is also evidence that under inflammatory conditions, the alveolar haemostatic balance is shifted towards a predominance of prothrombotic activity [24] . in addition, pro-inflammatory cytokines may be involved in endothelial injury, and may activate coagulation and inhibit fibrinolysis in patients with severe sepsis [25] . in this paper, the relationship between d-dimer levels and the markers of inflammation were also analysed in both covid and cap patients. although we lost the post-treatment data for cap patients, all the data reported in our analysis showed that d-dimer levels were significantly correlated with inflammation and tended to normalize as the inflammation subsided in most of the patients, highlighting the point that inflammation is one of the causes of coagulation activation in patients with both covid and bacterial pneumonia.however, one problem that could not be ignored is that patients with covid-19 have higher levels of d-dimer when their crp levels are lower than that of cap patients. this highly suggests that there are other factors besides inflammation that responsible for activation of the coagulation system in patients with covid-19. in a previous study [26] , gralinski et al. investigated viral pathogenesis and identify a novel host pathway involved in sars progression. their data suggest that dysregulation of the urokinase pathway during sars-coronavirus infection contributes to more severe lung pathology and profound alterations in the systemic haemostatic balance.in the treatment of patients with covid-19, the prevention and treatment of thrombus should be noted. it has been reported that reactive thrombocytosis occurred in 4% fig. 5 changes in d-dimer and hscrp after treatments at two groups in covid-19 patients, and the difference value = untreated hscrp levels minus treated hscrp levels, the two groups were divided into the difference value < 5 mg/l and the difference value ≥ 5 mg/l. a, b changes in levels of hscrp after treatments and c, d changes in levels of d-dimer after treatments of patients, which may be related to the increased risk of thrombus [8] . in addition, considering that patients with covid-19 might have increased blood viscosity due to high fever and excessive sweating, hypercoagulable state because of activation of coagulation system [9] , together with the risk factors such as long-term bedridden, obesity and old age, the risk of thrombus is further increased. the diagnostic value of d-dimer levels for thrombus formation in covid-19 patients is unclear. whether higher d-dimer levels in patients with covid-19 suggest the need for more aggressive anticoagulant therapy deserves further discussion. previous studies demonstrated high d-dimer levels in patients with cap similar to patients with pulmonary embolism that decreased the reliability of the test for the differential diagnosis of cap and pulmonary embolism [19] . as shown in our study, levels of d-dimer decreased with the disappearance of inflammation and the improvement of the disease, which indicates that it is not reasonable to judge whether anticoagulation is needed only according to d-dimer levels. also, the low correlation between padua vte score and d-dimer levels weakened the role of d-dimer in the prediction of thrombosis. this raises the question of what indicators are used to guide prophylaxis for venous thromboembolism in patients with covid-19. interestingly, not all patients' d-dimer levels decreased with the decrease of inflammatory factors, suggesting the possibility of thrombosis. thus, it should be noted that if levels of d-dimer are not synchronized with the regression of inflammation, anticoagulation therapy is needed. in addition, vte risk assessment should also be considered in clinical decision-making. because the mortality of covid-19 increases with age, and elderly patients are more likely to have bleeding events, bleeding scores should also be included in clinical decisions.this study has some several limitations. it's a retrospective analysis and patients we included in the present analysis were not systematically assessed for the presence of pulmonary embolism and vte because of conditional restriction. furthermore, although the hscrp and d-dimer levels were examined by the same method, the covid-19 patients and cap patients were enrolled in different centres, which might reduce the credibility of research results.elevated baseline d-dimer levels are associated with inflammation in covid-19 patients and have limited predictive value for thrombosis. in the treatment of covid-19 patients, the change of d-dimer levels should be observed dynamically. and the abnormal changes of d-dimer and inflammatory factors suggest that anticoagulant therapy might be needed. also, although the predictive value of vte score need to be further studied in covid-19 patients, it might be useful than baseline d-dimer levels for prophylaxis for venous thromboembolism in covid-19 patients.we present metatryp version-2 software that identifies shared peptides across organisms within environmental metaproteomics studies to enable accurate taxonomic attribution of peptides during protein inference. improvements include: ingestion of complex sequence assembly data categories (metagenomic and metatranscriptomic assemblies, single cell amplified genomes, and metagenome assembled genomes), prediction of the least common ancestor (lca) for a peptide shared across multiple organisms, increased performance through updates to the backend architecture, and development of a web portal (https://metatryp.whoi.edu). major expansion of the marine database confirms low occurrence of shared tryptic peptides among disparate marine microorganisms, implying tractability for targeted metaproteomics. metatryp was designed for ocean metaproteomics and has been integrated into the ocean protein portal (https://oceanproteinportal.org); however, it can be readily applied to other domains. we describe the rapid deployment of a coronavirus-specific web portal (https://metatryp-coronavirus.whoi.edu/) to aid in use of proteomics on coronavirus research during the ongoing pandemic. a coronavirus-focused metatryp database identified potential sars-cov-2 peptide biomarkers and indicated very few shared tryptic peptides between sars-cov-2 and other disparate taxa, sharing 0.1% peptides or less (1 peptide) with the influenza a & b pan-proteomes, establishing that taxonomic specificity is achievable using tryptic peptide-based proteomic diagnostic approaches.when assigning taxonomic attribution in bottom-up metaproteomics, the potential for shared tryptic peptides among organisms in mixed communities should be considered. the software program metatryp v 2 and associated interactive web portals enables users to identify the frequency of shared tryptic peptides among taxonomic groups and evaluate the occurrence of specific tryptic peptides within complex communities. metatryp facilitates phyloproteomic studies of taxonomic groups and supports the identification and evaluation of potential metaproteomic biomarkers.in metaproteomics the mixture of a large number of organisms within each sample collected from a natural environment creates challenges in the attribution of peptides to specific proteins. this is especially problematic in instances where exact tryptic peptide sequences are shared between two or more organisms. this potential for shared peptides across proteins can create uncertainty in protein inference and taxonomic attribution. in bottom-up proteomics, the primary method used in metaproteomics to date, whole proteins are typically digested into smaller peptides with the enzyme trypsin. since bottom-up metaproteomics directly measures these short tryptic peptides, as opposed to entire protein sequences, it is essential to understand the degree of shared peptides across proteins and taxonomic groups when assigning attributes of diverse environmental communities. previously, we described the development of the metatryp software which evaluates multiple organisms for shared peptides [1] . metatryp takes the full predicted proteome of an organism based on its reference genome, performs an in silico tryptic digestion of the proteins, and then stores the tryptic peptides of that organism within a single sql database. multiple taxa proteomes are stored within the sql database. using metatryp tools, the database can be queried to identify how many taxa share a specific peptide (or list of peptides), and it can also identify the total number of specific tryptic peptides shared across multiple organisms and for other phyloproteomic analyses. the former application has aided in the development of targeted metaproteomic biomarkers for assessing environmental changes in space or time [1] [2] [3] [4] . a useful result of the latter application was the observation that the percentage of shared peptides between distinct marine microbial taxa was low, often in the single digit percentages, implying that the design of biomarker targets for species or even subspecies level analyses was tractable if sufficient care was taken.in this manuscript, we describe version 2 of the metatryp software (https://github.com/whoigit/metatryp-2.0). we have added additional features to improve its usability and performance. a major improvement was the addition of new data categories for different sequencing assembly methods, specifically those associated with assembled metagenomic and metatranscriptomic data as well as single cell amplified genomes (sags). metatryp v 2 now supports these three specific data categories: "genomes" for reference cultured isolates, "specialized assemblies" from sags and mags, and "meta-omic assemblies" from metagenomic and metatranscriptomic assemblies. this greatly expands the utility of metatryp since cultured genomes are often unavailable from natural environmental populations due to many organisms being difficult to culture with classical microbiological techniques [5] , or being only recently identified taxa. as a result, the availability of single cell genomes amplified and sequenced from the ocean environment (sags), metagenome assembled genomes (mags), and assembled metagenomics and metatranscriptomic data can contribute greatly to the identification and interpretation of metaproteomic data. yet because these metagenomic and metatranscriptomic resources have varying levels of completeness and confidence in their functional and taxonomic assignments, maintaining them as separate categories of tryptic peptides within the database structure is particularly useful. in addition, metatryp v 2 now supports the calculation of a least common ancestor (lca) among shared tryptic peptides. for comparison, the unipept web portal [6] has some similar functionality in identifying shared tryptic peptides and interpreting the least common ancestor; however, unipept relies on the uniprot database which does not incorporate the wealth of environmental meta-omic sequencing available. also, the unipept portal does not support local curated database construction where users can evaluate unpublished sequencing resources like those of newly sequenced organismal genomes or novel environmental sequencing not yet available in the uniprot curated database whereas metatryp can be installed locally for use with custom curated databases. the addition of these new sequence assembly data categories enables better prediction of shared peptides through enhanced representation of environmental sequence variability.the metatryp marine web portal currently contains a total of 182,354,079 unique peptides from 19,104,353 submitted protein sequences combined across all three data categories.multiple improvements to the metatryp software architecture and additional features were added to v 2. in order to improve performance speed and support these larger data categories (especially, metagenomic and metatranscriptomic assemblies), the metatryp sql backend was converted from sqlite in metatryp v 1 to a postgresql backend in metatryp v 2. additional software and postgresql implementations support the lca analysis. metatryp v 2 uses the same tryptic digest rules applied to metatryp v 1, following trypsin-based digestion rules for proteins with peptides 6-22 amino acids in length [1] . here we describe the technical improvements within metatryp v 2, then demonstrate how metagenomics resources allow increased understanding of least common ancestor interpretations of metaproteomic results. additionally, we provide an overview of the metatryp web portal for marine microorganisms and the rapid deployment of a coronavirus-specific metatryp web portal demonstrating the application of metatryp to various research fields. finally, a private api was added providing lca analysis functionality to the ocean protein portal [7] , enabling metatryp to be inserted into other pipelines in the future.metatryp is built upon a relational database management system (rdms). version 1 was built using a sqlite database. while this database management system was sufficient for single reference genomes, it was lacking in speed needed for expanded sequencing data categories. in order to increase the speed of database construction (ingestion of proteomes), database searching, and expanded functionality, we have upgraded the database management system to a postgresql backend which is an object-relational database. the postgres backend has provided improvements in speed, as well as enhanced flexibility in searching.the advent of environmental de novo sequencing and assembly has identified an entire realm of microorganisms previously unknown to the scientific world, as many environmental microorganisms are not readily isolated using classical microbiological techniques [5] . metatryp v 1 focused on the construction of a search database using reference organismal genomes, metatyrp v 2 is capable of handling newer types of sequencing and assemblies thus opening the search space to a much greater range of organisms likely found within the environment of interest. within the field of metaproteomics, there has been great emphasis placed on the need for curated and appropriate search databases to be utilized for peptide-to-spectrum matching (psm) [8, 9] ; this also holds true for the construction of a metatryp database for evaluation of shared tryptic peptides in an environmental sample. metatryp relies upon protein sequences predicted from genomic sequencing and does not currently take into account any post-translational modifications (ptms).in order to expand the environmentally-relevant search space, metatryp v 2 now handles newer assemblies from sources like metagenome and metatranscriptome assemblies, metagenomeassembled-genomes (mags), and single cell amplified genomes (sags). the incorporation of these newer data categories, in addition to the traditional single organism reference genome, greatly expands the environmental variability (and therefore, potential for shared tryptic peptides) within an environmental sample. in order to manage the larger sequencing databases generated by incorporation of this environmental data, and thus the greater burden of a larger search space, improvements were made to the back-end search database (see section "database back-end upgrades"). the database schema ( figure 1 ) for metatryp was expanded to not only include these different data categories, but to identify them as separate search spaces as the uncertainty of taxonomic identity among the sequencing categories is variable and should be taken into consideration during interpretation. the new data categories roughly mirror the original reference genome schema. however, additional tables are required to properly map meta-omic data as multiple taxa are contained within a single meta-omic assembly file.environmental sequencing data is also more likely to have more frequent occurrences of ambiguous bases in assemblies. these are base locations where it is uncertain what the correct amino acid should be, sometimes a result of low-quality base calling by the sequencing technology or due to a single location where there are multiple possibilities for the amino acid at that single location in the assembly that cannot be determined. metatryp v 2 will recognize ambiguous bases, specifically the base symbol "x", which represents the presence of an unknown or ambiguous amino acid during the ingestion phase. as the specific amino acid represented by "x" is unknown, the exact tryptic peptide cannot be predicted. during ingestion, metatryp will identify proteins which contain an "x" and report to stdout the affected protein. if there is a tryptic peptide containing the "x", that peptide will not be included in the metatryp peptide table; however, all other tryptic peptides from that protein will be included in the peptide table.sequence homology is conserved among more closely related organisms. however, it is possible that tryptic peptides, especially shorter ones around 6 amino acids, may occur by chance across multiple taxa without a direct shared ancestry. in order to identify the occurrence of shared tryptic peptides either through shared evolutionary history or through stochastic variance in sequence, we have added least common ancestor (lca) analysis to metatryp v 2. the lca analysis incorporates the phylogenetic lineage of the sequences imported into the metatryp databases ( figure 1 ), then calculates the "least common ancestor" by finding the unifying phylogenetic point for all the organisms containing the tryptic peptide queried. in order for metatryp to identify the common point in the taxonomic lineage, it requires a consistent taxonomic lineage to be used across the database for each proteome submitted.for metatryp the shared phylogeny of the taxonomic groups is identified by pulling the taxonomic lineages from the national center for biotechnology information (ncbi) taxonomy database [10] . for the creation of a user-generated metatryp database capable of lca analysis, the user can submit the ncbi taxon id number (taxid) for the input sequence files, and metatryp will pull the taxonomic lineage information for each organism using biopython [11] and pandas [12] libraries in python 3. this lineage information is then used to calculate the lca among the organisms with shared peptides via the postgresql longest common ancestor function, which metatryp uses to return the lca for each sequencing data category.a primary goal of releasing the metatryp software originally was to enable other users to create and curate customized databases for searching tryptic peptides, specifically with a focus on marine microbial communities. metatryp v 2 expands on this goal through the creation of a web server and api which can be queried easily by users, without the need to install and run the software locally.the metatryp v 2 site can be found at https://metatryp.whoi.edu/. this web server takes as input a peptide sequence, multiple peptides, or a full protein sequence submitted into a text box by a user which is then in silico digested into tryptic peptides. metatryp then searches for the occurrence of these peptides across three different marine-specific data categories: an organismal reference genome data category ("genomes") same as metatryp v 1 (si table 1 ), and new data categories for "specialized assemblies" (si table 2 ) which currently contains 4,783 archaeal and bacterial mags [13, 14] assembled by binning metagenomic sequences [15] [16] [17] from the tara oceans sequencing project [18] , and a metagenomic & metatranscriptomic assembly data category ("meta-omic assembly") [3, 4, 19] (si table   3 ) which currently contains 4,863,985 predicted proteins. ideally, additional mags and sags will be added to the metatryp web portal database in an effort to broaden taxonomic coverage in the marine environment. the addition of eukaryotic sags [20] would significantly extend the diversity of the current database.results from a metatryp query are then returned to the user in an interactive drop-down genomes & microbiomes (img) genome ids are also shown, where available, with links out to img as the predicted proteomes for all those in the "genome" category were collected from in the current version of this database [21] .metatryp can also compare entire organismal proteomes to identify the frequency of shared peptides across taxa within a given sequencing data category. those more familiar with nucleic acid sequencing often incorrectly imagine that because translation to amino acid space results in loss of variable dna codon information, peptides will lack the ability to taxonomically resolve species or subspecies. this feature previously existed in metatryp v 1 for generating peptide redundancy tables within the "genome" sequencing data category and was used to show the relatively low occurrence of shared peptides across disparate taxa in the open ocean microbiome [1] . this feature can now be implemented within metatryp v 2 on all three major data categories: "genome", "meta-omic assemblies", and "specialized assemblies". within the web portal, there is now a visualization tool for creating ordered heatmaps of shared peptide frequencies among taxa for the genome and meta-omic data categories. this visualization page, "peptide redundancy heatmaps", was built in python 3.7 using the jupyter environment [22] , pandas [12] , and seaborn [23] . users can select what taxa they wish to compare within a given data category, and a heatmap is generated and displayed on the page below in a a specified data category where the percentage is calculated as the number of shared peptides between taxon a and taxon b divided by the total number of peptides in taxon a. given the varying levels of genome completeness for a specific taxon in the "specialized assembly" data category, this percentage should be viewed with more caution. due to the aggregate nature of meta-omic assemblies, where many taxa of highly variable coverage depth are present within each dataset, this heatmap visualization feature is not currently supported in the web portal for this data category.the capabilities of the metatryp software make it applicable to scientific domains outside of respiratory syndrome-related (mers) coronavirus strains [26] , and strains associated with the common cold [27] like human coronavirus strains nl63 [28] , hku1 [29] and 229e [30] for a total of 94 coronavirus taxa in the database. it also contains the human proteome, the african green monkey (chlorocebus aethiops sabaeus) proteome as it is the taxonomic source of the vero cell line commonly used in virus replication studies and plaque assays [31] , common oral bacteria [32] , six lactobacillus strains associated with the human microbiome [33] , the most common influenza strains (influenza a:h1n1 & h3n2; influenza b) as well as other influenza strains, and common proteomic contaminants in the crapome [34] . all taxa included in the coronavirus database and their associated ncbi taxonomy ids (si table 4 ) are listed on the databases page in the web portal (https://metatrypcoronavirus.whoi.edu/database). in order to capture the variability of sequences, we pulled all the proteins (aside from those in the crapome) for each taxon from the ncbi identical protein groups (ipg) database using taxon sequence identifiers (si table 4 ). the ipg database enables collection of a single non-redundant entry for each protein translation found from several sources at ncbi, including annotated coding regions in genbank and refseq, as well as records from swissprot and pdb [35] . one sequence for each identical protein group was collected for ncbi taxa with >= 10 identical protein groups, collecting proteins from the specified taxon and all its children from the ncbi taxonomy database. however, for the taxon "severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus" (ncbi txid: 694009), only protein groups from that specific txid level were recruited (using the flag "txid694009[organism:noexp]" in the query). this taxon should only contain sars-cov-1 related proteins; however, it may contain some non-sars-cov-1 sequences due to inconsistent nomenclature during the emergence of this relatively new pathogen. proteins were collected using biopython [11] and the ncbi entrez [36] e-utilities api [37] .by using the identical protein groups, the database captures sequence variability while reducing redundancy in database construction. this non-redundant collection of protein sequences per taxon is essentially the collection of the known pan-proteomes for each taxon; it is the representation of the predicted proteome of a single organism's genome plus all the sequence variation captured from sampling a population of organisms within a taxonomic group. for example, the taxon homo sapiens pan-proteome from ipg has >1,000,000 proteins capturing sequence variability from the population of human sequences in the ncbi database, whereas an individual human genome contains <20,0000 protein coding genes [38] . due to the varying sequencing efforts of among some taxa, the length of the proteomes in this database may vary. for example, the taxon severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2, 2019-ncov, covid-19 virus; taxid 2697049) has 1,752 unique identical protein groups whereas the taxon bat coronavirus isolate ratg13 (taxid 2709072), sars-cov-2's closest sequenced animal virus precursor [39] , has 10 unique identical protein groups as of this writing (may 3, 2020) even though the genomes of these viruses are roughly the same length. since the population of sars-cov-2 has been sequenced more frequently, more sequence variability has been captured in the ncbi databases. due to the collection of the pan-proteomes for the coronavirus metatryp database, the peptide redundancy heatmaps need to be viewed with caution, as taxa which have received a higher degree of sampling effort will have more peptides associated with them. therefore, it is important to take into consideration both combinations of pairwise taxa comparisons for heatmap calculations (both sides of the heatmap separated by the diagonal). for example, one should evaluate the percentage of shared peptides between sars-cov-2 and ratg13 where the total number of tryptic peptides for sars-cov-2 is in the denominator and also where the total number of tryptic peptides in the denominator is for ratg13. when calculating peptide redundancy between organisms, metatryp reports this calculation as "individual percent".the percentage of shared peptides across taxa can also be calculated by the number of peptides shared between taxa with the combined total number of peptides for both taxa in the denominator, metatryp reports this as "union percent".however, this also needs to be interpreted with care as when comparing a taxon that may have only been sequenced once (few total peptides) with a broadly sampled taxon (many peptides due to environmental variability), the signal of the rarely sampled taxon may be reduced due to the large n of the heavily sequenced organism. in addition, viewing "union percents" when comparing an organisms with a small proteome vs an organism with a large proteome would also skew any signal of shared peptides, for example sars-cov-2 only encodes 12 proteins/genome [24] , whereas the human genome encodes ~120,000 proteins. even though the ncbi ipg database is not used in the marine metatryp web portal, this same effect may be observed when comparing organisms with highly uneven proteome sizes, say if marine phages are added to the database, or with taxa that have varying levels of genome sequencing completeness, such as with specialized assemblies like mags and sags.backend upgrades for metatryp v 2 provide improved performance:the switch from a sqlite database backend in metatryp v 1 to a postgresql database backend has resulted in significant improvements in performance and functionality of metatryp. in particular, this transition has resulted in improved computational times and facilitated the addition of lca analyses to the software package. to test clock times, a database was constructed based upon the reference genomes from 136 marine microbial taxa (si table 5 ) in both versions of metatryp. si table 6 shows the benchmarks associated with the construction of these genome-only databases for comparison, withmetatryp v 2 taking only 17% of the time it took metatryp v 1 to construct the same database. by converting to a postgresql backend, the computational time to query the example database with the example peptide "lshqaiaeaigstr" was reduced over 10,000x, dropping from 1442.87 seconds using metatryp v 1 to 0.11 seconds with metatryp v 2. the cpu utilization for metatryp v 2 was also lower than for v 1.it is noted that setting up a postgresql server on a local machine requires administrative permissions and is more complex than sqlite which is more user-friendly and requires fewer system dependencies. therefore, for users without local administrative permissions, metatryp v 1 with its sqlite backend remains a good lighter weight option (albeit with slower performance and without the capacity to handle diverse data categories and lca analyses table 5 ) and the base schema for all three data categories is included in the metatryp v 2 code repository (https://github.com/whoigit/metatryp-2.0).using the results of the peptides set as the default example search in the metatryp web portal (lshqaiaeaigstr, vnsvidaiaeaak, vaaeavlsmtk), we see the results for these three peptides have varying levels of taxonomic lcas, ranging from species-to phylum-levels of taxonomic specificity (figures 2 & 3) . for peptide vnsvidaiaeaak, the lca across all data categories is the genus prochlorococcus, indicating that this peptide appears unique to this genus in the marine microbial community and is therefore a potential biomarker for targeted metaproteomics that allows species level specificity. for peptide vaaeavlsmtk, the lca for all categories is the order synechococcales as this peptide is found within the genus prochlorococcus and its sister genus synechococcus.taxonomic assignment of the original sequences of predicted proteins for the different data categories ranges in uncertainty. from reference genomes from cultured isolates being the most certain, to metatranscriptomic & metagenomic assemblies providing the least certainty in taxonomic assignment of the source proteins. the "specialized assemblies" of sags and mags exist somewhere in between on this taxonomic assignment uncertainty spectrum. peptide lshqaiaeaigstr (figure 3 ) demonstrates this level of uncertainty within the "meta-omic assembly" category as a source protein for this peptide in the gos/omz (jcvi) metagenome cannot be identified with below the phylum level of cyanobacteria ( figure 2 ) and in the "specialized assembly" category containing thousands of mags, this peptide is found in 94 cyanobacterial mags and one verrumicrobial mag (verrucomicrobiales_bacterium_strain_np1000), resulting in a lca of "bacteria". notably, this peptide is from the global nitrogen transcriptional regulation protein (ntca) which is highly conserved across the cyanobacteria [40] . while this peptide has been previously identified as a potential biomarker for cyanobacteria [1] , the addition of the "specialized assembly" data category identified the possible presence of this peptide in another phyla warranting further investigation. interestingly, upon further investigation, the protein in mag verrucomicrobiales_bacterium_strain_np1000, identified from metagenomes in the red sea [14] , is >99% identical to an ntca in the cyanobacterium genus synechococcus (ncbi accession wp_067098506.1). this verrumicrobial ntca may occur within this genome as a result of horizontal gene transfer or as an artifact of the mag binning process. either way,it indicates that peptide lshqaiaeaigstr should be used with caution as a cyanobacterial biomarker in environments with abundant verrumicrobia. however, this is an unlikely scenario as cyanobacteria tend to be far more abundant in marine environments than verrumicrobia. query results from a full sequence ntca from prochlorococcus med4 (ncbi genbank accession cae18705.1) show that other peptides, such as "lvsflmvlcr", may be more appropriate if targeting prochlorococcus only (si figure   1 ). by separating sequence types into different categories, metatryp allows the user to balance the varying levels in confidence of taxonomic attribution, where reference genomes from cultured isolates are the best in taxonomic quality but more incomplete in environmental coverage, and vice versa for environmental sequences.the addition of 4,783 mags to metatryp has provided further insight into the prevalence of shared peptides across taxonomic groups in marine microbial communities. an analysis with metatryp v 1 using a database of 51 single reference genomes from common pelagic marine microorganisms demonstrated very little overlap in shared peptides across different taxonomic groups [1] . expanding this analysis to the 4,783 mags shows a similar pattern of a very low occurrence of shared tryptic peptides across disparate taxa. figure 4 shows the individual percentages of shared peptides across a random selection of 25 mags. in general, taxa share <1% of tryptic peptides, with a few clusters of more closely related organisms sharing more tryptic peptides --for example, gammaproteobacterial and euryarchaeotal clusters highlighted with red outlines --where the taxa share between 1-2% or 2-14% of tryptic peptides in each cluster, respectively. a similar pattern is shown when the cross-wise comparison of taxa is expanded to 100 mags (si figures 2 & 3) . these results demonstrate that there should be sufficient resolution to discern between taxa using tryptic peptides identified by metaproteomic analyses, especially when coupled to lca analysis tools like metatryp to confirm peptide taxonomic origin.analysis of the coronavirus-focused metatryp instance is similar to the observations of marinefocused metatryp where there is a rather low frequency of shared peptides across disparate taxa with a higher frequency of shared peptides across more closely related taxa ( figure 5 ; si figures 4 & 5) .within the broader group of the 81 taxa associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome (si table 4 ; infections [42, 43] , as a combination of the coronavirus-specific database with other environmental databases (like marine microbial metatryp) may provide insight into potential tryptic peptide biomarkers in sewage effluent.this manuscript announces the release of version 2 of the metatryp software package for assessing shared tryptic peptides in complex communities. coronavirus has the most shared tryptic peptides with its closest bat precursor virus, has some shared peptides with sars-cov-1, and is very different from the "common flu". metatryp is a flexible software package to assess taxonomic occurrence of shared peptides applicable to proteomics studies of complex systems valuable for the identification of biomarkers and phyloproteomic analysis of complex communities.figures: figure 1 . core elements of the metatryp v 2 database schema. an entity relationship diagram depicting the core tables for the three sequencing categories (orange tables: "genome", green tables: "specialized assembly", and blue tables: "meta-omic assembly" data categories). the purple tables are shared tables among all three data categories containing information about the tryptic digestion rules (protease and digest tables) as well as the amalgamation of all unique tryptic peptide sequences found across all three data categories (peptide). the lines connecting the tables represent links between the data tables. the three data categories are stacked where tables represent similar information for each category. the metagenome data category requires two additional data tables as there are multiple taxa stored within a single meta-omic assembly sequencing file which requires an additional metagenome_annotations table for parsing; the blue connecting lines represent meta-omic specific data linkages. the lca results for these three separate peptides indicate the varying degrees of taxonomic uniqueness among the peptides in the "genome" and "meta-omic assembly" data categories. in these two data categories, lshqaiaeaigstr is unique to the phylum cyanobacteria. vnsvidaiaeaak is unique to the genus prochlorococcus. vaaeavlsmtk is unique to the order synechococcales. all of these peptides show potential as biomarkers at these varying taxonomic levels according to evaluation by the "genome" and "meta-omic assembly" databases. in general, there is a very low occurrence of shared tryptic peptides (<1%) across disparate taxa. higher frequencies of shared tryptic peptides are shown among more closely related taxonomic groups. severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronaviruses form a cluster in the top left corner. mers-related coronavirus shares <1% of tryptic peptides with all taxa depicted here. the "common cold" strains of coronavirus (hku1, 229e, and nl63) form a separate cluster in the bottom right corner. these coronavirus clusters are distinct and very different from the influenza a cluster in the middles, as the severe acute respiratory syndrome-related viruses share <1% of shared tryptic peptides with influenza a and b. homo sapiens and chlorcebus sabaeus form a distinct group, sharing more tryptic peptides with each other than with any other taxonomic groups.covid-19 patients especially at early stage are similar to these from other common pneumonia patients, including h7n9 influenza virus pneumonia, mycoplasma pneumonia, chlamydial pneumonia and bacterial pneumonia [7] . in this study, we develop and validate chest ct-based imaging biomarkers for covid-19 patient screening using artificial intelligence (or computer vision) methods, which will be of great significance to reduce the workload of clinicians and to assist in differential diagnosis of covid-19 from other diseases. our findings could open a new avenue to assist screening of covid-19 patients.the chest ct images in this case-control study were collected from hubei provincial hospital of traditional chinese medicine and wuhan third hospital. the inclusion criteria for covid-19 patients were: (1) patients were diagnosed and confirmed through nucleic acid test from january 2020 to march 2020; (2) patient were with mild or moderate disease status, where the severity was classified according to the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) diagnosis and treatment guideline (trial version 7) issued by the national health commission of the people's republic of china. specifically, according to the guidelines, patients with mild disease status have mild clinical symptoms, and have no obvious pneumonia manifestations on chest ct images; and patients with moderate disease status have obvious respiratory symptoms such as fever and cough, and have obvious pneumonia manifestations on chest ct images. in addition, both patients with community acquired pneumonia (cap) and healthy participants (with no obvious abnormalities in chest ct images) were randomly collected from aforementioned two hospitals and used as control group. the inclusion criteria for control group were: (1) patients who were diagnosed with lung infection on imaging and clinical basis few months before the onset of the epidemic; (2) patients without severe diseases of respiratory system, cardiovascular or cerebrovascular systems, (3) patients without mental illness or cognitive impairment. this study has been approved by the institutional review board (irb) of both participating hospitals.chest ct exams from hubei provincial hospital of traditional chinese medicine were performed with two different scanners: (1) ge optima 660 ct (ge healthcare, milwaukee) and (2) uct 530 (united imaging, shanghai), with reconstruction thickness at 0.625 mm and 1 mm, respectively. while, ct exams from wuhan third hospital were performed with ge discovery ct750 hd (ge healthcare, milwaukee) with reconstruction thickness at 0.625mm.vasculature-like signal is recognized and enhanced using an iterative tangential voting (itv) approach [8] within pre-segmented lung regions in 3d, where itv enforces the continuity and strength of local linear structures (i.e., vasculature-like structure) and the 3d lung segmentation is achieved via level-set method [9] . specifically, itv operates on ct image gradient information with sigma set to be 0.5 and 1.0 on training and validation cohorts, respectively, to accommodate the technical difference across hospitals.we developed an unsupervised feature learning pipeline based on stacked predictive sparse decomposition (stacked psd) [10] for the unsupervised discover of underlying 3d characteristics from the 'vasculature-like signal' space derived from ct-based raw images. specifically, in this study, we used single network layer with 256 dictionary elements (i.e., signal patterns) at a fixed pattern size of 20x20x20 pixels and a fixed sampling rate of 100 3d patches per sample which were experimentally optimized. in the training cohort, 8 of 256 dictionary elements were identified to have significant correlation with covid-19 with cutoff fdr value < 0.05 through cross-validation approach (training sample rate: 0.8; bootstrap 100 times). at last, these 8 significant dictionary elements as a set of imaging biomarkers were selected and utilized to build the random decision forests model for covid-19 screening. a double-blind study was designed and implemented to validate this model in an independent hospital. visualization of these imaging biomarkers was created in three-dimensional space using itk-snap (version 3.8.0), python (version 3.7.0), matplotlib (version 3.1.2), blender (version 2.82) and three.js (version r115 on github). snapshots of the three-dimensional visualization were used to generate two-dimensional visualization that overlays with the original ct slices.in order to validate the diagnostic performance of our pre-identified 3d imaging biomarkers, we invited two experienced chest radiologists to independently and blindly (blind to clinical data) assess the ct images in our validation cohort. these two chest radiologists have 8 and 10 years of clinical imaging diagnosis experience, respectively. and both of them have more than 2 months of intense and continuous diagnosis experience of covid-19 in wuhan, china. sensitivity and specificity were utilized for performance comparison between the chest radiologists and our 3d imaging biomarkers.the difference in the vasculature-like signals among different groups (covid-19, cap and healthy) was assessed by non-parametric test, and the association between signatures and covid-19 by logistic regression. principle component analysis (pca) and heatmap cluster analysis were performed in r (version 3.6.1) and matlab (version 2012b), respectively. the screening performance was characterized with sensitivity, specificity and area under curve (auc).in order to identify chest ct-based imaging biomarkers for covid-19 patient screening, we conducted a case-control study in two hospitals together with artificial intelligence technologies in machine learning (fig. 1) . the population characteristics for the training and double-blind validation cohorts are summarized in extended data table 1 . a total of 321 participants were included in this case-control study. the cohort (n=116) from one hospital (hospital a) served as training set, the cohort (n=205) from the other (hospital b) as a double-blind validation set (fig. 1) . the median ages of participants in the training and validation cohorts were 42 (range: 14-76) and 58 (range; 19-89), respectively. there were 53 (45.7%) females and 63 (54.3%) males in the training cohort, while corresponding data were 110 (53.7%) and 95 (46.3%) in the validation cohort. the training cohort contained 47 (40.5%) covid-19 patients, 20 (17.2%) healthy and 49 (42.2%) cap patients, while the validation cohort had 153 (74.6%) covid-19 patients, 15 (7.3%) healthy and 37 cap (18%) patients.in our study, the vasculature-like structure was recognized and enhanced with iterative tangential voting in both training and validation cohorts as a pre-processing step. interestingly in the training cohort, the mean vasculature-like signal reveals significant difference (p-value < 0.05) among healthy, cap and covid-19 patients (fig. 2b) . these findings are consistent with the observation of vascular changes in lung tissue from covid-19 patients, including vascular congestion/enlargement, small vessels hyperplasia and vessel wall thickening [11, 12] . furthermore, such distinction itself leads to remarkable differentiation between covid-19 and non-covid-19 groups in our training cohort (auc=0.721, extended data fig. 2 , blue curve) with logistic regression approach. altogether, those results encourage us to identify imaging biomarkers from the "vasculature-like signal" space to assist accurate screening of covid-19.next, we applied stacked psd on the entire training cohort within the 'vasculature-like signal' space to acquire underlying characteristics for dictionary construction (details see method). 256 dictionary elements were learned and optimized from the entire training cohort. we found that 8 of 256 dictionary elements have significantly positive correlation with covid-19 (fdr < 0.05, extended data table 2 and supplementary table 1 ). these 8 covid-19-relevant signatures (i.e., imaging biomarkers) are graphically presented ( fig.  1 3d ct imaging biomarkers panel) . these biomarkers also allow the construction of full 3d multispectral staining in the entire lung region (fig. 2a) , which is further demonstrated in 3d animations ( supplementary videos 1-3) . the corresponding 2d multispectral staining into the ct image slices are also constructed ( supplementary videos 4-6) . the 8 imaging biomarkers clearly separate covid-19 patients from others in the training cohort by pca (fig. 2c) and clustering (extend data fig. 3a) analysis. finally, we built a random decision forest model for covid-19 screening based on these imaging biomarkers within the training cohort (auc = 1.000, extended data fig. 2 , red curve), which will be tested in the validation cohort.identical enhancement process was applied onto the validation cohort. similar to training cohort, we observed the distinction of mean vasculature-like signal among different groups (i.e., covid-19, cap and healthy) (fig. 2d) . the logistic regression model pre-built in the training cohort on signal led to accurate prediction between covid-19 patients and others in the validation cohort (auc=0.927, fig. 2f , blue curve). 8 pre-identified imaging biomarkers also clearly separate the covid-19 patients from others in validation cohort (fig. 2e, extended data fig. 3b) . excitingly, we founded the pre-built random decision forest model based on pre-obtained biomarkers predict covid-19 with high sensitivity (0.941), specificity (0.904), and auc (0.952), which is competitive with two covid-19 experienced chest radiologists (fig. 2f ).in this study, we developed and validated 3d imaging biomarkers for covid-19 screening based on chest ct images. our quantitative evaluation suggests that, compared to healthy and cap patients, covid-19 patients may have significantly more vascular changes in lung tissue, including vascular congestion/enlargement, small vessels hyperplasia and vessel wall thickening [11, 12] , which leads to the discovery of robust imaging biomarkers for covid-19 screening. our double-blind validation confirms the robustness and effectiveness of pre-identified imaging biomarkers in an independent hospital with high specificity (0.904) and sensitivity (0.941), which is competitive with two covid-19 experienced chest radiologists.the current covid-19 epidemic is a world-wide threat. specifically, in europe and the united states, there are tens of thousands of new confirmed cases and suspected cases every day[13-16]. these sharply increased cases of covid-19 are running out of medical resources in some countries to varying degrees and are paralyzing the medical system in some countries [17] . therefore, rapid screening, diagnosis, isolation and treatment of covid-19 patients are particularly important for the prevention and control of the epidemic. however, it is unfortunate that nucleic acid detection kits for covid-19 have been in short supply in many countries. at the same time, due to improper operation, technical variations among different nucleic acid detection kits and many other reasons, the results of nucleic acid test have certain false negatives. on the other hand, ct examination has been proved to have unique advantages in the early screening and diagnosis of covid-19 [11, 18] . to discover new possibility for covid-19 screening, this study utilized an unsupervised deep learning method to identify robust imaging biomarkers . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 20, 2020. . from chest ct scans for accurate covid-19 screening. the major advantages of our imaging biomarkers reside in two folds as follows: (1) they provide robust, accurate and cost-effective covid-19 screening, which can significantly alleviate the shortage of clinical resources, including both nucleic acid detection kids and experienced chest radiologists; and (2) they provide a non-invasive diagnostic tool that enables world-wide scalable practical applications. furthermore, our imaging biomarkers may provide a new avenue for predicting covid-19 patients' prognosis and clinical outcome, which will be further investigated in our future research. the chest ct images involved in this study are available upon request and consideration by corresponding author(s) of this manuscript.iterative tangential voting for vasculature-like structure enhancement is publicly available at http://bmihub.org/project/itv; and the stacked psd for imaging biomarker detection is publicly available at http://bmihub.org/project/stackedpsd. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 20, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.15.20103473 doi: medrxiv preprintsevere acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is a highly contagious coronavirus that causes pneumonia-like deaths and spreads fast through human-to-human contact [1–3]. since the first suspected cases were documented in early december 2019, the increasing number of sars-cov-2 cases has reached more than six millions, including >350,000 deaths worldwide by june 1th, 2020.it has been hypothesized that older people are more vulnerable to sars-cov-2. an early study reported a high prevalence of sars-cov-2 in older males with comorbidities [4]. subsequent studies confirmed that sars-cov-2 was often observed in older patients with comorbidities [5] and severe disease progression [6, 7]. a study of 138 hospitalized patients reported a higher rate of icu admission in older patients compared with younger patients [8]. another study revealed a high risk of mortality in older patients with comorbidities and acute respiratory distress syndrome [9]. the overall case-fatality rate was 1.38% in china, but this rate increased to 3.99% in older patients between 60 and 69 years, 8.61% in older patients between 70 and 79 years, and 13.4% in ≥80 patients [10]. however, few studies have revealed clinical differences between older and younger groups.our study aims to characterize the clinical features of sars-cov-2 in younger and older groups based on a large cohort of 239 patients in changsha - a neighboring city of wuhan. moreover, we assessed clinical symptoms, laboratory findings, comorbidities, and hospitalization information to monitor the disease progression of sars-cov-2.a total of 239 patients confirmed with sars-cov-2 infections were hospitalized in changsha. table 1 summarizes their demographic and clinical characteristics. the median age of 239 patients was 45 years (interquartile range: 34 to 59 years) and 58 (24.3%) patients had at least 60 years of age (figure 1a). nearly half of the 239 patients were males. the youngest patient was a one-year-old girl discharged on february 18 after a 15-day hospitalization, while the eldest patient was an 84-year-old woman who had a 19-day hospitalization (from february 6 to february 25). fifty-three (22.2%) patients were categorized into the severe group and severe cases were often observed in the elderly patients (figure 1b).at hospital admission, fever (67.4%) was the most common symptom, followed by cough (58.2%), fatigue (33.9%), dyspnea (12.6%), sore throat (11.3%), myalgia (9.6%), diarrhea (8.4%), and others (table 1). in addition, 72 (30.1%) patients had at least one comorbidity such as hypertension (13.4%), diabetes (6.3%), cardiovascular disease (4.2%), hepatitis (2.9%), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (2.1%), cerebral infarction (2.1%), peptic ulcer (1.7%), cardiac arrhythmia (1.3%), and abnormal lipid metabolism (1.3%). furthermore, the increased risk of comorbidities was associated with the patient age that elderly patients were more likely to develop comorbidities (figure 1b). hiv infection was absent in all patients.clinical features of 58 older patients and 181 younger patients were summarized in table 1. the median ages of older and younger patients were 66 and 40 years, respectively (p<0.001). the percentage of females was higher in the older group than the younger group (62.1% versus 47.0%, p=0.045). compared with younger patients, older patients had pronounced key features such as: (i) older patients were more likely to be severe (37.9% versus 17.1%, p=0.001); (ii) older patients harbored more comorbidities such as hypertension (36.2% versus 6.1%, p<0.001), diabetes (15.5% versus 3.3%, p=0.001), and cardiovascular disease (10.3% versus 2.2%, p=0.007); and (iii) older patients had more cases of dyspnea (20.7% versus 9.9%, p=0.032).comparisons of ct diagnostics in younger and older patients revealed no difference in the risk of abnormal lungs (p=0.972). two males were severely ill during hospitalization and died thereafter. ct images showed the accumulation of ground-glass opacities and pulmonary consolidation during the disease progression (figure 2).we compared laboratory biomarkers in older and younger patients at baseline (table 2). the baseline values of eosinophils, c-reactive protein, lactic acid were abnormal in older and younger groups, while six biomarkers (white blood cells, neutrophils, alanine aminotransferase, total bilirubin, creatinine, lactic acids) were similarly expressed in both groups (table 2). of interest, the decrease of lymphocytes (figure 1c) and the increase of c-reactive protein (figure 1d) were observed along with the increasing age when patients were categorized based on their ages in decades (1 to 19, 20 to 29, 30 to 39, 40 to 49, 50 to 59, 60 to 69, ≥70 years).compared with younger patients, older patients had many abnormal biomarkers at baseline, including (i) higher levels of c-reactive protein (30.1 mg/l versus 12.1 mg/l, p<0.001); (ii) high levels of aspartate aminotransferase (27.90 u/l versus 23.38 u/l, p<0.001) and blood urea nitrogen (4.7 mmol/l versus 4.1 mmol/l, p=0.003); (iii) lower levels of hemoglobin (123 g/l versus 132 g/l, p=0.001) and albumin (35.56 g/l versus 38.98 g/l, p<0.001); and (iv) lower levels of lymphocytes (0.98 versus 1.25 ×109 cells/l, p<0.001). the percentage of patients with lymphocytopenia was higher in older patients than younger patients (32.8% versus 17.7%, p=0.015), while normal leukocytes (range: 0.8 to 4×109 cells/l) were observed in most patients (185, 77.4%).we next evaluated laboratory biomarkers of c-reactive protein, albumin, lymphocytes, and blood urea nitrogen on days 0, 7, and 14. (figure 3). first, serum levels of c-reactive protein were higher (30.11 mg/l) in older patients at hospital admission, but it dropped sharply after treatment and returned to the normal status (5.2 mg/l) on day 14. in contrast, the lower level of c-reactive protein was observed in younger patients (12.1 mg/l) at baseline and it decreased slowly compared with that in older patients. second, lymphocytes increased from 1.14×109 cells/l at baseline to 1.34×109 cells/l on day 7 and 1.46 ×109 cells/l on day 14. similar increasing patterns were observed for blood urea nitrogen from baseline (4.22 mmol/l) to day 14 (5.64 mmol/l). third, serum levels of albumin in older patients continuously decreased from 35.56 g/l at baseline, to 34.6 g/l on day 7 and 33.6 g/l on day 14.the median duration from symptom onset to virus clearance was 19 days (interquartile range: 15 to 28 days). this duration was much longer in older patients than younger patients (24 versus 19 days, p=0.014) (figure 4a). compared with younger patients, older patients had longer hospital stays (18 versus 15 days, p=0.047) (figure 4b). we further analyzed the associations of baseline biomarkers with the short (<3 weeks) or long (≥3 weeks) hospital stay in older and younger patients (supplementary table 1). blood urea nitrogen was significantly lower in older patients with a short hospital stay than older patients with a long hospital stay (p-value=0.037). compared to older patients, younger patients with a short hospital stay usually had lower baseline levels of c-reactive protein and aspartate aminotransferase, but higher levels of lymphocytes, albumin, and albumin/globulin at baseline (p-values<0.05, supplementary table 1).by march, 15th, 2020, 237 (99.2%) patients fulfilled the discharge criteria, and a 58-year-old male and a 64-year-old male had died. after the 14-day hospitalization, 129 patients were diagnosed with virus clearance, and 101 of them were discharged for 14-day home isolation. after hospital discharge, the presence of sars-cov-2 was not reported in any discharged patient over a follow-up period of two months.based on a cohort of 239 patients, our study revealed three major findings: (i) older and younger patients exhibited differences in dyspnea, comorbidities, and proportions of severe cases; (ii) compared with younger patients, older patients exhibited higher levels of c-reactive protein, d-dimer, aspartate aminotransferase, blood urea nitrogen and lower levels of lymphocytes, hemoglobin, platelet, albumin at baseline; and (iii) the disease progression of sars-cov-2 was associated with the dynamics of laboratory biomarkers such as c-reactive protein and lymphocytes, supporting their clinical use in disease monitoring.sars-cov-2 is a highly pathogenic coronavirus of bat origin [11] that causes upper respiratory tract diseases and pneumonia-like diseases [3, 9]. increased mortality risk was previously reported in critically ill patients with chronic comorbidities and acute respiratory distress syndrome [9]. similar to the prevalence of older patients in wuhan [4], 58 (24.3%) of 239 patients were ≥60 years in our study. although the cutoff of 60 years was used to categorize older and younger patients, key factors such as comorbidities, severe cases, lymphocytes, and c-reactive protein showed increasing or decreasing patterns over seven age groups (figure 1). in agreement with previous studies [5], severe cases were often observed in older patients in our study (table 1). older patients often have many comorbidities such as diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease, which potentially cause the difficulty of clinical treatment. fever, cough, and fatigue were common symptoms but there were no differences in older and younger patients, indicating that symptoms and signs were not unique features to distinguish the impact of sars-cov-2 in both groups. however, dyspnea was more common in older patients, implying the potential risk of lung lesions after sars-cov-2 infection.in agreement with previous studies [6, 12, 13], our study revealed key laboratory markers such as white blood cells, lymphocytes, eosinophils, c-reactive protein, albumin, blood urea nitrogen, aspartate aminotransferase, and lactic acid. these biomarkers are commonly used to monitor disease progression, inflammatory/immune responses, and/or physiological changes associated with viral infections. for instance, lymphocytes are a type of white blood cell that could play protection roles in defending viral infections [14]. lymphocytopenia might be a biomarker to reveal disease severity or antiviral immunity [15]. lymphocytopenia was observed in 51 (21.3%) patients in our study, while this percentage was lower than the national study (83.2%) [3]. this discordance may be due to the condition of mildly ill patients in our cohort and timely antiviral treatment. moreover, c-reactive protein was much higher in older patients (30.11 mg/l versus 12.11 mg/l), indicating that severe inflammatory reactions could be observed in older patients. whether these biomarkers could be effective predictors of treatment responses requires further investigations.this study has several limitations. first, our study characterized older and younger patients in changsha, but the clinical features of older patients should be analyzed from a global perspective, including those from different countries. second, we evaluated the dynamics of laboratory biomarkers in a 14-day period because of data availability, but future studies should report the full course of disease progression. third, only two deaths were observed in our study and future studies should characterize the mortality risk of older patients in larger cohorts.overall, our study characterized the clinical features of younger and older patients infected with sars-cov-2. older and younger patients exhibited differences in dyspnea, comorbidities, and proportions of severe cases. higher levels of c-reactive protein, aspartate aminotransferase, blood urea nitrogen, and lower levels of lymphocytes and albumin were observed in older patients. furthermore, the dynamics of laboratory biomarkers such as lymphocytes and c-reactive protein can be used for monitoring the disease progression in older patients.this study was conducted at the first hospital of changsha, designated as the single hospital to treat all sars-cov-2 cases in changsha. patients who were infected with laboratory-confirmed sars-cov-2 according to the who interim guidance [16] were transferred from local hospitals to the first hospital of changsha between january 23 and march 15, 2020. clinical outcomes were monitored up to the hospital discharge of all patients. this study was performed following the helsinki declaration and was approved by the ethics committee of the first hospital of changsha. in light of the rapid emergence of sars-cov-2, written informed consent was waived for this observational study. the corresponding author had full access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.we retrieved electronic medical records, clinical symptoms or signs, laboratory findings, comorbidities, and hospitalization information of hospitalized patients infected with sars-cov-2. clinical information was retrieved using a customized collection form. any missing or uncertain record was clarified by direct communications with doctors and patients. to verify data accuracy, two study investigators (hyx and ccl) reviewed the clinical data independently.to identify the presence of sars-cov-2, throat swab specimens were collected for real-time rt-pcr analyses using the slan-96p real-time pcr system (hongshitech, shanghai, china) and sars-cov-2 nucleic acid diagnostic kits (pcr-fluorescent probe) from sansure biotech, changsha, china. the latter was approved by the china national medical products administration (registration number: 20203400064) and the european ce approval (id: cmb 8764-2020). the detection limit of this nucleic acid kit was 200 copies/ml. sars-cov-2 tests were independently conducted at two medical centers: the first hospital of changsha and the changsha municipal center for disease prevention and control. a positive case was reported if sars-cov-2 was identified by two medical centers above, while a negative case was reported if two medical centers consistently reported an undetectable viral load. negative cases were considered from their discharge if they fulfilled three requirements: (i) no respiratory symptoms of fever or cough were observed for three consecutive days; (ii) two consecutive nucleic acid tests were negative (three days apart from each test); and (iii) computed tomography images became normal. all discharged cases remained on home isolation for another 14 days.computed tomography (ct) diagnostics were performed using the 128-slice somatom go. top ct systems from siemens healthineers. hematologic assessments of white blood cells, hemoglobin, lymphocytes, neutrophils, eosinophils, and platelets were proceeded using the mindray bc-6800 automated hematology analyzer. biochemical data of albumin, alanine aminotransferase, albumin/globulin, aspartate aminotransferase, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, c-reactive protein, d-dimer, and total bilirubin were quantified using the architect c16000 clinical chemistry analyzer.based on the new coronavirus diagnosis and treatment guideline (version 7) in china, a severe case was classified if a patient had any of the following conditions: (i) respiratory distress with the respiration rate ≥30 times per minute; (ii) oxygen saturation ≤93% in the resting state; (iii) the ratio of the arterial partial pressure of oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen ≤300 mmhg (1mmhg = 0.133 kpa); and (iv) the area of the lung affected with pneumonia increased >50% within 24 to 48 hours. non-severe cases included mild or moderate patients who had the conditions of fever (≥37.5°c) and/or the respiratory tract.we measured median (interquartile range) of continuous variables as well as counts and percentages of categorical variables. normal distribution was examined by shapiro-wilks normality tests. to explore differences between patient groups, the chi-square and fisher’s exact tests were conducted for categorical variables; two-tailed t-tests were performed for continuous variables following normal distributions; the wilcoxon rank-sum tests were used for non-normal continuous variables in paired groups; mann-whitney u tests were applied for non-normal continuous variables in unpaired groups. a common approach called pairwise deletion was applied to handle missing data. statistical analyses were conducted using spss 16.0. differences were considered significant at p<0.05.to date, the 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia (covid-19) is the greatest public health problem in the world. by 10:30 on mar 19, 2020, the cumulative number of confirmed cases had reached 218,785 globally, including 8,949 deaths. of the total confirmed covid-19 patients, about 19.9% were severe cases [1] , which have a mortality rate of about 20%. severe cases often suffer from underlying diseases such as cardiovascular disease and diabetes that can accelerate the progression of 2019 novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) infection [2, 3] . furthermore, acute respiratory distress syndrome could lead to death in some severe covid-19 patients, and this is often accompanied by heart failure, liver failure, and kidney failure [2, 4] . therefore, early, simple and effective diagnosis of severe covid-19 pneumonia is of great significance in reducing mortality and shortening the hospitalization period.2 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. perpetuity. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in the guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of novel coronavirus pneumonia [5] [6] [7] have clear criteria for severe covid-19, including respiratory rate, haemoglobin oxygen saturation (sao2), oxygenation index (pao2/fio2), and so on. however, these criteria are susceptible to subjective and objective factors, which may lead to an extended time for diagnosing and the possibility of misdiagnosing severe covid-19. therefore, it makes sense to find a potential biomarker that could effectively diagnose severe covid-19.in this study, we investigated and analysed more than 4,000 test results from 28 covid-19patients. the concentrations of 6 serum biochemical markers showed significant differences between severe and mild covid-19 patients. interestingly, the levels of serum biomarkers reflecting glomerular filtration function (including cystatin c (cysc), creatinine (crea), and urea) in severe covid-19 patients were significantly higher than those in mild patients. it has been demonstrated that serum urea, crea and cysc could be potential biomarkers that could rapidly and specifically reflect severe covid-19, and it is of great significance in the early diagnosis of covid-19 to reduce the mortality and shorten the hospitalization period for patients with severe covid-19. moreover, glomerular filtration injury in patients with severe covid-19 should not be ignored by clinicians.the study enrolled patients who were diagnosed with covid-19 at the first affiliated hospital of zunyi medical university and the fourth people's hospital of zunyi city from january 29, 2020 to february 21, 2020. the exclusion criteria were based on the guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of novel coronavirus pneumonia [6] . the inclusion criteria for participants are shown in figure 1 .3 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. perpetuity. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in software. the wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare the data between two groups.differences with a value of p<0.05 were considered statistically significant.in this study, the majority of serum biochemical markers, including ua, hco 3 perpetuity.preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in glomerular filtration function markers, such as serum urea, crea and cysc, were significantly higher in severe covid-19 patients than in mild covid-19 patients (p<0.001) ( figure 3a , b, c). there were also significant differences in serum dbil, che and ldh 6 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. perpetuity. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in the copyright holder for this this version posted march 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.19.20034447 doi: medrxiv preprint concentrations between severe and mild covid-19 patients (p<0.05) ( figure 3d , e, f). in this paper, the results of most serum biochemical tests were investigated and analysed. the incidence of liver or heart failure was higher in severe covid-19 patients [2, 4] ; however, we found that most of the indicators, including liver and cardiac function biomarkers, except for serum dbil, che and ldh, did not change significantly or directly in severe and mild patients. there were not much consistent with some reports in the literature [2] , which may be the result of prophylactic use of drug by doctors. there were also no differences in serum crp concentrations between severe and mild covid-19 patients; however, the overall level of serum crp increased, suggesting that it could be sensitive to sars-cov-2 infection.the results of renal injury were similar with 2003 sars-cov [8] , a close relative of 7 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. perpetuity. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in the copyright holder for this this version posted march 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.19.20034447 doi: medrxiv preprint sars-cov-2. we also found that serum urea, crea, and cysc, which are biochemical markers of renal function, were significantly elevated in severe covid-19 patients, suggesting that sars-cov-2 infection could damage the kidney, and this is consistent with part of the latest findings [9] . furthermore, there were no differences in the serum hco 3- results between severe and mild covid-19 patients, and this further suggests that the glomerulus could be one of the target organs for the coronavirus in severe patients and may be related to the high expression of ace2 in glomerular cells [10, 11] .two limitations are inherent in our study. first, the survey area is relatively limited.additionally, the relatively small number of participants in the survey may not fully reflect the overall situation. thus, further studies are necessary to execute a large number of data surveys in multiple regions by multi-centre cooperation.herein, we found that some serum indicators of glomerular function, including urea, crea, and cysc, were observably higher in severe covid-19 patients than in mild covid-19patients. this result indicates that serum urea, crea, and cysc could be used as potential biochemical biomarkers to identify a severe covid-19 patient. moreover, clinicians should constantly monitor the glomerular filtration function while treating patients with a severe sars-cov-2 infection.the study and management of lung diseases is of concern to allergist/immunologists and pulmonologists. the most common chronic lung disease is asthma, but there is an immunological basis for many other lung diseases, which span a vast clinical spectrum of lung disorders ranging from infectious lung disease to cancer. several significant challenge areas include the diagnosis and treatment of certain specific infectious lung diseases, including viral lower respiratory infections caused by respiratory syncytial virus, rhinovirus, metapneumovirus, coronovirus, and enterovirus. severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus (sars-coa) was responsible for the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome in the early 2000s that originated in asia and led to significant mortality in those afflicted. other viruses such as bird flu and swine flu have the ability to cause respiratory tract disease as well. tuberculosis is another primarily respiratory infection that has been resistant to eradication. new strains of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis have emerged. other challenges involve the genetic diseases cystic fibrosis and alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency, autoimmune lung diseases, lung diseases that are part of a systemic autoimmune disease, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd). the diagnosis and treatment of hypersensitivity pneumonitis still poses problems to clinicians. biomarkers are continually being developed in lung and other cancers, but more research is needed [1] . the genetics of cystic fibrosis are now well elucidated, but the development of a successful gene therapy has been unexpectedly slow (table 1) .for many of these conditions, it was and still is expected that the ongoing development of new waves of molecular biology techniques, coupled with computerized automated analysis that can provide transcription signatures, will help identify differences between patients with these diseases and spur on the development of relevant and effective treatments. the subsequent discussion takes on some of the more interesting and challenging issues in respiratory disease over the past two decades, with a focus on what to expect in the future as well.asthma is one of the most common chronic diseases worldwide. the who estimates that there are over 300 million asthmatics worldwide and 250,000 deaths per year. in the usa, there are 22 million asthmatics, 6.5 million of whom are children. until recently, the mortality rates from asthma had been steadily increasing. it is only in the past 5-10 years that the mortality rates have begun to stabilize and are perhaps even on a decline.the increasing incidence of asthma has been attributed to various theories, perhaps the most popular of which is the "hygiene hypothesis" [2] . this attributes the rise in incidence to the reduced rate of infectious diseases, cleaner living environments, and, in general, those features that accompany a higher standard of living. but, conversely, the annual death rates per 100,000 asthmatics tend to be higher in the economically poorer countries. this emphasizes the most significant global concern regarding asthma care, which is access to care and medications. in developed countries, this problem is less prevalent, and in countries such as the usa, we are primarily focused on asthma education and compliance issues. in both situations, severe asthma is still a problem in that it impacts quality of life and still contributes to considerable morbidity and mortality.one of the problems of severe asthma is related to defining the disease. asthma is inherently very heterogeneous, and many phenotypes of severe asthma have been described. it is increasingly clear that there is no single medication that works for all patients with severe asthma. while patient compliance is an issue, we frequently fall into the trap of believing the problem is always patient compliance, when in fact, it may be that patients are not taking their medications because they perceive that they do not work. nevertheless, the explosive growth in the availability of new pharmaceutical interventions provides us with an arsenal of controller medications, at least in the developed world. more medications are being developed every day, including the newer class of biological modulators against cytokines and chemokines [3] , such as anti-il5 [4, 5] and anti-il4rα [6, 7] . the next challenge will involve the identification of suitable patients for these new and existing treatments.but how will this be done? researchers over the years have attempted to define asthma phenotypes, trying to categorize asthma patients based on demographic and clinical characteristics in an attempt to define certain patient groups for certain preferential treatments [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] . in general, this has led to more confusion as the different research groups do not necessarily come up with the same classifications. moreover, asthma in children is also significantly different from that in adults, and the response to medications varies based on multiple and not a single factor. the choice and exclusion of confounding variables has been a thorn in the side of those attempting to define a specific asthma phenotype. it has also not been found that specific childhood asthma phenotype will develop into a specific adult asthma phenotype.the concept of asthma endotypes has now been the subject of much research because endotypes address the underlying mechanism of a disease [17] [18] [19] [20] . however, this is also confusing because of the highly redundant inflammatory pathways that can lead to disease. the use of biomarkers to identify those patients who are at high risk for severe, lifethreatening exacerbations has not been entirely fruitful. the recent commercial introduction of fractional exhaled nitric oxide (feno) to identify patients with eosinophilic inflammation is a potentially useful tool, but more is needed to guide treatment. the identification of a gene for asthma has revealed that this is more complex than one might have expected. there are now over 100 genes that have been attributed to asthma. some of the more likely candidates include adam33, ormdl3, dennd1b, filaggrin, chi3l1, and il-33. moreover, the existence of shared genes between asthma and other comorbid conditions such as obesity has also been demonstrated [21] .ultimately, asthma, like many other diseases, is a heterogeneous disease with many phenotypes and endotypes [17, 18] . not one single treatment will fit all, and the art of medicine may be to find the right peg for the corresponding hole [22] . the twenty-first century has ushered the concept of personalized or genomic medicine, which utilizes advancements in molecular biology, such as proteomics, metabolomics, and genomics, to identify the optimal therapy for each individual patient.cystic fibrosis-what happened to gene therapy?it has now been 24 years since the identification of the gene responsible for cystic fibrosis (cf) [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] . the initial study describing the gene named "cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance receptor (cftr)" was first published in the late 1980s by tsui et al. [26, [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] . this discovery led to a localization of the gene to chromosome 7, leading to widespread belief that a cure for cf utilizing gene therapy was right around the corner. the landmark development of a molecular biology technique which became known as genetic targeting in mice, pioneered by capecchi [37] [38] [39] [40] , evans [41, 42] , and smithies [43] [44] [45] [46] [47] , promised gene replacement in humans in a similar way to that performed in mice. twentyfour years later, there are new advancements in the management of cystic fibrosis with regard to pharmacological and supportive respiratory treatment, but still no cure. these advancements have prolonged the longevity of patients with cf, but their life expectancy still only averages to be about 35 years. so, what happened to gene therapy? what happened to all that promise that buoyed the cystic fibrosis community back in the 1980s?the idea behind gene therapy is to introduce a missing of malfunctioning gene into the cells of a patient using a "harmless" virus that can be manufactured to carry a normal copy of the diseased gene. this technique can either target cells globally or be restricted to a certain group or location of cells. but gene therapy has not progressed as smoothly or as quickly as anticipated. previously unrecognized barriers became apparent [48] . these included the fact that studies were initially focused on molecular or biochemical outcomes and not on clinical efficacy. moreover, the administration of the gene would need to be repeated due to epithelial turnover. repeated administration leads to host recognition, which may inhibit gene expression. questions on which cells to target in order to achieve efficacy has slowed research. the use of viral material, including viral dna and liposomes, could potentially lead to inflammatory responses. the point is that unexpected consequences were discovered as research proceeded, and this has had an impact on the progress of gene research.in 2012, a group of british investigators began large-scale trials of gene therapy delivered by encompassing the gene in fat globules and delivering the gene by nebulization. future methodologies will utilize a viral delivery strategy, but this is still several years into the future. gene therapy for cystic fibrosis is not dead, but certainly moving at a far slower pace than originally expected.current treatments are not curative for cystic fibrosis. gene therapy and stem cell transplants are two techniques that are still under investigation, and it may turn out that only certain mutations may be candidates for gene therapy. mutations in the cf gene have in fact been subclassified into six classes [49] , each with its own pathogenic or physiologic characteristics. for example, the common f508del mutation results in reduced amounts of cftr channel expression, which leads to exacerbation of the disease [50] .respiratory syncytial virus-how to develop an effective vaccine?respiratory syncytial virus is an infection of the lower respiratory tract that causes significant morbidity and mortality in infants and young children [51] . globally, there are over 30 million new lower respiratory tract infections per year and approximately 200,000 deaths per year in children fewer than 5 years of age. the majority of these deaths occur in lowincome countries where access to care may be limited. the search for a vaccine for respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) has been ongoing for many years, but like the previous case of gene therapy in cystic fibrosis, this also has been a challenge to achieve. in the absence of a vaccine, researchers have developed passive immunization to the virus in the form of a monoclonal antibody to rsv, named palivizumab. the current global strategies for the development of an rsv vaccine now target four areas: infants <6 months of age; infants >6 months of age and young children; pregnant women for whom passive immunization can be implemented; and the elderly, in whom rsv can also have significant morbidity [52] [53] [54] .the main challenges that have prevented the development of an effective vaccine so far revolve around the fact that even natural infection to rsv does not provide long-term protection from reinfection. an earlier study actually found that the vaccine may actually accentuate the disease, especially in young infants who may not have a fully mature immune system and may be unable to effectively engage in somatic mutation, leading to a suboptimal b cell repertoire [55, 56] . this may also apply to older infants or young children who may still be rsv-naive. the issues in adults are just the opposite as most adults have been exposed to rsv and thus have rsv antibodies. the effectiveness of passively immunizing pregnant women in order to deliver igg across the placenta to the fetus must be weighed against possible adverse effects of such a "vaccine" on the fetus. in the elderly, the challenge has been the ability to boost immunity through active immunization in an individual who is becoming immunosenescent.there are now several vaccine development programs that pursue a variety of vaccine strategies. a live virus vaccine trial has shown that a particular vaccine candidate, medi-559, is safe, although effectiveness has not been proven [57] . other strategies include subunit rsv vaccines, the use of dnaconjugate vaccines to boost antigen presentation, and further development of passive antibody prophylaxis that is focused on f or g proteins [52, [58] [59] [60] [61] [62] [63] [64] [65] [66] [67] [68] [69] [70] [71] [72] . an additional challenge with all of these strategies is that effective vaccine studies in animals have not been translated into successful human trials.tuberculosis is a global health problem. tuberculosis is an infection caused by the bacterium mycobacterium tuberculosis, which primarily affects the lung, but can also affect other tissues, including bone and the nervous system. tuberculosis is believed to be one of the oldest infections to reportedly affect mankind, with archeological and anthropological studies showing evidence of infection in humans over 4,000 years ago. it continues to top the charts of mortality and morbidity in developing nations. it is estimated that in 2007, there were 9.27 million new cases of tb, as well as a prevalence of 13.7 million. the 1.32 million deaths in 2007 from tb in patients without hiv and 450,000 deaths in patients with hiv is a shocking statistic that shows how far we have come, yet how far we still are from effectively eradicating the disease [73] .two very effective drugs have been developed to treat tuberculosis, isoniazid (inh) and rifampin. however, tuberculosis continues to be a global health problem. tuberculosis is second to hiv/aids as the infection with the highest mortality globally. more recently, an increase in multiple drug-resistant tuberculosis (mdr-tb) has been observed, with most cases from india, china, and russia. there were 450,000 reported cases of mdr-tb in the world in 2012. of these, it is estimated that 9.6 % fall into the category of xdr-tb, which is an even more resistant form. thus, drug resistance is a significant challenge in the treatment of tb in the twenty-first century. another challenge stems from the fact that about one third of patients with hiv/aids are infected with tb, although many may not yet be symptomatic. the who defines six core functions and six strategic approaches to combat tb (table 1) .overall, 80 % of tb cases occur in just 22 countries, and 60 % of cases occur in china. however, as overall healthcare accessibility and technology improves, there have been significant declines in the rate of tb in some of the asian countries, including cambodia and china. there is no dispute that the dots and "stop tb strategy," as outlined in table 1 , have contributed to significant progress in the control of tb, but significant challenges remain. one of the areas that are being focused on now has to do with the identification of biomarkers. biomarkers can play several roles in the improvement of treatment of tb in the world. the main areas of focus for research in biomarkers are to identify those that can perform the following functions: (1) prediction of a curative state, (2) prediction of reactivation of tb, and (3) prediction of immunity to tb. in the past, biomarkers for tb would normally involve culturing for the organism, but the development of molecular biology techniques has afforded us the use of non-culture biomarkers.the types of approaches, as described by wallis et al. in 2013 [74] , categorize biomarker development into functional categories ( table 2) . non-culture biomarkers include cytokine levels, quantifiable genetic measures of the presence of tb, other serological tests, imaging techniques, gene transcription profiles, and micro-rna profiles. the development of a vaccine has been an ongoing challenge in the quest for a cure for tb, and limitations in these studies include the lack of valid biomarkers to assess protection in clinical trials.the cytokines interferon-γ and il-18 have been studied as biomarkers for latent tb infection. a tuberculosis-stimulated interferon-γ release assay can detect sensitization to tb antigens, but, unfortunately, cannot differentiate between resolved and persistent latent infection. interleukin-18 is a marker of innate immunity. elevated levels of plasma interleukin levels seen in tb patients indicate increased activation of innate immunity, which was not observed in controls. a chemokine that was observed to be elevated in tb were ccr7 [75] , while the levels of the apoptosis inhibitor bcl2 expression were reduced [76, 77] . il-18 levels actually correlated with the radiographic extent of the disease [78, 79] . hiv appears also to modify cytokine production in patients with tb [80] . other cytokines and chemokines have been profiled as potential biomarkers for tb disease activity [81] [82] [83] [84] [85] [86] , although to this date, none has been shown to be useful for widespread clinical application.fifty years ago, it was the introduction of pyrazinamide and rifampicin that reduced the duration of therapy from 18 months to 6 months. the value of biomarkers may be reflected in the implications of being able to predict cure and latency of infection, as well as active infection. from a therapeutic standpoint, this may mean the difference between the current regimen of 6 months of treatment versus a possible reduction in the duration of therapy for certain patient groups. but this depends on the biomarker being significantly accurate as to not lead to inadequate treatment of affected individuals.though a half century has passed since the development of effective treatment for drug-susceptible tb, the period of treatment is still at least 6 months of standard therapy, i.e., rifampicin and isoniazid for 6 months and pyrazinamde and ethambutol during the initial 2 months of treatment. efforts to reduce the length of treatment are dependent on the discovery of more effective treatment as well as being able to monitor the treatment. at the same time, more and more patients with tb are demonstrating multiple drug resistance forms including mdr or xdr tb. the addition of second-line drugs for the treatment of these more difficult to treat patients is plagued by longer periods of treatment, higher cost, and reduced efficacy. the drugs often used for second-line treatment include aminoglycosides, terizidone, protionamide, capreomycin, fluroquinolones, cycloserine, and ethionamide. the mortality of mdr and xdr tb in hiv patients is particularly high, and researchers have focused on novel approaches to combat this global health issue, including revamping of efforts to develop a vaccine for tb [87] [88] [89] [90] [91] [92] , treatment of latent infection to reduce reservoir pools of infection, and the development of predictive biomarkers. one should not forget that for years we have had a vaccine for tb, the bcg vaccine named after albert calmette and camille guerin. while this vaccine has been used primarily in underdeveloped countries and has been administered to over 4 billion people worldwide, the limitations include an inability to protect against adult tb and adverse effects when used in hiv-positive tb patients. further research is ongoing to develop an improved replacement or enhancement vaccine for bcg [91, [93] [94] [95] [96] [97] [98] [99] [100] .therefore, as we develop new biomarkers and new treatment strategies, one should remember that the infective landscape of tb is not a static target either. the emergence of multidrug-resistant strains as mentioned above means that the disease may become more difficult to treat and that the development of biomarkers must take new medication use into consideration. moreover, the development of biomarkers requires the availability of large patient samples, such as those that can be found in biobanks of large high-volume treatment centers. the willingness of patients to contribute to research, and the regulatory landscape for the collection of samples for research, could potentially negatively impact the ability to conduct large-scale studies on biomarkers. for a comprehensive review of biomarkers, diagnostics, drug treatment, and vaccine development, the reader is referred to an excellent series of articles published in lancet in 2010 [74, 89, 101] .the incidence of pertussis appears to be increasing over the past 30 years. this trend flies in the face of an availability of, first, the killed whole organism pertussis vaccine dtwp and, subsequently, the acellular vaccine (dpap). the acellular vaccine was less reactogenic because it incorporated a step during manufacturing that removed endotoxin, which was a major reason for the adverse side effect profile. it was clear that vaccination against pertussis afforded much improved prevention of the disease, as illustrated by the 157-fold decreased rate for pertussis between the 1930s and 1940s. dtwp vaccines were used until the 1990s, when technological development in the 1970s and 1980s led to the introduction of commercially available acellular pertussis vaccines [102] .the continuing increase in pertussis cases leads to an obvious question. is this a failure of an immunization program? earlier, we discussed several examples that illustrate the difficulty of bringing an effective vaccine to market (tb and rsv). the problems associated with pertussis are clearly different. there are several reasons that may explain why we have not eradicated the disease. it is well documented that the dtap vaccine is not as immunogenic as the whole organism dtwp vaccines. studies have indicated that the overall [149] efficacy of dtap vaccines is below 70 %. we do not normally test for pertussis titers following vaccination, except in studies. but there are those who suggest that the increase in pertussis cases is mainly due to the increased ability to diagnose the disease and to an increased awareness. yet another challenge may be that pertussis has mutated over the years, rendering the vaccine less effective. because our current vaccine is <70 % effective, the ability of mutant strains to evade destruction would lead to their preferential survival.it has been shown that pertussis vaccine which contains more antigens, such as the five-component vaccine that contains pertussis toxin (pt), filamentous hemagglutinin (fha), pertactin (prn), and fimbriae (fim 2/3), is superior to those containing fewer antigens. it has also become apparent that the balance of antigens in the vaccine may play a role in determining efficacy. for example, a whole-cell pertussis vaccine with antigenic components pt, fha, and fim was compared to an acellular pertussis vaccine in children. the whole-cell vaccine produced high levels of antibodies to prn and fim, but low levels to pt and fha, in contrast to the acellular pertussis vaccine which produced high levels of antibody to pt and fha. more than one study has suggested that the vaccine components may antagonize each other. it has been found that the antibody levels to fha do not correlate with the efficacy of the vaccine; furthermore, it has been suggested that adding fha to a vaccine may actually suppress efficacy.linked epitope suppression is another concept to explain the failure of pertussis vaccines. while one would expect that the presence of antigens that do not deliver a brisk vaccine response should not affect the response to other vaccine antigens, this may not be the case. if there were a linkage suppression between two epitopes on the pertussis vaccine, then this could be a significant consideration in vaccine design as one would then need to exclude certain antigens from the vaccine component mix. suffice to say that vaccine development is a very complex topic, and it involves various techniques, including the use of classical adjuvants such as aluminum salts, emulsions or liposomes, or novel adjuvants such as toll-like-receptor agonists, saponins, or immune stimulating complexes [103] .one cannot discuss challenges in pertussis without commenting on the fear of immunizations held by many families, even in developed countries such as the usa. the refusal of many parents to immunize their children, for whatever reason they may have, plays a significant role in our inability to eradicate several diseases, including pertussis, measles, rubella, and so on. this phenomenon is not limited to the uneducated population as many highly educated individuals appear to choose not to subject their children to the relatively miniscule real or imagined risks of immunizations. certainly, one has an astronomically higher risk of being killed in a car accident than dying from a vaccination. and yet, people who refuse to vaccinate their children do not stop driving or riding in cars.the problem with all this is that achieving "herd" immunity is important in total eradication. this means that if only a very small portion of the population do not immunize their children, there is still a possibility of eradicating a disease, but as more people choose to remain unimmunized, the likelihood of successful eradication becomes less and less. unfortunately, people who choose to remain unimmunized fail to understand that in order that everyone not have to get immunized in the future (as in the case of smallpox), everyone must be immunized in the present [104] .severe acute respiratory syndrome, or sars, was an infection that reached epidemic proportions during the early part of the 2000s. it originated in china and rapidly spread to neighboring countries, and eventually, it was reported in many other distant nations, including europe and the usa. although the number of cases was far fewer, by several orders of magnitude, than the common flu, it caught the attention of healthcare professionals and public health officers because of its high mortality, with 8,000 cases and 774 deaths reported between 2002 and 2003, for a mortality rate of 9.6 %. sars was later identified to be caused by a coronavirus and was named sars-coa. travel histories of infected people were instrumental in tracing the origin of the disease [105] .but where did this virus come from and how did it suddenly cause so much havoc? initially, in may of 2003, the virus was traced to civets, a cat-like mammal that is occasionally consumed as food by the chinese. however, these creatures were eventually dismissed as the original source because of the lack of appearance of further infected civets. in 2005, reservoirs of sars-like viruses were found in chinese horseshoe bats. these were often brought to market, and it was thought that the virus was passed to humans at that time. phylogenetic studies further provided evidence that genetically, it was likely that the sars coronavirus evolved from viruses that infected the horseshoe bats [105] [106] [107] [108] [109] [110] [111] [112] .so can sars happen again? in fact, smaller outbreaks that do not attract as much attention may already be occurring in a manner that mimics sars. a middle east respiratory syndrome or mers has been reported to also be caused by a coronavirus. the mortality in this case is high as well, 38 of 64 cases, or >50 % [112] [113] [114] [115] [116] [117] [118] [119] [120] [121] [122] . mers is also thought to have originated in bats. interestingly, many other viruses are thought to be transmitted by bats, including ebola, hendra, and rabies. the cellular receptor for mers is cd26, or dipeptidyl peptidase 4 [123] .lessons learned from the 2003 sars epidemic included the fact that transmission can often be facilitated by the very medical workers who are trying to save patients [109, 110] . strict infection control measures are critical in limiting the spread of the disease, including the use of negative pressure rooms, n95 masks, and gowns. the optimal dosing of antiviral medications and the timing of supportive measures of respiratory care are still unknown, but previous experience should guide us to be more vigilant if this ever occurs in a large-scale fashion in the future.autoimmune lung diseases-biomarkers and biologics-sparing the steroids?anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (anca) was discovered in 1982 [124, 125] . the antigenic targets of anca include myeloperoxidase or proteinase-3, and the antibodies against these antigens were for a long time referred to as p-anca and c-anca, respectively, the p and c indicating their cellular staining pattern (perinuclear or cytoplasmic). this latter nomenclature has since been discouraged, and the antibodies should be referred to in the context of their specific antigenic target [126, 127] .an understanding of the pathogenesis of anca-associated vasculitis (aav) would help in the development of more effective drugs to treat this group of diseases [125] , which include granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly wegener's granulomatosis), eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (egpa or churg-strauss disease), and microscopic polyangiitis [128] .for toxin-mediated aav, a meta-analysis has shown a link between crystalline silica and aav [129] . silica is an inflammasome activator and is believed to trigger the activation of pro-inflammatory cytokines leading to the disease. other triggers include drugs, most commonly hydralazine, propylthiouracil, and penicillamine (all of which are known to stimulate b lymphocyte activation), and infectious trigger such as staphylococcus aureus. avoidance of exposure may prove to be a useful methodology to prevent disease, but as of this time, the triggers of aav are too diverse and too controversial to recommend any particular avoidance strategy.another disease state that affects millions, perhaps billions, of people worldwide is allergies. allergies that affect the respiratory tract can take the form of allergic asthma or simply allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis. the hygiene hypothesis would indicate that because of our cleaner living environments, we are developing higher rates of sensitivities to common allergens, both indoor and outdoor, as well as higher rates of autoimmune diseases [130] [131] [132] [133] [134] [135] [136] . one of the main avenues of treatment has always been avoidance, but we have not really been able to define what exactly constitutes effective avoidance. many of the studies done on dust mite and animal dander avoidance have not been able to identify a single avoidance measure that can make a significant impact on outcome, although perhaps a comprehensive avoidance plan may provide some relief. studies are needed to (1) determine whether indeed effective avoidance is possible in the face of indoor and outdoor exposures to allergens and (2) the extent to which avoidance of allergens, if possible, provides a significant benefit to patients.the diagnosis and management of respiratory diseases is plagued by numerous unmet needs, affecting both common diseases such as asthma to uncommon occurrences such as sars. some of the problems are common and ultimately involve improving our understanding of the mechanisms of disease. only then can we develop tools to help us manage these patients. the advent of molecular biology has allowed us to develop genetic analyses of patients, and this has led to a realization that these diseases are frequently not one disease, but many [137] . thus, the genomic and personalized medicine acts of 2006 and 2010 are important legislatures that will hopefully divert increased funding into studies that will help us identify which treatment should optimally be used on which patient [138, 139] . understanding the pathogenesis of these diseases is another significant unmet need which requires commitment of funding and resources [140] . the respective contributory roles of genes, epigenetics, and the environment in the pathogenesis of lung diseases must be better elucidated [141] [142] [143] [144] [145] [146] [147] [148] . with better understanding of disease comes better diagnostic markers and better treatment.other unmet needs circle around the availability of biomarkers to both diagnose disease and vaccines and other novel treatments to manage disease. new techniques for vaccination which will hopefully alleviate concerns of vaccines among vaccine-apprehensive patients may help lead to the eradication of infectious respiratory disease such as tb, pertussis, and rsv. there is much work yet to be done, and it is important to remember that diseases are not static either, especially in the context of pathogen-related diseases as pathogens are also very adept at evading our efforts to destroy them.the challenges outlined in this article are far from comprehensive, and specific unmet needs exist for a variety of other respiratory diseases, including alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, lung cancer, pulmonary hypertension in the newborn, and others. while each disease state may have its own unique set of challenges, in general, one can categorize these into three major areas of need, namely, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention (fig. 1 ). more specifically, these would include the identification of biomarkers to provide less invasive methods for the diagnosis and monitoring of the disease, as well as determining prognosis, the development of new drugs and treatment modalities, and also the development of vaccines or other environmental controls to reduce the incidence of the disease.the first incidence of coronavirus disease 2019 infection is considered the most serious infection worldwide, most of the infected individuals suffer from mild or moderate symptoms that begin in the first week after infection. the most common mild symptoms include fever, fatigue, and cough. however, infected patients may suffer from serious complications that vary in their degrees between different individuals such as dyspnea, severe pneumonia, and organ dysfunction 1 . based on the previous facts, the diagnosis of covid-19 cannot be based on specific symptom detection and the only specific detection test depends on identificationusing the key terms, a total of 4021 articles were retrieved using the search strategy.after screening by the abstract and title of 1541 studies, 160 articles were selected for full-text assessment. of these, 104 were excluded due to lack of enough data, and 56were included for qualitative analysis. pairwise comparison meta-analysis was conducted; 29 articles to compare between the severe and non-severe presentation of covid-19 disease, 7 records to compare between cohorts who developed cardiac injury and those who are not, 6 records to compare between patients who were admitted to the icu and those admitted to the general hospital ward and 16 studies to compare between survivors and expired patients ( figure 1a) . the study included a total of 56 studies (52 retrospective and 4 prospective studies) published from january 24, 2020, to may 7, 2020 1, . these included 17,794 covid-19 patients from china (13 cities) and overseas ( figure 1b-c) . the main characteristics of eligible studies are demonstrated in table 1 .the demographic characteristics of covid19 patients are shown in table 2 . the median accepted article age of 17,364 covid-19 patients across 53 studies ranged from 32 to 74 years in patients with a good prognosis and 47 to 77 years in patients with poor outcomes. pooled estimates revealed significantly higher age in critical/expired cases (smd = 1.0, 95%ci = 0.72 to 1.31, p <0.001) than non-critical group. the results from 54 articles with a total sample size of 17,702 patients showed that the proportion of males was significantly higher in critical cases (or = 1.50, 95%ci = 1.36 to 1.69, p <0.001). evidence of heterogeneity and publication bias were observed for age data (i 2 = 97.1%, p <0.001, egger's p = 0.041), but not for gender (i 2 = 26.5%, p = 0.041, egger's p = 0.58).the laboratory examination of the included studies is demonstrated in table 2 summarizing analysis revealed a 93% increased risk of poor prognosis in cohorts who experienced chest pain or tightness (or = 1.93, 95%ci = 1.14 to 3.28, p = 0.014). in addition, meta-analysis showed that covid-19 patients who developed complications were more likely to have adverse outcomes with higher risk of mortality ( furthermore, as depicted in table 2 patients who received antibiotics (or = 3.36, 95%ci = 1.66 to 6.77, p = 0.001), glucocorticoids (or = 3.52, 95%ci = 2.51 to 4.93, p <0.001), immunoglobulins (or = 3.41, 95%ci = 1.90 to 6.14, p <0.001), and hydroxychloroquine (or = 6.67, 95%ci = 2.0 to 22.2, p = 0.002) had higher risk for poor prognosis.however, noteworthy, there was significant heterogeneity between studies (i2 = 67.9% to 84.6%), and only two studies had reported hydroxychloroquine.table s1 summarizes pooled estimates for seven cardiac biomarkers, eight comorbidities, and nine secondary complications in covid-19 patients with severe presentation compared to non-severe cohorts, who developed secondary cardiac injury versus not, icu admitted patients versus general ward patients and survived versus expired. the forest plot for the pooled analyses is presented in figures s1-s11. funnel plots for assessment of publication bias are depicted in figure s12 . meta-regression to assess the impact of study characteristics as sample size, the city of the study, and timing of publications as moderators for the study effect size of each pairwise comparison is accepted article demonstrated in table s2 .to assess the impact of study characteristics as sample size, the city of the study, and timing of publications as moderators for the study effect size, meta-regression was performed. results of studies comparing critical/expired patients with non-critical cases table 3) .receiver operating characteristics (roc) curves were first employed to analyze the prognostic performance of cardiac markers for predicting adverse outcomes and to select the best cutoff threshold with high sensitivity and specificity. the highest area under the curves (auc) were for myoglobin (auc = 0.91 ± 0.07, p = 0.002) and high-sensitive ctni (auc = 0.89 ± 0.04, p <0.001) at the cutoff values of 72 ng/ml and 13.75 ng/l, respectively, followed by nt-probnp (auc = 0.86 ± 0.06, p <0.001) and ast (auc = 0.84 ± 0.04, p <0.001). combining cardiac markers with demographic and clinical features, decision tree analysis was used to predict mortality and severity in covid-19 patients. age, ctni, and ast levels were able to classify patients into high and low-risk patients (figure 2a-b) . high troponin i over 13.75 ng/l combined with either advanced age over 60 years or elevated ast level over 27.72 u/l were the best model to predict poor outcomes (classification accuracy = 81.03%, precision = 74.1%, recall = 86.0%, and this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.diagnostic odds ratio = 20.8). after conversion of smd to or, meta-analysis showed that patients with high ctni (or = 5.22, 95%ci = 3.73 to 7.31, p <0.001) and ast levels (or = 3.64, 95%ci = 2.84-4.66, p <0.001) were more likely to develop adverse outcomes for covid-19 disease.our meta-analysis has several important aspects. we include a robust sample size with broad, global geographic reach. utilizing a two-arms meta-analysis for 56 articles and 17794 covid-19 subjects, our findings reveal the association of covid-19 mortality with high levels of cardiac biomarkers. we amplify previous smaller meta-analyses and the single site or regional studies. furthermore, as of may 8, 2020, we enclosed a larger number of studies and patients, and involved more cardiac biomarkers, demographics, and clinical data than prior studies, demonstrating multiple predictors of cardiac injury, poor prognosis, severity, icu admission, and mortality. additionally, for prognostic risk assessment, we employed decision tree model analysis for both serum biomarkers and the clinical data and performed roc curves analyses. although our analysis included 169 hospitals located in 11 countries in asia and europe, it is largely retrospective.meta-regression analyses indicated the pooled results were independent to study characteristics and decision tree analysis revealed that ctni, ast, and potentially other serum biomarkers could be predictors of risk. one significant limitation, inherent in the use of meta-analyses to guide further clinical practice is the heterogeneity across studies, including differences in study methods. this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.the exact pathway by which elevated biomarkers leads to death with covid-19 with systemic inflammatory activity may include myocarditis, thrombosis, and additionally unstable coronary atherosclerotic plaque rupture. hence, beyond the predominant pulmonary complications, severity, and mortality sources include viral myocarditis, cytokine-driven myocardial damage, microangiopathy, and acute coronary syndromes 75 . therefore, biomarkers may identify a heightened inflammatory response, including endothelial dysfunction and microvascular damage.there are several limitations to our analysis and review. the actual cause of mortality may be obscured by unmeasured or unknown confounders, underestimated by analysis of multivariable regression. understanding cvd-associated mortality must integrate biomarker data with cardiac imaging and physiologic and structural abnormalities.additionally, the percentage of patients with sepsis has been under-reported in our report and cardiac injury may correlate with the prevalence of shock with severe covid-19. 76 another limitation of these data is the lack of a determination of timing and estimated glomerular filtration rate (egfr) as factors. although cardiac biomarkers may reflect myocardial injury, inflammation, and remodeling, interpretation of biomarkers in chronic kidney disease (ckd) can be complicated by decreased urinary clearance and/or overall ckd-associated chronic inflammation. the prognostic power of future biomarker analyses for covid-19 mortality should be trended over time and account for the degree of renal dysfunction. 77 finally, in consideration of the immense covid-19 global mortality, over 360,000 deaths 78 , with over 100,000 deaths in the u.s. alone 79 at the time of manuscript submission, despite our relatively large sample size, our data will require this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.ongoing supplementation, to overcome inherent statistical bias and confirming our results.in conclusion, covid-19 severity and mortality are compounded by vascular and myocardial injury. elevated cardiac injury biomarkers may improve the identification of those patients at the highest risk and potentially lead to improved therapeutic approaches.none.all authors declare no conflict of interest. were often not made in time. we aimed to identify simple and quickly available laboratory biomarkers to facilitate effective triage at the fever clinics for sorting suspected covid-19 patients from those with covid-19-like symptoms.we collected clinical, etiological, and laboratory data of 989 patients who visited the fever clinic at wuhan union hospital, wuhan, china, from jan 31 to feb 21. based on polymerase chain reaction (pcr) nucleic acid testing for sars-cov-2 infection, they were divided into two groups: sars-cov-2-positive patients as cases and sars-cov-2-negative patients as controls. we compared the clinical features and laboratory findings of the two groups, and analyzed the diagnostic performance of several laboratory parameters in predicting sars-cov-2 infection and made relevant comparisons to the china diagnosis guideline of having a normal or decreased number of leukocytes (≤9·5 10 9 /l) or lymphopenia (<1·1 10 9 /l).findings: normal or decreased number of leukocytes (≤9·5 10 9 /l ), lymphopenia (<1·1 10 9 /l), eosinopenia (<0·02 10 9 /l), and elevated hs-crp (≥4 mg/l) were presented in 95·0%, 52·2%, 74·7% and 86·7% of covid-19 patients, much higher than 87·2%, 28·8%, 31·3% and 45·2% of the controls, respectively. the eosinopenia produced a sensitivity of 74·7% and specificity of 68·7% for separating the two groups with the area under the curve (auc) of 0·717. the combination of eosinopenia and elevated hs-crp yielded a sensitivity of 67·9% and specificity of 78·2% (auc=0·730). the addition of eosinopenia alone or the combination of eosinopenia and elevated hs-crp into the guideline-recommended diagnostic parameters for covid-19 improved the predictive capacity with higher than zero of both net reclassification improvement (nri) and integrated discrimination improvement (idi).interpretation: the combination of eosinopenia and elevated hs-crp can effectively triage suspected covid-19 patients from other patients attending the fever clinic with covid-19-like initial symptoms. this finding would be particularly useful for designing triage strategies in an epidemic region having a large number of patients with covid-19 and other respiratory diseases while limited medical resources for nucleic acid tests and radiographic examination. keywords: eosinopenia, elevated hs-crp, covid-19, triageevidence before this study as of april 3, 2020, the outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19) has led to 972303 confirmed cases with 50322 deaths globally. in wuhan, a large number of mixed patients of true or suspected covid-19 cases and those with other pneumonia or respiratory infections swarmed into designated fever clinics. this brought tremendous pressure on patient triage at fever clinics. however, most of published covid-19 papers focused on clinical characteristics of hospitalized patients but not covid-19 outpatients. we searched pubmed for studies related to the biomarkers for effective triage of covid-19 in clinics up to april 3, 2020. the search terms included "triage", "prediction", "biomarker", and "covid-19", and yield no relevant papers.to the best of our knowledge, this is the first retrospective analysis focused on how to improve triage process during covid-19 outbreak at fever clinics. we compared laboratory findings between laboratory-confirmed sars-cov-2-positive patients and sars-cov-2-negative patients, both of which presented similar fever and respiratory symptoms. differentiating these two types of patients was a core question to be solved during triage at fever clinics. our study revealed that eosinopenia and elevated high-sensitivity c-reactive protein (hs-crp) level were observed in the majority of sars-cov-2-positive patients, and the combination of eosinopenia and elevated hs-crp was capable of predicting true covid-19 patients (72.8% positive prediction) more efficiently than the combination of "normal or decreased number of leukocytes" and/or "lymphopenia" (48.4% positive prediction), two diagnostic parameters recommended by the guideline of the china national health committee for covid-19 diagnosis (6 th edition).eosinopenia along with increased hs-crp can be used to rapidly and effectively triage suspected cases from mixed patients with similar covid-19-related symptoms at fever clinics. these patients should be prioritized for computerized tomography (ct) diagnostic examination and covid-19 nucleic acid polymerase chain reaction (pcr) testing when resources are limited. our finding may provide useful information for designing proper triage strategies in regions, which have begun to struggle with covid-19 outbreak or might have similarly intense covid-19 local outbreak in the future.as of april 3, 2020, laboratory-confirmed severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection across china has reached over 80000 cases. 1 the who named this coronavirus disease as covid-19 and declared it as a public health emergency of international concern. 2 covid-19 has now affected over 200 countries and territories, 3,4,5 and a surge in cases (972303 confirmed cases with 50322 deaths globally) has been noted in multiple countries outside of china, including the united states, italy, spain, germany, france, iran, the united kingdom, japan, and south korea. 3, 6 such an urgent situation underscores the importance of effectively identifying infected patients for timely treatment in relevant epidemic regions.a key to slow the spread towards outbreak containment is rapid diagnosis and isolation of cases. 7 this relies on effective triage protocols identifying suspected patients for isolation or further diagnostic examination towards timely treatment. 8, 9 by referring to previous experience of combatting sars-cov in 2003 in china, designated fever clinics were quickly established across epidemic regions to triage suspected patients. covid-19-like initial symptoms include fever and respiratory symptoms (such as dry cough and shortness of breath). 10 these symptoms are however not specific, and readily confused with other non-bacterial community-acquired pneumonia or common upper respiratory infection. thus, a critical task of triage at the fever clinic was how to accurately and effectively sort suspected covid-19 patients from those of other pneumonia or respiratory infection who presented with covid-19-like symptoms.this triage was particularly challenging because immediately after the covid-19 outbreak, an overwhelmingly large number of mixed patients with fever or respiratory symptoms flooded in, resulting in long waiting time for computerized tomography (ct) examination and etiological polymerase chain reaction (pcr) tests. this significantly delayed diagnosis and subsequent quarantine or therapeutic decisions. due to these reasons, many true covid-19 patients were left un-diagnosed at fever clinics causing cross infection, or were self-isolated at home, which was however often ineffective and could lead to family cluster infections and poor prognosis because of delayed treatment. therefore, it is highly desired to develop more effective ways of optimizing the triage process at fever clinics to sort suspected covid-19 patients out of patients with similar symptoms. those suspected covid-19 patients would be prioritized for diagnostic ct examination and etiological pcr tests. thus, we set to identify simple and quickly available laboratory parameters as biomarkers for precise and effective triage.data of this retrospective case-control study were consecutively collected from 3323 patients who made first medical visit at the fever clinic of wuhan union hospital from jan 31 to feb 21, 2020, prior to any antiviral and anti-bacterial treatments that they might receive later on. the majority of the patients presented fever and/or respiratory symptoms at the fever clinic. we excluded patients without blood routine examinations (n=1749) mainly because these patients (1) had already received blood routine examination in community clinics and their blood testing results were not obtainable, (2) were transferred to designated hospitals for isolation and treatment, or (3) made their own decisions to refuse further routine blood tests or go to other hospitals for further testing and treatment. we also excluded patients who already had ct examination and were considered as suspected covid-19 cases (n=151), those with unknown status of sars-cov-2 infection (n=329), and those with irrelevant symptoms or conditions (n=105).finally, a total of 989 patients were included for the analyses (figure 1). all patients' throat swab specimens were subject to nucleic acid testing for sars-cov-2. among them, 458 patients were tested positive and considered as covid-19 cases and 531 were tested negative and considered as controls. two researchers independently extracted and reviewed the data. this study was approved by the wuhan union hospital ethics committee.etiological examination, blood routine analysis, and high-sensitivity c-reactive protein (hs-crp) the who interim guidance for covid-19 11 defines suspected cases that should meet two criteria: (1) clinical features: respiratory-infection symptoms that cannot be fully explained by other etiology; and (2) epidemiological features (affected geographic regions travel history or close contact with a confirmed or probable case). in the who interim guidance, the laboratory evidence was not required to define a suspected case. in addition to who guideline, different countries can have their own guidelines. in china, the guidelines of the national health commission of china for covid-19 (6 th edition) 12 was followed during this study. according to it, suspected covid-19 cases would have the following features: (1) recent travel history to wuhan city or hubei province or close contact with a confirmed or probable case;(2) fever and/ or respiratory symptoms; (3) laboratory findings of normal or decreased number of leukocytes and/ or lymphopenia; (4) radiographic evidence showing pneumonia. the suspected cases were defined if they met the following criteria: (1) plus any two of (2)(3)(4), or three of (2)(3)(4) at the same time. for simplicity, the two parameters (normal or decreased number of leukocytes and/or lymphopenia) described in "(3)" were referred to as one term "guideline" for the following analyses.biomarkers from blood routine examination were dichotomized according to normal reference range used in clinics. characteristics of laboratory-confirmed sars-cov-2-positive and sars-cov-2-negative patients were compared using mann-whitney u tests or chi-square tests where appropriate. univariate logistic models were established to examine risk factors for covid-19. those showing significant associations were further included in the multivariate logistic analysis.significant biomarkers both in the aforementioned univariate and multivariate logistic analyses were then used to construct the prediction models. the diagnostic performance of each prediction model was evaluated using sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (ppv), negative predictive value (npv), youden index (yi) 13 , and consistency rate (cr). the improvement in discrimination was assessed by comparing the area under the curve (auc) of receiver operating characteristic (roc) between the "guideline" and the model plus the biomarkers identified from the above analyses. 14 net reclassification improvement (nri, the improvement in classification probabilities) and integrated discrimination improvement (idi, the improvement in discrimination) statistics were also utilized as supplementary approaches to assess the incremental improvement in prediction over the existing "guideline". 15, 16 in addition, akaike information criteria (aic) was used to assess the goodness of fit of all models, with lower aics indicating better model fit.among 531 patients who were tested negative for the sars-cov-2 infection, 95 had two or more nucleic acid tests that were all negative. thus, we used these 95 patients as the controls in a sensitivity analysis given that they were most unlikely true covid-19 patients. since we did not have a validation cohort and our selected model might be subject to overfitting, a 10-fold cross-validation method (9 training datasets and 1 validation dataset) was utilized to evaluate the goodness-of-fit of the model identified from the above analyses. 17 to evaluate the influence of missing values for the hs-crp, a sensitivity analysis of excluding those with missing data was performed. a 2-tailed p value <0·05 was considered as statistically significant.all analyses were conducted using stata version 15·0 (stata corporation, college station, texas, usa).nsfc and mstip had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript for publication. table 1 showed the basic demographic factors and laboratory parameters in the two groups. the median age (iqr) was 59·5 years (48·0-68·0 years) in patients with covid-19 and 50·0 years (37·0-62·0 years) in the controls. as for laboratory findings, covid-19 patients had significantly lower levels of leukocytes (5·2 10 9 /l), neutrophils (3·5 10 9 /l), lymphocytes (1·1 10 9 /l), eosinophils (0·01 10 9 /l), and platelets (178·0 10 9 /l), but higher levels of hs-crp (27·4 mg/l) (all p value <0·05), while similar levels of monocytes (0·37 10 9 /l), red blood cell counts (4·7 10 12 /l), and hemoglobin (140·0 g/l) (all p value >0·05), compared to the controls. when dichotomized into binary variables, eosinopenia (<0·02 10 9 /l) and elevated hs-crp (≥4 mg/l) were present in 74·7% and 86·7% of covid-19 patients, much higher than 31·3% and 45·2% of the controls, respectively. meanwhile, 97·8% of the patients with covid-19 and 89·8% of the controls had normal or decreased number of leukocytes and/or lymphopenia, two recommended parameters (referred to as "guideline" in this study) as a criterion for defining suspected covid-19 case in wuhan throughout our study (see "definition" section in methods). the univariate analysis revealed a similar pattern. in the multivariate analysis, age, normal or decreased number of leukocytes, decreased neutrophils, eosinopenia, elevated hs-crp, and the "guideline" recommended parameters remained significantly associated with covid-19.we further evaluated the predictive capacity of those significant blood biomarkers (eosinopenia, elevated hs-crp, and normal/ decreased leukocyte counts) both in the aforementioned univariate and multivariate logistic analyses. since less than 10% of the participants had decreased neutrophils, this parameter was not included in the diagnostic performance analyses. among the 3 remaining biomarkers, we found that the eosinopenia produced the highest specificity (68·7%), ppv (67·3%), yi (43·4%), cr (71·5%), and auc (0·717). then, the eosinopenia was further singly or doubly combined with the other 2 biomarkers. we found that the combination of eosinopenia and elevated hs-crp yielded the highest specificity (78·2%), ppv (72·8%), yi (46·1%), and cr (73·4%), with an improved model fit (aic values=1149·5). no further improvement was observed when the parameter of "normal/decreased leukocytes" was added into the eosinopenia and elevated hs-crp combination (table 2) . consistently, the highest auc was found for the combination of eosinopenia and elevated hs-crp (auc = 0·730), followed by the combination of eosinopenia and elevated hs-crp plus "normal/decreased leukocytes" (auc = 0·723), and then by eosinopenia alone (auc = 0·717) (figure 2). these results remained largely unchanged in the sensitivity analysis when only using 95 patients who had two or more consecutive negative nucleic acid testing results as the controls (table s1 and 2, and figure s1). the 10-fold cross-validation method also produced the same results (table s3) . similar results were produced in the10-fold cross-validation method (table s3) , as well as in the sensitivity analysis of excluding those with missing data (table s4) . table 3 showed that the "guideline" parameters produced the highest sensitivity (97·8%) but the lowest specificity (10·2%) with an auc of 0·540. higher specificity (71·0% and 78·2%), ppv (68·5% and 72·8%), yi (44·1% and 46·1%), and cr (72·0% and 73·4%) were found for the combination of the "guideline" plus eosinopenia alone, and for the the combination of "guideline" plus both eosinopenia and elevated hs-crp, respectively, with improved model fits (aic values=1161·4 and 1133·0, respectively).notably, a higher auc was also found for the "guideline" plus eosinopenia alone (auc=0·731), and the "guideline" plus both eosinopenia and elevated hs-crp (auc=0·745). compared to the "guideline" parameters, the model added with eosinopenia alone or the combination of eosinopenia and elevated hs-crp showed a more significant improvement in the prediction capacity with higher than zero of both nri and idi (table 3) . consistently, these results remain mostly similar in the sensitivity analysis when only using 95 patients who had two or more consecutive negative nucleic acid testing results as the controls (table s5) .clinics play important roles in response to covid-19 outbreak, such as setting up protocols for triaging and isolating suspected covid-19 patients so that they do not infect others. triage processes were evolvingly optimized as our understanding of covid-19 progress. in light of this rationale, we performed this analysis. our case-control study revealed that the combination of eosinopenia and elevated hs-crp as a potential effective predictor of covid-19 patients from other patients with similar symptoms. the combination of eosinopenia and elevated hs-crp produced a sensitivity of 67·9% and specificity of 78·2% with an auc of 0·730. more importantly, the ppv was 72·8%, indicating that 72·8% of those classified as positive in our model are true covid-19 patients. even if hs-crp was not included, eosinopenia alone could also produce a sensitivity of 74·7%, a specificity of 68·7%, and a ppv of 67·3%.an early clinical study in wuhan reported that 86·3% of patients (63 of 73 patients) with covid-19 had elevated hs-crp levels. 18 we also observed a similar proportion in our study (84·0%). notably, a previous study demonstrated that increased hs-crp also appeared in asymptomatic patients, suggesting a potential significance of hs-crp in latent sars-cov-2 infection. 19 the increased hs-crp levels were likely due to covid-19 related acute inflammatory pathogenesis during which multiple cytokines were released and their amount was associated with disease severity. 20 notably, in addition to hs-crp, eosinopenia appeared in the majority of patients with covid-19.eosinopenia was reportedly observed in other diseases, such as typhoid fever during which possible viral attach in bone marrow reduced the production of eosinophils. 21 in our cases, although the detailed mechanisms were unclear, the possibilities included viral attacking bone marrow, blocking eosinophils' entrance into peripheral circulation, or infiltration into certain organs (such as lungs) 22 for which further analysis of tissue from autopsy 23 or bone marrow aspiration might provide some clues.possibly due to unclear functional roles of eosinophils in infectious diseases, changes in eosinophils in peripheral blood did not attract attention in the early studies about covid-19, 10, 18, 20, 24 and in previous clinical reports on mers-cov. 25 however, we noted that eosinopenia was in the laboratory findings of all the five patients infected by an asymptomatic covid-19 carrier in a recently published case report. 26 moreover, our literature search found a paper reporting that nearly 90% of 2003 sars-cov patients had eosinopenia in 2003. 27 they reported that eosinopenia could be observed at admission, persisted throughout the clinical course, and was resolved after improvement of symptoms, or kept at a low level when illness was worsened. in our study, eosinopenia was found at patients' first medical visit, suggesting that it might be an early event of covid-19 infection, likely prior to emergence of characteristic radiological findings. but whether or not the dynamic changes of eosinopenia was similar to sars-cov during disease course of covid-19 awaits further study. in addition, none of the sars-cov-2-positive patients in our study presented increased number of eosinophils, suggesting that eosinophil counts do not generally increase at the early stage of covid-19.although eosinopenia's underlying mechanisms were unknown, eosinopenia's reference value for triage and diagnosis can be fully utilized. eosinopenia as a parameter in routine blood tests in conjunction with elevated hs-crp could be used to facilitate rapid triage and identification of highly-suspected cases from mixed patients presenting with fever and respiratory symptoms in fever clinics(figure s2). these identified suspected patients could (1) receive the priority for radio-diagnosis and laboratory-definitive diagnosis, (2) be isolated in designated wards without any delay to avoid potential virus spreading, (3) and receive empirical antiviral treatment (as of now no consensus over usage of antiviral agents) to prevent illness aggravation.according to the definition for suspected cases by the guideline of the national health commission of china for covid-19 (6 th edition, see methods for details), 12 at fever clinics in wuhan, the majority of patients met the first two criteria of epidemiological exposure and clinical symptoms. from our analysis, we showed that in case ct or etiological pcr testing was not available, the third criterion alone ("normal or decreased leukocytes" and/or "lymphopenia") was not quite effective in triaging and recognizing suspected covid-19 cases from patients with fever and other respiratory symptoms (figure s2). in the analysis, the specificity of including those two biomarkers was only 10·2% and the ppv was low, only 48·4%, meaning that more than half of patients identified using this guideline were not true covid-19patients. this may be because normal or decreased leukocytes and lymphopenia are not covid-19 specific and can also be seen in other community-acquired viral pneumonia. 28 the who interim guideline is followed worldwide, including developed or undeveloped countries. 11 it defines suspected patients at triage based on epidemiological history and clinical symptoms. our finding of eosinopenia and increased hs-crp in covid-19 patients may be a useful supplement to the triage strategy recommended by current who interim guideline, 11 as eosinophil counts and hs-crp levels could be conveniently measured by technically simple routine blood tests even in small community clinics in resource-limited regions, which is particularly critical given that covid-19 has been affecting more than 200 countries and territories, 3 such as countries in middle-east and africa. 29 this study has several limitations. first, the finding was obtained from the retrospective study, and the sample size in our study was not large and further validation of our findings in a larger prospective cohort is needed. second, potential selection biases exist due to the hospital-based case-control study design.third, nucleic acid test could sometimes yield false negative results mainly due to an insufficient viral load below the detection limit in collected nasopharyngeal swabs and the possible degradation of viral nuclei acids during sample collection, transportation, and storage. however, the findings were generally robust in our sensitivity analysis of using control patients who had twice or more nucleic acid negative testing results.in summary, the combination of eosinopenia and increased hs-crp may facilitate accurate and effective triage of suspected covid-19 patients from the aforementioned patients with covid-19-like pneumonia or respiratory infection. thus, this optimized triage could speed up diagnosis and treatment for covid-19 patients under current urgent situation. our findings may provide useful information for regions that will be or are now beginning to struggle with the outbreak to better design triage protocols preparing for potential covid-19 local outbreaks.all authors declare no conflict of interests. data are presented as n (%) and median (iqr).the or (95% ci) was calculated as the comparison of the abnormal biomarker group compared to the normal range group for the odds of having the covid-19 disease. the unit is mg/l for hs-crp, and 10 9 /l for leu, lym, and eos.aic, akaike information criteria; auc, area under the curve; covid-19, coronavirus disease; cr, consistency rate; eos: eosinopenia; hs-crp, high-sensitivity c-reactive protein increased; leu: normal or decreased number of leukocytes; npv, negative predictive value; ppv, positive predictive value; yi, youden index. the unit is mg/l for hscrp, and 10 9 /l for leu, lym, and eos.aic, akaike information criteria; auc, area under the curve; cr, consistency rate; eos: eosinopenia; hs-crp, high-sensitivity c-reactive protein increased; idi, integrated discrimination improvement; leu: normal or decreased number of leukocytes; lym: lymphopenia; nri, net reclassification improvement; npv, negative predictive value; ppv, positive predictive value; yi, youden index. covid-19, coronavirus disease; eos: eosinopenia; hs-crp, high-sensitivity c-reactive protein increased; leu: normal or decreased number of leukocytes; roc, receiver operating characteristic.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is an emerging respiratory infectious disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), and rapidly spread throughout the world [1] . the clinical manifestations and transmission routes of seasonal influenza a (h1n1) are similar to those of covid-19 [2, 3] . who reported that the prevalence of influenza and influenza-like illness were high in china and the united states in the 2019-2020 season [4] . distinguishing covid-19 and h1n1 at the early stage of outbreaks is essential because occupational safety measures, treatment, and prognosis are different between these entities. sars-cov-2 binds to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptors to invade human cells, and these receptors are highly expressed in the intestinal epithelium [5] . ace2 might be associated with cardiopulmonary disease via alterations in the gut and/or lung microbiomes [6] . previous studies have found that 3.34-11.4% of covid-19 patients had gastrointestinal symptoms, such as vomiting and diarrhea, especially in critically ill patients [7, 8] . moreover, viral rna and live viruses were detected in fecal samples, suggesting that the digestive tract might be a site of viral replication and activity [9] . however, the interaction between covid-19 and intestinal microorganisms is not fully understood.the intestinal flora is involved in host nutrient absorption and metabolism and has a profound impact on human health and disease [10] [11] [12] . previous studies indicated that the intestinal flora was closely related to respiratory virus infection and could affect the occurrence and development of diseases through the gut-lung axis [13] .moreover, influenza infection can affect the composition of the intestinal microbiota [14] , and intestinal microflora disorders reduce host antiviral immune response, thereby aggravating lung damage caused by these infections [15] .this cross-sectional study analyzed the gut microbiome of covid-19 patients, h1n1 patients, and healthy controls (hc) by high-throughput sequencing of the 16s rrna gene to provide a theoretical basis for differential diagnosis and intestinal microbial intervention. the results showed that biomarkers could be used to identify changes in the structure, composition, and function of the microbiome between these a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t patient groups.the study was approved by the research ethics committee of the first affiliated all subjects who received antibiotics, probiotics, or both within 4 weeks before enrollment were excluded. viral infections were confirmed by real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. only laboratory-confirmed cases with clinical symptoms were included in the study.patient data, including laboratory test results, clinical manifestations, and disease course, were obtained from medical records and laboratory information systems.fecal samples from covid-19 and h1n1 patients were collected at admission, a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t and fresh stools from healthy subjects were collected during physical examination.fecal samples were processed in the laboratory within 4 hours after collection and stored at -80°c until analysis.blood samples were taken from all study subjects for analyzing hematological variables, liver functions, kidney functions and serum cytokines, using routine clinical laboratory methods as described in the supplementary methods.given the potential presence of live virus in feces, all fecal samples were inactivated for biomarker identification, a two-step approach was adopted. first, a random forest model [20] was constructed for distinguishing between the two groups, and ten most predominant genera as candidate biomarkers were selected on the basis of a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t importance values (using the r package "randomforest", ntree=500) (supplementary   table s1 ). second, the differences in taxonomic composition taxa between two cohort groups were identified using the linear discriminant analysis (lda) effect size (lefse) analysis (http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/galaxy/). candidate biomarkers with a lda>3.5 were selected as final biomarkers. the discriminatory ability of the biomarkers was evaluated by plotting receiver-operating characteristic (roc) curves and calculating the area under the roc curve (auc) using r software's proc package.continuous variables were reported as means ± standard deviations, and statistical comparisons were made using the independent t-test. non-normally distributed variables were expressed as interquartile range (iqr), and comparisons were conducted using the mann-whitney u test. for correlation analysis, spearman's rank test was performed. statistical analysis was performed using spss version 20.0 (spss inc., chicago, il). p values of less than 0.05 after multiple-comparison correction using the false discovery rate method were considered significant.the study population included 30 hospitalized patients with confirmed sars-cov-2 there were no significance differences in age, gender, and body mass index (bmi) between the groups. however, there were significant differences in platelet a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t count, aspartate aminotransferase (ast), il-4, and tnf-α between h1n1 and covid-19 patients (p<0.05). the rate of hypertension did not differ significantly between these two groups (p=0.445). with regard to inflammatory markers, there was a significant difference in procalcitonin (p=0.016) but no significant difference in c-reactive protein (crp) (p=0.832) between h1n1 and covid-19 patients. there were significant differences in lymphocyte count, alanine aminotransferase (alt), il-2, il-4, il-6, il-10 and tnf-α between hc and covid-19 patients.according to clinical guidelines, covid-19 severity on admission was categorized as general in 15 patients and severe in 15 patients. the clinical data of these subjects were summarized and compared (supplementary table s2 ). there was a significant difference in white blood cell (wbc) count, neutrophil count, lymphocyte count, and lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) between these two groups (p<0.05).the characteristics of the gut microbiome in patients with respiratory virus infections were analyzed by 16s rdna gene sequencing of 84 fecal samples (one sample per patient). after merging and filtering, 4,105,869 high-quality sequence reads were generated, with an average of 48,879 sequences per sample for subsequent data analysis.the mean community richness and microbial diversity were significantly lower in covid-19 and h1n1 patients than in hc, according to shannon diversity index and chao diversity index ( figures 1a, b) . the number of otus in the covid-19, h1n1, and hc groups was 911, 960, and 922, respectively. more than 50% of 1242otus were shared by the three groups, and 62.3% of otus overlapped between the covid-19 group and hc ( figure 1c ). pcoa of bray-curtis distances indicated differences in the fecal microbiota between covid-19 and h1n1 patients and between these groups and hc (anosim, r=0.36, p=0.001) ( figure 1d ). ternary plot showed that the relative abundance of streptococcus and escherichia-shigella was significantly higher in covid-19 and h1n1 patients, respectively ( figure 1e ).the analysis of group similarities indicated that differences in richness, diversity, a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t and structure of the gut microbiota were not significantly different between general and severe covid-19 patients (anosim, p=0.426; supplementary figure s1 ), indicating that the experimental design was adequate.to investigate changes in the microbiota of covid-19 patients, we assessed relative abundance in the three groups at the phylum, class, family, and genus levels ( figure   2 lefse analysis was used to determine and distinguish the composition of the gut microbiome between the covid-19 group and hc. the gut microbiome of the figure s2) . figure s2) .the gut microbiota signature of covid-19 and h1n1 patients was analyzed to assess correlations between disease characteristics and the microbiome. the abundance of prevotella, ezakiella, murdochiella, and porphyromonas was higher in the h1n1 group than in covid-19 patients ( figure 4a ). in addition, seven final biomarkers (streptococcus, fusicatenibacter, collinsella, dorea, agathobacter, eubacterium hallii group, ruminococcus torques group) were selected reference the two-step schema in the method to distinguish the two cohorts, with an auc of 0.94 (95% ci, 0.87-1.00) ( figure 4b ).spearman analysis was conducted to evaluate the correlation between genera (abundance >0.1%) and clinical indexes, including wbc, crp, pct, d-dimer, il-2, il-4, il-6, and tnf-α in covid-19 and h1n1 patients, respectively. the significance thresholds were absolute correlation coefficients higher than 0.4 and p values lower than 0.05, as shown in figure 5 . intestinibacter, and prevotella) ( figure 5b ). increasing evidence indicates the intimate relationship between the gastrointestinal and respiratory tract, which is known as the gut-lung axis [13] . deriu stimulating the production of ifn-γ by these cells [14] . studies have identified sars-cov-2 rna in stool specimens of infected patients [9] , and rna analysis demonstrated that the duration of viral shedding from stool was longer than that from respiratory samples [32] . in addition, host ace2 receptors are highly expressed in the gastrointestinal epithelium [7] . sars-cov-2 may interfere with nutrient absorption by binding to ace2 receptors, causing gastroenteritis-like symptoms, and disrupting intestinal homeostasis. we declare no competing interests. m a n u s c r i p t community-acquired pneumonia (cap) is a frequently seen disease, with high morbidity and mortality, accounting for 600,000 hospitalizations each year. it represents the seventh leading cause of death in the usa [1] . cap prognosis depends on the rapidity of specific treatment, which should ideally be initiated within four hours and no later than eight hours after diagnosis [2, 3] . cap diagnosis is based on the clustering of non-specific pulmonary and general symptoms [4, 5] , an increase in biomarkers reflecting systemic inflammatory response syndrome (sirs), and the presence of new parenchymal infiltrates on chest x-ray. however, cap diagnosis remains uncertain in many cases with alternative diagnoses, such as cardiac failure, acute bronchitis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) exacerbations, pulmonary embolism, neoplasia, and sepsis [6, 7] .part of the uncertainty of cap diagnosis may be due to the high rate of chest x-ray misdiagnosis [8, 9] ; over diagnosis of cap is frequent when infiltrates of noninfectious origin coexist with pulmonary or general symptoms, and the diagnosis of cap is often ignored when the lung infiltrates are at the limit of visibility or are hidden due to superposition [10] . we recently published a study in which thoracic ct scan was systematically performed in a population of clinically suspected cap patients visiting the emergency department for cap (the escaped study) [11] . we showed that cap diagnosis based on chest x-ray led to a false cap diagnosis in many patients: among cap suspected patients with radiological pulmonary infiltrate, cap diagnosis was excluded in around 30 % of patients based on ct scan results; on the contrary, among patients without radiological pulmonary infiltrate, one-third had a pulmonary infiltrate on thoracic ct-scan. we also reported the isolation of viruses in one-third of patients [11, 12] .several attempts have been made to improve cap diagnosis based on biomarkers, such as c-reactive protein (crp) and procalcitonin (pct); however, there are conflicting data on their reliability [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] . this could be due to the consideration of cap diagnosis based on chest x-ray as establishing pulmonary infection. in the present study, we aimed to analyze crp and pct values in the population of the escaped study reported above for whom cap diagnosis was established by an adjudication committee which founded its judgment on all usual available data, systematic multidetector thoracic ct scan performed at inclusion, and results from a day-28 follow-up. we also analyzed whether the viral etiology of definite cap based on polymerase chain reaction (pcr) multiplex naso-pharyngeal swab interfered with the accuracy of the biomarkers.setting escaped was a multicenter, prospective, interventional study, entitled "early thoracic ct-scan for community-acquired pneumonia at the emergency department (escaped)" [11] , conducted from november 2011 to january 2013, in four emergency departments (eds) of four tertiary teaching hospitals in paris, france, designed to measure the impact of thoracic ct scan on clinical decision. the study was sponsored and monitored by the paris public health hospitals, and funded by the french ministry of health. the french health authorities (agence nationale de sécurité des medicaments et produits de santé, ansm) and the institutional review board for the protection of human subjects approved the study protocol and patient informed consent procedures. all enrolled patients provided written informed consent for inclusion. the protocol was registered in the clinicaltrial.gov website under the pacscan acronym, the french translation of the english escaped acronym (nct01574066). the ethics committee of ile de france (comité de protection des personnes. paris n°2 011-oct-12749) approved the study protocol.the primary objective was to compare crp and pct values in the four different categories of cap level of certainty using the day-28 adjudication committee classification. the four categories were: 1) absence of cap hereafter referred to as excluded cap diagnosis; 2) possible cap; 3) probable cap; and 4) definite cap. the secondary objectives were to assess whether crp and pct were associated with cap diagnosis using sensitivity analyses in three successive subgroups chosen a priori; 1) when specifically considering patients classified as having excluded cap diagnosis and definite cap (i.e., the patients for whom the level of certainty was the highest); 2) when patients with excluded cap diagnosis and diagnosed extra-pulmonary infectious disease (which may increase biomarker values) were not taken into account, in the excluded cap group; and 3) when patients classified as viral cap were not taken into account in the definite cap group, as pct has been reported to be lower in viral infections as compared to bacterial infections [18] .consecutive adults ( [19] .multidetector thoracic ct-scan was performed after chest x-ray, ideally within the four hours following inclusion. chest x-ray and thoracic ct-scan were performed using a standardized protocol. the four levels of cap probability according to ct scan were defined as definite (systematic alveolar condensation, alveolar condensation with peripheral and localized ground glass opacities, bronchiolar focal or multifocal micronodules), probable (peripheral alveolar condensation, retractile systematic alveolar condensation, or diffuse ground glass opacities), possible (pulmonary infarct), or excluded (pulmonary mass, other abnormalities, or normal images). scan views were recorded on a dvd.based on data collected from baseline standardized case report forms, dvd recorded pictures of x-ray and ctscan, and blinded to local interpretations, an adjudication committee consisting of three independent senior experts in infectious diseases, pneumology and radiology retrospectively assigned the probability of cap diagnosis using the same 4-level likert scale, with all available data including patients' discharge summary, and follow-up data obtained by assistant investigators who contacted by phone either the patient, relatives or general practitioners at day 28. for this study, the gold standard of cap was the diagnosis assessed by this adjudication committee. alternative diagnoses were established for excluded cap and classified as non-cap pulmonary diseases and extra-pulmonary infectious diseases and others.blood samples were collected at inclusion in sodium heparin-treated tubes, centrifuged, and stored at −40°c until completion of the study. crp and pct concentrations were measured a posteriori on plasma collection (see additional file 1 for methodology), except for patients in whom marker dosage was performed by the emergency practitioner on his own initiative.naso-pharyngeal swabs were collected at enrollment and placed in a middle virocult mwe (sigma®) transport medium. samples were kept at room temperature and sent to the virology laboratory of bichat -claude bernard hospital (paris) as soon as possible after collection. the samples were not frozen and thawed. multiplex pcr (respifinder-19 assay (pathofinder®, maastricht, netherlands)) was performed on naso-pharyngeal swabs to detect 15 respiratory viruses -coronavirus 229e, nl63, oc43, human metapneumovirus (hmpv), influenza a, a (h1n1) pdm2009 and b viruses, parainfluenza viruses 1, 2, 3, and 4, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) a and b, rhinovirus, adenovirus, and 4 intracellular bacteria -bordetella pertussis, chlamydophila pneumoniae, legionella pneumophila, mycoplasma pneumoniae, in one reaction. the multiplex pcr results were not available to the adjudication committee. routine microbiological examinations were also performed at the discretion of the emergency physicians and included blood culture, sputum culture, and antigenuria (see additional file 1 for methodology). cap, classified as definite, was considered as being of viral origin when multiplex pcr was positive for at least one of the 15 respiratory viruses and no bacteria were found using pcr and routine bacterial microbiological samples (sputum, blood culture, antigenuria) when performed.baseline and follow-up characteristics were described by means and standard deviations (sd) or by median and interquartile range (iqr) for continuous variables normally distributed or with skewed distribution, respectively, and by percentages for categorical variables, for the total study population and for the study groups. we performed chi-square or fisher exact tests when appropriate for qualitative variables, and the student or mann-whitney tests for continuous variables with skewed distributions to compare baseline patient characteristics and study outcomes between study groups.the distribution values of the biomarkers were determined in the different populations of patients using boxplots. the performances of crp and pct in predicting definite cap were evaluated by sensitivity analysis (definite cap vs excluded cap). crp was evaluated at several cut-off points of 20 mg/l, 30 mg/l, 50 mg/l, 70 mg/l, and 100 mg/l, values used in previous studies [15, 20, 21] . several cut-off points for pct were chosen at the level of 0.10 μg/l [18] , and at the two levels for suspected bacterial infection as stated by the manufacturer, i.e., 0.25 μg/l and 0.50 μg/l. sensitivities, specificities, positive predictive values (ppvs), negative predictive values (npvs), and likelihood ratio were calculated. receiver operating characteristic (roc) curves were drawn, area under the curve auc was computed and optimal cut-off was identified by the maximization of the youden's index, comparing biomarker values in patients with excluded cap and definite cap. from these optimal cut-offs for crp and pct, sensitivity analyses were performed combining the crp and pct cut-offs.a multivariate logistic regression model was built to identify factors associated with having definite cap as compared to having an excluded cap diagnosis. we excluded from the excluded cap diagnosis group, patients with an extra-pulmonary infectious disease. all variables with a p value of < 0.25 in the bivariate analysis were entered into a multivariate logistic regression with a backward stepwise approach; the discrimination was evaluated by the c-index and its 95 % confidence interval (95 % ci) and the calibration was evaluated by the hosmer lemeshow goodness-of-fit test.all tests were two-sided, and p-values below 0.05 were considered to denote statistical significance. all statistical analyses were performed using spss statistical software version 21.0 (spss inc., chicago, il, usa).two hundred patients with suspected cap out of the 319 in the escaped study were included in the present study, for which crp and pct assays and nasopharyngeal swab for multiplex pcr were available (fig. 1) . characteristics of the 200 patients (age, age more than 65, gender, probability of cap diagnosis by adjudication committee) were not significantly different from those of the 119 other patients of the escaped study and are summarized in table 1 . crp and pct assays were performed based on the emergency practitioner's own initiative in 70 patients for crp and 131 for pct, or performed a posteriori on plasma samples of the remaining patients. sex ratio was approximately 1. more than half of the patients (54 %) were 65 years of age or older. the pulmonary infiltrates were seen on chest x-ray in 127 (63.5 %) patients. thoracic ct-scan excluded a cap diagnosis in 16.5 % of these 127 patients; on the contrary, thoracic ct-scan revealed a parenchymal infiltrate in 27 % of the 73 patients without infiltrate on chest x-ray.based on all available data including multidetector ct scan results (but excluding pcr results), the adjudication the crp and pct distributions in the 200 patients are presented in fig. 2 a statistically significant difference between the two groups (excluded cap vs definite cap) was demonstrated for several cut-off points for crp and pct ( table 2 ). for crp, the value of 50 mg/l resulted in a ppv of 0.76 and a npv of 0.75. for pct, no value resulted in a satisfactory ppv or npv. for these two biochemical markers, the ability to predict cap was evaluated by a roc curve. the auc was 0.787 (95 % ci 0.717-0.857), optimal cut-off = 45.9 mg/l for crp (fig. 3 ) and 0.655 (95 % ci 0.570-0.739), optimal cut-off = 0.13 μg/ l for pct (fig. 4) .sensitivity analyses for the combination of crp and pct, using these optimal cut-offs, resulted in a ppv of 0.74 and a npv of 0.58. use of the other pct cut-offs did not result in better ppv or npv ( table 2) . the present study is novel as patients prospectively benefited from extensive investigation to determine the diagnosis of cap in the ed, including both early multidetector thoracic ct-scan and day-28 adjudication committee. this led to the correction of cap diagnosis previously based on chest x-ray in a high number of patients. in these extensively characterized patients, both crp and pct lacked operational precision to allow the decisionmaking process to rule out or confirm diagnosis of cap even in selected subgroups.the clinical characteristics of the patients included in this sub-study are consistent with those in the current literature. as previously reported, patients frequently had a history of respiratory disorders, cancer and congestive heart failure [21, 22] . the design of the escaped study required exclusion of patients within the highest crb 65 categories, which limited the inclusion of patients older than 65. this may explain why the mean age of our patients (64 years) falls within the lower values of those reported elsewhere [19] . data to identify the microbial agent responsible for the disease were collected by the usual techniques and multiplex pcr. viral identification using naso-pharyngeal pcr that revealed viral respiratory infection in approximately one-third of cases was concordant with values reported in the literature [23] . therefore, we believe that our results can be extrapolated to most emergency patients suffering from cap.in the present study, patients were recruited on the basis of initial clinical assessment for the diagnosis of cap. therefore, we believe that the characteristics of the patients closely correspond to those that lead practitioners to consider a possible diagnosis of cap. in these patients, the design of our study allowed us to confirm or refute cap diagnosis with a high level of certainty. results confirmed the poor predictive value of clinical symptoms (new onset of systemic features and symptoms of an acute lower respiratory tract illness) in identifying cap patients [21] . indeed, clinical presentation of excluded cap patients was similar to that of definite cap patients except for fever and cough that were more frequent in definite cap patients. furthermore, the design also revealed that the combination of clinical symptoms and chest x-ray results led to cap misdiagnosis in a high number of patients, including the 98 whose cap diagnosis was excluded by the adjudication committee and who would have been considered as possible, probable or definite cap without the use of the ct scan. this low specificity of clinical-standard radiological evaluation led to the consideration of either non-infectious pulmonary diseases (such as, cardiac failure, pulmonary embolism, pulmonary neoplasia or bronchitis) or extra-pulmonary infectious diseases as cap. of note, some of these diseases are also associated with increased biomarker values. this raises concerns about previous evaluations of biomarkers in cap-suspected patients, which used clinical and standard radiological (chest x-ray) evaluations as the gold standard for cap diagnosis [15] . the use of biomarkers has been advocated to improve diagnosis and management of patients with lower respiratory tract infections [14] . however, this issue is still unresolved [24] , with conflicting positions [14, 15, 25, 26] . in our study, while median values of both biomarkers did increase with level of certainty for cap diagnosis, we were unable to establish discriminating values for pct. recent data suggested that crp could be of more help in assisting in the diagnosis of lower respiratory tract infections (lrti) [15, 27, 28] . in our study, although crp seems more discriminating than pct, neither the experimental exclusion of extra-pulmonary bacterial infections from the excluded cap group, nor the exclusion of viral cap from the definite cap patients group, made possible the determination of a discriminant cutoff. the combination of crp and pct was not more discriminating than each biomarker separately. an operational algorithm has been released to assist physicians in prescribing antimicrobial therapy [14, 26, 29] . according to this strategy, a pct concentration higher than 0.25 μg/l should prompt administration of antibiotics to patients with suspected lrti. in our study, this value was associated with poor performance. additionally, mean pct levels remained above this threshold both in excluded cap patients without infectious disorders and in definite cap presumably related to virus. therefore, the gold standard for the diagnosis of cap may influence the performance and utility of pct in this setting.this study has some limitations. first, the adjudication committee was not blinded to the value of biomarkers measured at bedside in some patients (70 for crp and 131 for pct) and its cap classification could thus have been influenced by these results. however, the lack of statistically significant differences in the mean crp and pct values in the definite cap cases, whether or not these biomarkers were available for the adjudication committee, argues against a major impact of these results on adjudication committee classification. second, another critical point is the prescription of antibiotic therapy (34 %) previous to inclusion. we cannot exclude that these previously-treated cap patients may have altered biomarker performance and reduced the yield of bacterial cultures, although such a population reflects the usual emergency department practice. third, multiplex pcr was performed on naso-pharyngeal sampling and not on lower respiratory tract samples, which does not allow definite confirmation of the viral origin of cap. however, a recent large study on cap patients which reported a viral etiology of cap at a comparable rate, did not find upper respiratory tract shedding in a control population without cap explored during the same year and season [30] . finally, even if multidetector thoracic ct scan is a better imaging examination than x-ray to explore the chest, only invasive local microbiological samples would have provided a diagnosis with certainty.given the diversity of the clinical and radiological cap presentations, cap diagnosis is often uncertain. in our population of patients treated in the emergency room with clinical symptoms evoking cap, neither crp nor pct cut-off values carried sufficient weight to confirm or refute cap diagnosis at bedside; this underlines that these biomarkers are telltales of the host inflammatory response to the intrusion of microorganisms independent of the site of infection. these results, based on a systematic thoracic ct scan evaluation of cap-suspected patients, do not argue for the use of crp and pct in routine care to diagnose cap with certainty in patients visiting the ed for suspected cap. p r e p r i n t biomarkers and outcomes in covid-19 pneumoniaa viral pneumonia of unknown cause detected in wuhan, china was first reported to the world health organization (who) country office in china on 31 december 2019. 1 in the united states, the virus was first seen in january 2020, in a traveler who returned from china. 2 by february 2020, who had given the virus a name: the novel coronavirus 2019, shorthand covid-19. in early march 2020, shortly after the first cluster of cases was diagnosed in the western united states, 3 who declared a pandemic.new york city was the first major metropolitan area on the us east coast to see large numbers of covid-19 patients. by early march, the virus was confirmed in the district of columbia. 4 shortly thereafter, the first cases were diagnosed at george washington university hospital (gwuh) in washington, dc. in the following 2 months, 299 cases of confirmed covid-19 were admitted to our hospitalist service.previous studies of covid-19 have identified various biologic markers associated with poor prognosis. an association between mortality and both elevated inflammatory markers and coagulation functional indices was first reported in a retrospective cohort study of 138 patients with covid-19 in wuhan. 5 in this study, higher d-dimer and il-6 levels were seen in patients requiring icu care, in patients with ards, and in non-survivors. also published in march 2020, a second retrospective analysis of 191 patients found that elevated levels of ldh, ferritin, d-dimer, and il-6 were associated with mortality. 6 this group reported that their patients with d-dimer greater than 1mcg/l at the time of admission had an 18-fold increase in the odds of in-hospital death. in a subsequent retrospective analysis conducted at tongji hospital, tang based on these and other reports in the literature, 9 clinicians in the us have been measuring a variety of biologic markers in covid-19 patients. the clinical impact of these biological markers on outcomes in the u.s. population remains unclear. at gwuh, during the first few weeks of the covid-19 pandemic, hospitalists typically measured markers of inflammation and coagulopathy, but no standardized protocol for laboratory testing had been established. our team sought to examine the association between these markers and clinical outcomes of our covid-19 patients, with the goal of identifying which markers had clinical utility in assessing prognosis.all adult (>18 years of age) patients diagnosed with covid-19 and admitted to the medicine service at gwuh between march 12, 2020 and may 9, 2020 were included in the study. clinical, laboratory and outcome data were extracted from electronic medical records using a standardized data collection form. age, sex, bmi, comorbidities, and medications were recorded. in addition to routine admission laboratory studies, c-reactive protein (crp), d-dimer, interleukin 6 (il-6), ferritin, and lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) were recorded. further, the maximum oxygen requirements prior to transfer to intensive care unit, transfer to the icu, necessity for mechanical ventilation, and discharge status were noted.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. the data analysis was conducted using statistical software r. given the sample size and the need for reliable markers for disease severity, the continuous variables were transformed into categorical variables. for il-6, ferritin, crp, and ldh, the median of each group was used as the threshold [il-6 > 60 pg/ml (normal range 0.0-15.5 pg/ml), ferritin > 450 ng/ml (normal range 20-450 ng/ml), and crp > 90 mg/l (normal range 0.0-9.0 mg/l), and ldh is 1200 u/l (normal 400-800 u/l). for d-dimer (normal range 0.20-0.28 mcg/ml), a level of 3 mcg/ml was used. this level had been reported in the recent literature from china as having a higher specificity for predicting thrombi. 10 after the key characteristics of the variables were studied, a logistic regression model was fitted with ddimer, il-6, ldh, ferritin, and crp with icu admission, intubation, and death sequentially. as all the coefficients of these markers were found to be statistically significant, the odds ratio of all three outcomes were calculated for patients with the categorical variables of il-6, d-dimer, ferritin, ldh and crp.a stratification analysis was carried out with every one of the comorbid conditions recorded. these conditions were classified by the elixhauser disease severity index and grouped into 8 categories of interest. a weighted ahrq disease severity index was also calculated and later transformed into a binary variable with 1 indicating patients with a score higher than 10. furthermore, a stratification with regards to sex and bmi>30 was carried out. the mean age of patients within each outcome category was also compared.this study was approved by the institutional review board at george washington university.a total of 299 patients with confirmed covid-19 positive results were admitted to the hospitalist service at gwuh between march 12 th and may 9 th , 2020. of these patients, 200 had all the biomarkers of interest measured by their clinicians. the median follow-up period was 8 days. sixty-nine patients (23%) were transferred to the icu, thirty-nine patients (13%) required intubation and seventy-one patients (23.7%) died. the key laboratory findings for the 5 biomarkers can be found in table 1, and the comorbid conditions are illustrated in table 2. if any of the markers were measured a few times during the hospitalization, the peak value was used during analysis.univariate logistic regression models yielded statistically significant estimates for il-6 > 60 pg/ml, ddimer > 3 mcg/ml, crp > 90 mg/l, ferritin > 450 ng/ml and ldh > 1200 u/l for icu admission and intubation, and death. the odds ratio of the three outcomes with the different markers is illustrated in table 3. htn, heart disease, and neurologic disorders had significant association with icu admission, intubation and death. the other medical conditions were not significant, except for ckd having a significant association with death. male sex had a higher odds ratio of intubation and icu transfer than female sex. a separate stratified analysis was conducted for every marker with respect to the comorbid conditions to eliminate any confounding effect. the mantel-haenszel test for heterogeneity was not significant except for cancer (hematologic and solid malignancies) with respect to d-dimer, and sex with respect to il-6. the adjusted or are thus reported in table 3.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. although population-based studies have identified risk factors for poor prognosis in covid-19, the clinical course of individual patients infected with the virus is highly variable. risk stratification of medical comorbidities as well as biologic markers predicting clinical deterioration are needed for the u.s. population.in our cohort of patients, the only comorbidities associated with poor outcomes across all three endpoints were history of hypertension, cva, and heart disease. chronic kidney disease was associated with an increased odds of death. other analyses have demonstrated an association between obesity and diabetes as having poor outcomes in hospitalized patients with covid-19 infection. 5, 6, 11 we suspect that our cohort of patients was too small to detect any other significant comorbidities.our retrospective study did identify an association between biomarkers and clinical deterioration as well as death. elevated levels of il-6, d-dimer, crp, ldh, and ferritin all had an independent increased risk for the clinical outcomes assessed (icu admission, invasive ventilatory support and death), which were statistically significant. specifically, in our cohort, these biomarkers remained statistically significant in patients with hypertension and cardiovascular disease. these associations were also independent of any patient co-morbidities, except for cancer which appeared to have an effect on d-dimer. however, the prevalence of cancer in this population was low. thus, a higher number of patients with this condition is required to confirm the confounding effect of cancer on d-dimer.of further significance is that our cohort of covid-19 patients admitted to the hospitalist service revealed that the highest odds of death occurred when the ldh level was greater than 1200 u/l and a ddimer level greater than 3 mcg/ml. though more modest, all other biomarkers including il-6, ferritin, and crp also carried a statistically significant increased odds of death. these findings appear to corroborate that the inflammatory indices of il-6, crp, and ferritin are independently associated with patients becoming critically ill, requiring ventilatory support, and dying. it remains unclear whether these inflammatory indicators are biologic markers of disease or mediators of the hypothesized 'cytokine storm,' in which hyperinflammation and multi-organ disease arise through excessive cytokine release from uncontrolled immune activation. 12 however, there are no studies to aid in contextualizing the significance of inflammatory biomarkers. it is possible these markers predict clinical course; if so, they could inform therapeutic interventions rather than simply demonstrate a consequence of the disease. further study on the timing and frequency of measuring inflammatory biomarkers, and the value of trending them as it relates to clinical outcomes, is clearly warranted.in our cohort, the odds of intubation were the highest with a d-dimer greater than 3 mcg/ml. these patients had a higher likelihood of clinically deteriorating and transferring to the icu, requiring mechanical ventilatory support, and greater odds of death. our decision to use a d-dimer threshold of 3 mcg/ml, rather than the median of 2.1 mcg/ml, was based on a study pointing to a d-dimer threshold of 3 mcg/ml as having a higher specificity for identifying patient with thrombotic complication. 10 the clinical predictive value of an elevated d-dimer corroborates findings observed in prior studies (zhou' (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.27.20115105 doi: medrxiv preprint p r e p r i n t biomarkers and outcomes in covid-19 pneumonia suggestive of a hypercoagulable state. 13, 14, 15 in addition, a single retrospective study has demonstrated mortality benefit in patients with high d-dimer levels (6 times the upper limit of normal) who were treated with prophylactic doses of lmwh. 16 of note, the mortality rate in their patients was substantially higher than that observed in our cohort, suggesting that we may be already achieving a benefit from the dvt prophylaxis that is routinely used in the us, in contrast to the clinical practice in china. the cohort of patients that tang et al reviewed were not routinely treated with chemoprophylaxis for prevention of dvt. whether therapeutic anticoagulation with heparin would yield greater benefit has yet to be demonstrated and deserves further clinical study.our study has some limitations. first, due to the retrospective study design, not all laboratory tests were done on all patients and, as a result, the role of an individual marker might be overestimated. selection bias could overestimate the utility of these biomarkers. our cohort did not include covid-19 patients who were evaluated in the emergency room and deemed to be clinically well enough to return home. if biomarkers in these discharged patients were also elevated, their predictive value would be diminished. however, checking inflammatory biomarkers is not the standard of care in the emergency department. perhaps the clinical context (referred for hospitalization) enhances the benefit of these biomarkers for an inpatient team.despite these limitations, we believe these markers can aid clinicians in identifying hospitalized covid-19 patients at risk of clinical deterioration. our findings suggest that regularly checking il-6, d-dimer, crp, ldh, and ferritin has clinical utility in this respect, especially when these markers are above the cutoff values mentioned. following these biomarkers could ensure closer monitoring of these patients and provide guidance and standardization in the allocation of increasingly scarce resources.laboratory markers of inflammation and coagulopathy can help clinicians identify patients who are at high risk for clinical deterioration. future directions of research could focus on the temporal variability of these biomarkers and outcomes in covid-19 patients, as well as, the effect of treatment with full dose anticoagulation. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 29, 2020. a coronavirus, designated by the world health organization as 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) and by the coronavirus study group of the international committee on taxonomy of viruses as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), has been spreading worldwide, producing the coronavirus disease 2019 . although its mechanism of infection is still not known, it has affinity for and replicates in cells located in the lower airways. the most characteristic clinical sign is the production of a respiratory distress syndrome that can range from mild malaise to death, having worse prognosis in elderly patients with comorbidities [1] . in addition, one of the symptoms, referred by many patients, is the loss of sensory acuity, including smell and taste [2] . on the 18th of april, the number of cases worldwide was 2,261,034 with 154,726 deaths.saliva has been increasingly used over the last few decades for evaluating human health. it is an integrated mixture of secretions of the different salivary glands, desquamated oral epithelial cells, gingival crevicular fluid, and different microorganisms [3] . it also contains a large number of proteins such as immunoglobulins, mucins, and enzymes, as well as metabolites, hormones, and electrolytes. this composition allows the detection of pathogens in saliva and also the quantification of biomarkers that can provide information about the immunological, inflammatory, endocrine, and metabolic status of the individual. in some cases, its value to detect physiological changes is similar or superior to serum, such as for the detection of acute stress by alpha-amylase or cortisol [4] . overall, saliva appears to be a fluid of enormous potential in health assessment, especially due to the clinical information that it can provide and the non-invasive nature of its collection, which can be performed by individuals without particular training and with no major requirements in terms of equipment or facilities.currently, naso and oropharyngeal swabs are the two main recommended upper respiratory tract specimen types for covid-19 diagnostic testing, although the use of saliva for the diagnosis of the disease has been recently suggested [5, 6] . furthermore, in recent days, a test for assessing the rna in saliva samples was approved by the us food and drug administration [7] .the objective of this report is to provide updated information about the use of saliva as a sample for laboratory analysis in covid-19 investigations. for this purpose, the advantages of the use of this biofluid are described and the scientific evidence is presented, which supports the concept that the analysis of saliva in patients with covid-19 could allow for the detection of the virus and antibodies produced against it, as well as the assessment of the non-specific, innate immune response. finally, the possibility of the use of saliva for finding new biomarkers in this disease and some general recommendations that could contribute to a more appropriate use of this sample will be highlighted.the use of naso and oropharyngeal swabs have several limitations, such as the discomfort for the patient and the need for the intervention of a healthcare worker in a disease with a high risk of nosocomial transmission [8] . these collection systems can also induce coughing and sneezing, generating aerosol, which can transmit the virus. in addition, in cases of thrombocytopenia or any other coagulation disorder, this procedure can cause bleeding. these drawbacks can limit the use of swabs, especially in serial monitoring or mass test programs. sputum has been also proposed as a non-invasive lower respiratory tract specimen, but 72% of covid-19 patients were not able to produce it for collection [9] . the difficulty of obtaining sputum also has been described in sars-cov, a virus with many similarities with the covid-2019, especially at early stages of infection, when no cough or only dry cough is present [10] . the use of saliva could improve these drawbacks as it has the following advantages:-it can be collected by the patient, even at home, minimizing the exposure of health care workers to nosocomial infections. this also reduces the need for health care personnel and waiting times for sample collection, resulting in easier crowd control regulations in clinical settings and thus avoiding further virus transmission. -it is easily accepted by the patients since it is non-painful and non-stressful. therefore, it can be used for serial samplings and in large scale or epidemiological studies, being especially advantageous in certain populations, such as children [11] . -it is easy, fast, and cheap to collect, allowing widespread testing.in the particular case of sars-cov-2, saliva could be used for evaluating different aspects of the disease, as shown in figure 1 , the evidence for which will be described in the following sections. currently there are publications from three different research groups that have used saliva for sars-cov-2 detection: -the group of dr. to published two reports using saliva collected by asking the patient to cough out saliva from their throat into a sterile container and adding a viral transport medium to the sample [12, 13] . these samples, in addition to salivary gland secretions, contained material from the posterior oropharynx, that could have come from respiratory secretions swept up from the tracheal-bronchial tree, and also secretions coming down from the nasopharynx.in these reports, the rna of the virus was identified in the saliva of 20 out of 23 patients who had previously been confirmed as infected by the detection of sars-cov-2 rna in their nasopharyngeal or sputum specimens, giving an overall diagnostic sensitivity of 87%. in addition, saliva tested negative in 33 patients from whom nasopharyngeal specimens were negative for sars-cov-2. the detection of the virus was by a real-time reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr) and the range of values was from 9.9 x 10 2 copies/ml to 1.2 x 10 8 copies/ml.-azzi et al. [14] collected saliva through passive drool. in cases of patients who were undergoing endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation, the collection was performed intraorally by a physician with the use of a pipette. these specimens possibly also contained respiratory secretions. in these conditions, sars-cov-2 was detected in all saliva samples collected from a group of 25 patients with severe to very severe disease, who were diagnosed by detection of the virus in pharyngeal or bronchoalveolar swabs. an rrt-pcr that detected a trend in viral load without quantification of the viral copies per millimeter, was used for virus detection.in this study, two patients who were monitored showed positive salivary results on the same days that their pharyngeal or bronchoalveolar swabs were negative. this raises the possibility that individuals can be contagious through their saliva even when pharyngeal swabs are negative. this could be a point in favor of the use of saliva for the virus detection and would be in line with the currently there are publications from three different research groups that have used saliva for sars-cov-2 detection: -the group of dr. to published two reports using saliva collected by asking the patient to cough out saliva from their throat into a sterile container and adding a viral transport medium to the sample [12, 13] . these samples, in addition to salivary gland secretions, contained material from the posterior oropharynx, that could have come from respiratory secretions swept up from the tracheal-bronchial tree, and also secretions coming down from the nasopharynx.in these reports, the rna of the virus was identified in the saliva of 20 out of 23 patients who had previously been confirmed as infected by the detection of sars-cov-2 rna in their nasopharyngeal or sputum specimens, giving an overall diagnostic sensitivity of 87%. in addition, saliva tested negative in 33 patients from whom nasopharyngeal specimens were negative for sars-cov-2. the detection of the virus was by a real-time reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr) and the range of values was from 9.9 × 10 2 copies/ml to 1.2 × 10 8 copies/ml. -azzi et al. [14] collected saliva through passive drool. in cases of patients who were undergoing endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation, the collection was performed intraorally by a physician with the use of a pipette. these specimens possibly also contained respiratory secretions. in these conditions, sars-cov-2 was detected in all saliva samples collected from a group of 25 patients with severe to very severe disease, who were diagnosed by detection of the virus in pharyngeal or bronchoalveolar swabs. an rrt-pcr that detected a trend in viral load without quantification of the viral copies per millimeter, was used for virus detection.in this study, two patients who were monitored showed positive salivary results on the same days that their pharyngeal or bronchoalveolar swabs were negative. this raises the possibility that individuals can be contagious through their saliva even when pharyngeal swabs are negative. this could be a point in favor of the use of saliva for the virus detection and would be in line with the description of salivary glands as potential reservoirs for covid-19 in asymptomatic but infected people [15] . - han et al. [16] collected saliva from a 27-day-old neonate diagnosed with covid-19 and reported values in the range of 10 5 copies/ml that were similar to the values obtained with pharyngeal swabs but lower than those from bronchoalveolar swabs.sars-cov was detected in the saliva of 14 sars patients at high amounts, ranging from 7.08 × 10 3 copies/ml to 6.38 × 10 8 copies/ml [10] . in the same study, throat wash by gargling 10 ml normal saline was collected in an airborne isolation room from all these patients and the supernatant was analyzed after centrifugation. the amount of sars-cov rna in the saliva was greater than in the throat wash, with values in the throat wash ranging from 9.58 × 10 2 copies/ml to 5.93 × 10 6 copies/ml [10] . this high detection rate appeared at a median of four days after disease onset and before the appearance of lung lesions. in another study, lower values (5.2-5.5 × 10 2 copies/ml) were obtained in the saliva of three patients with sars-cov [17] . these divergent results could be influenced by the differences in the methods used and samples collected.in an in vivo experiment in rhesus macaques, after intranasal inoculations with a pathogenic sars-cov, the angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 receptor positive epithelial cells lining the salivary gland ducts were target cells, being infected at an early stage [18] . sars-cov was readily detected in oral swabs in four infected macaques, but in only two of them was the virus detected in lungs and it was not detected in blood in any animal. this experiment suggests that the virus appears in saliva at an earlier stage of infection than in lungs and could reach saliva due to direct salivary gland infection.the group of dr. to, using saliva samples obtained by the expectoration of saliva into a sterile container, has reported a high concordance (higher than 90%) between saliva and nasopharyngeal specimens in the detection of coronavirus and other respiratory viruses, and in some patients, coronavirus was detected only in saliva but not in nasopharyngeal aspirate. in addition, they indicated that saliva can be used for the detection of patients who were subclinically infected with respiratory viruses. the authors indicated that these collected saliva could be mixed with sputum because it was obtained by expectoration [19] . in animals, the rna of the coronavirus, called porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (pedv), can be detected in the saliva of infected pigs by real-time pcr at the same time but at higher concentrations than in serum [20, 21] . in other species of virus such as the flavivirus zika, the virus can be detected in the saliva of infected human patients with higher sensitivity than in serum [22] . in addition, saliva is widely used in the diagnosis of cytomegalovirus infection [23] .another field where saliva may have a major potential for covid-19 is in screening for immunity. there is scientific evidence that specific antibodies against infectious diseases can be detected in saliva [24] . salivary igg and igm concentrations are much lower than in serum, although it has been suggested that they are in a similar proportion in relation to total protein in saliva as in serum [25] . in the particular case of igg, plasma and saliva igg profiles are highly similar for a large number of antigens [26] . it has been hypothesized that both salivary igg and igm are derived from blood, whereas iga is mainly produced by the salivary glands [24] .the presence of igm and igg in serum against components of the virus, such as 2019-ncovid nucleoprotein (np) and spike protein receptor binding domain (rbd), has been described in covid-19 patients 10 days or later after symptom onset [12] . although, to the author's knowledge, there are presently no studies regarding antibodies in saliva in covid-19. in animal species, there is evidence that saliva can be used for the assessment of antibody responses to coronavirus infections. for example, saliva igg and iga can be used to track levels of immunity against pedv disease over time [20] .in addition, saliva has been used in several viral diseases of humans for the detection of specific immunoglobulins to pathogens such as hepatitis a, b, and c, human immunodeficiency virus, and rubella virus [24, 27, 28] .the detection of antibodies in saliva could be potentially used for the control of covid-19 as occurred with other infectious diseases. for example, for infection with rubella, oral fluid testing has been offered by the public health laboratory service in the uk for cases notified to the office for national statistics (ons). in this program, saliva samples are collected between two and six weeks after the onset of symptoms and tested for virus specific igm. the assays used have been shown to be greater than 90% sensitive and specific [25] . it could be expected that saliva will have similar value in covid-19 diagnosis and monitoring. this is particularly interesting for two main reasons: (1) as long as there is no effective treatment or vaccine and person-to-person transmission has to be minimized, the possibility of identifying immune individuals will be invaluable in defining who and how particular individuals can be relieved from confinement and limited social contact; (2) there is a lot to establish and understand about immunity dynamics during the disease, and how long it remains after the individual has recovered [29] .in patients with covid-19, serum concentrations of acute phase proteins (apps), such as c-reactive protein (crp) and ferritin, are increased in the cases that develop more severe disease. their concentrations have been shown to correlate with the severity of the process [30, 31] . in inflammatory conditions, apps can increase before the appearance of clinical signs, being very early biomarkers [32] . in addition, increases in serum of several interleukins (il), such as il-6 and il-10, have been described in covid-19 patients [33] , and these cytokines are known to be mediators of the apps response.in humans and in animal models, a high correlation in crp between serum and saliva has been demonstrated [11, 34] . additionally, other apps such as ferritin, haptoglobin, serum amyloid a, different interleukins, and other analytes related to the immune response, such as adenosine deaminase (ada), can be measured in saliva [11, 35, 36] .these analytes can potentially be used as salivary biomarkers to assess the severity of the process and also to predict the development of more severe cases in covid-19.the use of proteomic techniques allows the identification of multiple proteins in saliva [37] . by comparing these proteins between healthy individuals and those with disease, it is possible to assess the differences, which can result from changes in the circulating levels of proteins and/or from changes in the salivary gland secretion, associated with a disease. these differences are valuable to understand the pathophysiological processes associated with the disease, and identify biomarkers that may allow an early and easy diagnosis, and have been studied in other viral diseases [38] .in covid-19, proteomic studies could allow for the discovery of new biomarkers for the disease and help to elucidate the loss of smell and taste by some patients [39] . it is known that the saliva proteome is related to taste sensitivity [40] . in this context, potential changes in the saliva proteome in this disease may be associated with the reduced taste perception.although saliva is a sample easy to collect, general recommendations should be followed for its use, some of which are particularly focused in the application to this disease, as shown in table 1 . use a standardized method for saliva collection, which minimizes the potential risk of transmission via contact by saliva droplets or aerosol.use appropriate conditions for sample preservation.use appropriate assays, validated and with sufficient sensitivity for application in saliva.increase the knowledge base on clinical applications, allowing for a more accurate interpretation of the results.1. the use of a standardized method of collection.different methods can be used for saliva collection, such as passive drool, different absorbent materials, or stimulation with citrate. these methods may have, in some cases, interference with selected analytes. in the particular case of the covid-19, two aspects should be addressed regarding the method of collection:-the possible differences between saliva obtained by passive drool or absorbent materials and by clearing the throat should be evaluated. in addition, some patients might not be able to clear the throat effectively to cough out saliva from deep in the throat and, therefore, this could decrease test sensitivity with this collection method, which should be explored. although there are no studies comparing the use of saliva with throat wash in covid-19, in the previous sars-cov epidemic similar results were obtained when throat wash with 10 ml of saline and saliva were compared [10] .-instead of direct spitting, the use of a straw or any device that avoids the creation and expansion of drops should be encouraged. the saliva of infected patients can contain viruses that may allow airborne transmission and also by oral droplets and, therefore, should be handled with care [14] . in sars-cov, it has been hypothesized that very small particles of the virus can be spread in the air [10] . therefore, special care should be taken during all the processes of sample collection, management, and analysis to eliminate this potential risk of transmission via contact with saliva droplets or aerosol.taking these facts into consideration, preliminary tests should ideally be made to establish the optimal method of collection, which may be different depending on the analyte to be measured. for example, in covid-19, it would be of interest to evaluate if the saliva obtained by clearing the throat could be more convenient for the detection of the virus, whereas the whole saliva obtained directly by drool could be more suitable for the quantification of antibodies or acute phase proteins.in addition, ideally, the salivary flow should be controlled by establishing a fixed amount of time during which saliva is collected (e.g., one minute). it is worthwhile to indicate that the report of results should be standardized, since in some cases, such as for selected interleukins or alpha-amylase, the way of expressing the values can influence their interpretation [4] . furthermore, the need for saliva sample centrifugation and the effect of this centrifugation on the analyte of interest should be assessed. avoiding centrifugation can speed the sample processing, allowing the use of rapid point of care tests; however, centrifugation helps to eliminate components that can interfere with subsequent assays.it is known that the degradation of saliva components can occur under certain storage conditions [41] . as such, it is important to know the best storage conditions for samples that allow the maximum preservation of the analytes to be analyzed. nevertheless, while such data are lacking, it is recommended to keep samples refrigerated until arrival at the lab to be analyzed and use −80 • c temperatures if the samples are stored.3. use of appropriate assays.ideally, the assays used should be sensitive enough for detecting low amounts of the analyte that can appear in saliva. in this line, highly sensitive immunoassays, such as those based on time-resolved fluorescence or similar technologies, would be recommended for immunoglobulins and acute phase proteins quantification [25] . in the case of qrt-pcr, it would be of importance to select an appropriate housekeeping gene and explore if the virus detected in saliva is cell-free or cell-associated. overall, assays should be fully validated in order to avoid analytical errors due to assay technical limitations.further studies should be made to evaluate and refine the interpretation and clinical application in covid-19 of the different analytes that can be measured in saliva. these studies should be focused on their use in different clinical aspects such as in diagnosis, evaluation of disease severity, and in monitoring the response to treatment and predict relapses.as an example, studies on the kinetics of antibodies in saliva compared to serum could be undertaken. in some diseases, a delay in the appearance of antibodies in saliva compared to serum exists and should be taken in consideration for an appropriate interpretation of the test [42] .saliva can have potential applications in the context of covid-19 by direct detection of the virus, quantification of the specific immunoglobulins produced against it, and for the evaluation of the non-specific, innate immune response of the patient. moreover, a deeper knowledge about potential changes in the saliva proteome may allow for the identification of new diagnostic biomarkers or help to understand the mechanisms associated with the disease. with the development of appropriate sample collection and processing methods and the use of adequate assays, saliva can provide useful clinical information about the disease and could be potentially included in guidelines for sample collection for the diagnosis, disease management, and control of covid-19. a large virus (approximately 120 nm in diameter). its relatively large size and lipid envelope make it highly susceptible to viral inactivation and removal capacity steps during manufacturing processes, such as solventdetergent processing [8] , low-ph incubation, caprylate incubation, pasteurisation [9] , dry-heat treatment [10] , nanofiltration and fractionation [11] . plasma or immunoglobulins collected from patients who recovered from a viral infection, such as covid-19, have been used as a last resort to improve the survival rate of patients with the novel coronavirus whose conditions have continued to deteriorate despite treatment with pulsed methylprednisolone [12] . patients treated with convalescent plasma (cp) demonstrate shorter hospital stay and lower mortality compared with those not treated with cp; work is ongoing to test this theory on patients with covid-19 [12, 13] . people who have recently recovered from covid-19 have antibodies to the coronavirus circulating in their blood. transferring those antibodies into deteriorating patients could theoretically help boost their immunity [14, 15] . cp administration to patients with covid-19 improves their clinical conditions and decreases lung lesions [16] . given scarce information on the biology and mode of infection of covid-19 and the virus' ability to reproduce itself via mutation, plasma collected from recovered patients that meet clinical criteria may offer a valuable treatment option [17] . however, the low number of recovered covid-19 cases and their ability and eligibility for plasma donation make the implementation of this strategy difficult. the cp of eligible donors in areas where an epidemic disease has broken out can offer specific, artificially obtained, passive immunity against the local infectious agent [18] . plasma protein levels can readily be affected by bacterial and viral infections [19] . identifying specific viral protein biomarkers is a possible strategy to identify sources and types of infection [20] . regular donor screening procedures should be performed to prevent individuals that show disease symptoms generally associated with coronavirus infection, including covid-19, from donating their plasma. in general, age, gender and weight must be considered for plasma donor selection [21] . specifically, pooled plasma from recovered covid-19 donors for anti-covid-19 antibody therapy may undergo several general tests that can be divided into two challenging stages. the first stage involves general plasma requirements. plasma first undergoes polymerase chain reaction (pcr) testing to detect viral genomes (covid-19, hiv, hbv and hcv), which should be negative [22, 23] . depending on the result, the plasma sample could undergo viral inactivation treatments, such as solvent-detergent incubation, which is the most commonly used method [24, 25] . the second stage is the evaluation of plasma suitability/efficacy by using protein biomarkers that indicate the safety/suitability of plasma. these biomarkers include serum protein and albumin concentrations of 60 and 35-50 g/l, respectively. furthermore, igm and igg levels should be at least 0.5 g/l and within 5-20 g/l, respectively [22, 23, 26] . other infection-related proteins in plasma, such as peroxiredoxin ii [27, 28] and cytokines and chemokines (il2, il7, il10, gcsf, ip10, mcp1, mip1a and tnfα), should be at normal levels [29, 30] . the level of plasma c-reactive protein has been used as a marker to differentiate between severe and non-severe cases of covid-19 [31, 32] . the ratio of the partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood to fractional inspired oxygen (pao 2 /fio 2 ) is used to determine the level of respiratory distress (200-300 for mild, 100-200 for moderate and below 100 as severe) in patients with covid-19 [33, 34] . finding and selecting eligible donors with a sufficient amount of plasma for efficient utilisation can be challenging as convalescent subjects must meet the donor selection and general plasma requirements in the first stage. furthermore, the selection of the best cp to the most critical patients with covid-19 is challenging because the requirements in the second stage should be followed whilst considering blood types; this process is considered a problem of multi-criteria decision-making (mcdm), which complies with national health requirements and known standard routine procedures [35] . moreover, intelligent computing issues should be investigated to propose a fully automated intelligent computing framework to solve these complex challenges.a fully automated intelligent computing solution framework for the abovementioned challenges can be established by following critical reviews related to intelligent computing issues on the basis of two directions, namely, classification of blood types and prioritisation in the medical sector. firstly, blood type classification is crucial for medical procedures such as blood transfusions. before conducting medical procedures, a wide range of compatibility tests called pre-transfusion tests must be conducted [36] . however, time is often limited in case of emergencies, preventing these experiments to be performed using commercial systems available in laboratories; this scenario might result in transfusion reactions, which may worsen the condition of patients or lead to death [37] . other manual alternatives allow blood type determination; however, these procedures require a laboratory technician to intervene and are susceptible to human error during either testing or reading and interpreting findings, which are not acceptable in crucial cases [38] . in these cases, pre-transfusion tests are often appropriate even in emergency situations, and compatible blood should be administered to eradicate blood incompatibilities. furthermore, the universal blood type for donors is not too infrequent. research efforts on classifying blood types in these cases are scarce. the author of [38] developed a prototype for the rapid determination of blood pre-transfusion tests in emergency situations. this prototype is portable, effective and affordable can be used even in remote locations and undeveloped countries; it has been used in remote areas, ambulances, far-off accident sites and areas struck by natural disasters (e.g. tornados, earthquakes, tsunamis and wars). another author [39] discussed the importance of classifying blood type by presenting an image processing-based methodology that allows the rapid (i.e. 2 min) and safe determination of a patient's blood type for use in emergency cases. they effectively utilised their methodology and verified its capability to safely and rapidly identify blood types for use in emergencies [40] . the blood types can be determined using their techniques by plate tests, and the analysis can be carried out automatically. furthermore, they discussed that image processing methods can enable automatic identification with fast and accurate blood type results; the use of such approach would eliminate errors committed by technicians in blood typing, leading to safe blood transfusions and reducing the loss of human lives [41] . authors [42] introduced a prototype for pre-transfusion testing that was designed exclusively for use in emergencies. the prototype is unique in its portability, effectiveness and timely results. the latest version of the prototype introduced significant improvements concerning various factors, such as size, optimised plate test, high autonomy, light weight and reduced execution time for procedures. these research efforts clearly indicate that blood type determination is not a new topic and should be performed rapidly and efficiently without producing errors in dangerous situations. given the recent spread of covid-19, hospitals are filled with numerous patients who are either improving from the viral infection or getting worse (dying). however, plasma from those who recovered can be used to assist those who have not recovered depending on their severity. in this case, blood type classification should be performed with maximum speed and efficiency to save as many lives as possible. the role of intelligent technologies, such as machine learning (ml) methods (e.g. naive bayes, nearest neighbour, support vector machines and decision trees) and deep learning methods (e.g. deep, artificial, convolutional and recurrent neural networks), would help the classification process, the management of such patients and in deciding donor plasma prioritisation. secondly, patient prioritisation in the medical sector is conducted to provide health care/services for each patient in due course. on the basis of the severity of patient condition, rescuers determine and provide suitable healthcare services depending on patient priority [43] . in an emergency, the highest and lowest priorities should be given to patients with the most and least emergent case, respectively, compared with other patients in the healthcare system. improper patient prioritisation can lead to incorrect strategic decisions that can endanger patients' lives [44] . several medical informatics studies have presented a prioritisation solution for patients with single [45] [46] [47] [48] and multiple chronic heart diseases [49] [50] [51] . furthermore, the healthcare sector is affected by numerous patients with covid-19 and needs an urgent solution to avert the risk of deteriorating patients in terms of their prioritisation according to their critical health conditions. a study [52] proposed a methodology to select situations with risky health conditions and prioritise patients depending on laboratory examination results. this process is highly complex, especially when a decision rule based on multibiological requirements is followed, thereby introducing another challenge [53] . the exact situation for all infected patients should be understood on the basis of all criteria. in this case, patients infected with covid-19 should be prioritised in order to administer appropriate treatments from critical to mild situations [54] . this process enables infectious disease specialists to differentiate patient levels and detect optimal asymptomatic carriers amongst other critical patients [55, 56] . no study has presented a distinct and successive prioritisation solution for patients with covid-19 and cp recipients nor provided an appropriate health care/treatment based on their priority situation. three specific issues of the prioritisation of patients with covid-19 and cps are described as follows. firstly, the prioritisation is dependent on important attributes; thus, patient and cp selection based on multiple criteria is a multi-attribute decision matrix [57] [58] [59] [60] [61] . secondly, different values of importance are often given for each attribute, which further increases the complexity of the task [63] [64] [65] [66] [67] . finally, a prioritisation process requires synchronised consideration of the inverse relationship amongst the mentioned criteria; thus, a trade-off is created [49, 68] , [122] . in this context, decision-making methods are essential to overcome the abovementioned challenges by prioritising infected patients with covid-19 and cps. mcdm is an extension of decision theory covering any multi-objective decision and can solve this problem by constructing a decision matrix based on an intersection between the evaluation criteria used and patients with covid-19 and/or a list of tested cps. in general, the main target of mcdm is to rank/prioritise a set of alternatives on the basis of different evaluation criteria [63, [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] [74] .to the best of our knowledge, no study has covered the challenges and issues in terms of biological requirements and intelligent computing on automation framework. thus, a transfusion framework should be proposed to help doctors hasten treatments. the framework should include general plasma requirements, a minimum of two viral reduction steps and the use of protein biomarkers to indicate the safety and suitability of plasma. furthermore, the framework should include a process for selecting patients with the most critical emergency condition and the best cp on the basis of biomarker criteria whilst utilising mcdm methods. these methods should be used to weigh the evaluation criteria and prioritise covid-19 plasma on the basis of blood types. in such case, transfusion can be achieved from donor to patient on the basis of patients' critical health conditions and priority.the proposed framework is illustrated on the basis of two distinct and consecutive phases (i.e. testing and development). in testing, abo compatibility is achieved after classifying donors into the four blood types, namely, a, b, ab and o, to indicate the suitability and safety of plasma for administration and refine the list of tested cps ( figure 1 ). the development phase includes patient and donor sides. on the patient side, prioritisation is performed using a contracted patient decision matrix between the serological/protein biomarkers and pao 2 /fio 2 and patient list via a novel mcdm method called subjective and objective decision by opinion score method (sodosm). then, the patients requiring the highest emergency are classified on the basis of their blood type to be matched with the list of tested cps from the test phase on the donor side. then, the list of tested cps is prioritised using the contracted cp decision matrix ( figure 2 ).plasma protein levels can readily be affected by bacterial and viral infections [19] . however, specific viral protein biomarkers can be used to identify the source and type of infections [20] . standard donor screening procedures should be followed to avoid plasma donations from people that display clinical symptoms typically linked to coronavirus infection, including covid-19. in general, pooled plasma from recovered covid-19 donors for anti-covid-19 antibody therapy should undergo a two-stage abo compatibility test ( figure 1 ). pre-transfusion testing is essential before blood transfusion from donors to patients. the detection of agglutination in blood samples and the correct determination of blood type through ml methods are effective. patient classification at this phase can be performed using several approaches based on image acquisition, processing and ml methods. through these different classifiers, accurate blood type results can be achieved. this classifier will manage donors at the start of the process ( figure 1 ) and classify them on the basis of their blood types. the list of donors who had their plasma tested for blood typing and who were successful in the test stages and collected in repository #1 should be determined and show beneficial results on further steps ( figure 2 ). practical steps will be explained in detail in the development phase. the first stage explains the general plasma requirements and the following viral reduction steps. (1) pcr is used to detect viral genomes (e.g. covid-19, hiv, hbv, hcv), which should be negative; alternatively, other methods approved by local medical authorities can be used [22, 23] . (2) viral inactivation/fractionation treatments, such as solvent-detergent incubation, are used. (3) viral heat deactivation or filtration is also used. the second stage involves the use of the following protein biomarkers to indicate the safety and suitability of plasma: (1) total serum protein concentration of 60 g/l; (2) albumin concentration within 35-50 g/l; (3) minimum igm and igg level of 0.5 and within 5-20 g/l, respectively [22, 23, 26] ; (4) normal plasma peroxiredoxin ii level (relative to that of a non-infected individual) given that a high [28] or low [27] level may indicate that a plasma is unsuitable for donation/therapy; (5) normal plasma level of cytokines and chemokines (elevated levels of il2, il7, il10, gcsf, ip10, mcp1, mip1a and tnfα indicate severe lung inflammation) [29, 30] ; and (6) plasma creactive protein can differentiate severe from non-severe cases. the c-reactive protein is highly elevated in severe covid-19 cases [31, 32] . the outcome of stage 1 is that either a patient is registered in repository #2 due to positive hcv test or referred to stage 2 due to negative hcv test. stage 2 begins by testing for anti-covid-19 antibodies/biomarkers. the outcome of stage 2 involves two repositories. repository #3 is considered for non-eligible donors. the most important repository is #1, wherein a donor has passed the tests related to this stage. this repository will involve a useful cp that can be used for further processing (figure 2 ). this phase manages the list of tested cps resulting from the test phase and repositories of the infected patients. it involves two intelligent concepts. section 3.2.1 explains the ml methods used for classifying blood types for infection repository. section 3.2.2 discusses the prioritisation of patients with covid-19 and cps by using the mcdm approach. figure 2 intelligence-integrated concept to identify the most appropriate cp for a corresponding prioritised patient with covid-19.the classification processes involve testing and development phases [75] [76] [77] [78] [79] . in the testing phase, donors with patient repository in the development phase are classified ( figure 2 ). this phase aims to classify the most emergent patient into one of the four blood types (a, b, ab and o). the list of tested cps that can be targeted from repository #1 ( figure 2 ) in further processes should be determined. the blood classification steps shown in figure 3 for both phases can be explained as follows: in this step, the test results of collected blood samples will be converted into images for use in the next stage, which is preprocessing [78, 80, 81] . a person's blood type is determined by applying antigens a, b and d to the person's blood samples. these antigens may or may not match with red blood cell antibodies to a particular blood group. thestep 1blood test samplesstep 2 step 4make the pridiction model technician detects clumps of blood cells after antigens are applied to the blood samples. for example, if clumps in samples with antigens a and d are detected, then the blood group is defined as a+. if the clumps are only found in samples applied with antigen a, then the group is marked as a−. likewise, if clumps are produced in blood samples applied with antigens b and d, then the group is known as b+. if no clumping occurs in blood samples added with any of the antigens, then the group is known as o− [42] .in this step, the collected sample images must be aligned to one image containing three centred blood tests to preprocess the dataset and prepare it for ml. the image is a 30×90-pixel rectangle. afterwards, the label should be changed from categorical to numerical. the dataset will be loaded to python. the data arrays are reshaped to provide a single-colour display, and the collected images should be converted from rgb to greyscale. eight groups are defined as specific integer groups. one hot encoding is performed to convert the integers into eight binary vector elements with 1 for a class value index and 0 for all other classes. accordingly, for ml to understand our dataset, the pixel values of each image in the dataset should be prepared as unsigned integers in the range between black and white or 0 and 255. the pixel values of greyscale images are then normalised (e.g. rescale them to the range [0,1]). this step first involves the conversion of the data form to floats from unsigned integers and then the division of the pixel values by a maximum value of 255. moreover, the dataset will be divided into three sets, namely, training set with 70% of the total size, validation set with 15% of the total size and test set with 15% of the total size. the training set will be used to train via ml. the validation set will be used to validate the training in every epoch. lastly, the test set will be used to evaluate the model after being trained. the next step will involve using these sets to train via ml.this step includes building learning methods as previously explained. the dataset is loaded into python and then separated into training, testing and validation sets, which will be used for learning training, validation of the model and evaluation of learning, respectively [82] . after training and testing, the learning will be used to classify new blood test samples. a good result will then be obtained by the ml classifier in image processing. thus, each of the tests will establish whether or not sample agglutination has occurred.this step uses the trained saved model in step three and then preprocesses the new image samples as in phase two, except for labelling, which will be predicted using our trained ml method. to classify the new blood test results on new images, the trained learning method will be used as a classifier method, which assumes that new images are greyscale and arranged in a manner wherein one picture contains three oriented blood tests (antigens a, b and d). the picture is a 30×90-pixel rectangle. a set of alternatives (i.e. patients with covid-19) can be prioritised to transfuse cp to the most severe patients who cannot safely wait. at this stage, the patients will be prioritised on the basis of six serological/protein biomarkers and pao 2 /fio 2 criteria (i.e. albumin, igm/igg, cytokine/chemokines, peroxiredoxin ii, c-reactive protein, pao 2 /fio 2 ). in this case, the patient decision matrix is constructed on the basis of an intersection between serological/protein biomarker and pao 2 /fio 2 criteria and patients with covid-19 (table 1) . figure 2 (patient side), the proposed patient decision matrix can be used to prioritise all patients with covid-19 and identify the most critical patients that immediately require a compatible cp from donors. before proceeding with a detailed explanation of cp transfusion to prioritised covid-19 patients, we should explain the process of cp/blood donation. from a medical perspective [38] , cp/blood donation can be performed as follows: on this basis, the most critical patient with covid-19 has been prioritised, and the results from the mentioned patient decision matrix should also be classified for blood type identification. moreover, as shown in figure 2 (donor side), the donors are classified into the four blood types. now, we assume that we have obtained five cps of class o, five patients with covid-19 of class a and five patients of class b. the patient decision matrix is used and prioritises patients on the basis of their emergency conditions. for example, if patient 1 under class a is considered as the most critical and severe patient with covid-19, then he/she immediately requires a suitable cp. an important question is: who is the most appropriate volunteer (five cps under class o) that can donate cp for this critical patient (patient class a)? a cp decision matrix (table 2) should be provided to prioritise and identify the most suitable volunteer that can provide an appropriate cp for the patient under class a. in line with the patient decision matrix, the cp decision matrix is constructed on the basis of an intersection between the serological/protein biomarker criteria and the list of cps tested. an overall evaluation criterion can be recognised under two categories, namely, benefit and cost. the benefit criterion implies that a high value is better, but the cost criterion implies the opposite [49, [83] [84] [85] . in this study, from a medical perspective, albumin, igm/igg and pao 2 /fio 2 levels are considered the benefit criteria, whereas cytokine/chemokine, peroxiredoxin ii and c-reactive protein levels are considered the cost criteria. in summary, the mentioned decision matrices (i.e. patients and cp decision matrices) have been proposed to identify the most suitable cp within each class (donor side) for corresponding prioritised patients with covid-19 (patient side). however, on the basis of the constructed decision matrices, three prioritisation issues have been generated (i.e. multi-criteria, important criteria and trade-off amongst the criteria(. the prioritisation of patients with covid-19 and/or cps regarding multi-criteria (i.e. serological/protein biomarker and/or pao 2 /fio 2 criteria) is challenging because of the following issues. firstly, the patients should be prioritised on the basis of the severity of covid-19, and the suitability of each cp should be evaluated on the basis of their value within each criterion. secondly, different weights can be assigned for the mentioned criteria by decision-makers (i.e. specialists) and/or based on objective calculations, which further increases the complexity of the task. thirdly, three criteria of serological/protein biomarkers and/or pao 2 /fio 2 are considered benefit criteria, whereas the rest are considered cost criteria. thus, the inverse relationship between serological/protein biomarker and/or pao 2 /fio2 criteria produces a trade-off. the prioritisation of patients with covid-19 and/or cps is a complex mcdm problem. the development of decision-making methods is important to preclude the prioritisation problem complexity [86] [87] [88] [89] .this section proposes an mcdm approach with two important purposes. firstly, weights are assigned to the serological/protein biomarker and pao 2 /fio 2 criteria used in the prioritisation of cps and covid-19 patients. this stage aims to solve the issue of importance by investigating the most effectively used serological/protein biomarker and pao 2 /fio 2 criteria for prioritisation. secondly, cps and patients with covid-19 are prioritised on the basis of weighted criteria resulting from the first stage. this stage aims to eliminate two critical issues (i.e. multi-criteria and trade-off issues) through ranking alternatives (i.e. cps and/or covid-19 patients). furthermore, many mcdm techniques are generally developed and used for weighting the evaluation criteria, alternative ranking or both. alternative methods are ranked to determine the best approach [90, 91] . such techniques include weighted sum model [92] , multiplicative exponential weighting [93] , weighted product method [94] , hierarchical adaptive weighting [95] , simple additive weighting [96] , technique for order of preference by similarity to ideal solution [97] , vlsekriterijumska optimizacija i kompromisno resenje [98] , analytic hierarchy process (ahp) [99] , novel technique for the reorganisation of opinion order to interval levels (trooil) [49] and preference selection index (psi) [100] . the major drawbacks of all of these methods, except for ahp, trooil and psi, include the absence of weight generation provision [101] [102] [103] . literature reviews have incorporated external weighting approaches to boost the efficiency of the original ranking strategies by generating the importance of many criteria in relation to the goal to avoid the abovementioned limitations [104, 105] , [121] . criterion weighting strategies allocate weights to attributes that are relatively important to one another [106, 107] . however, weighting the evaluation criteria comprises two aspects. the first aspect indicates the importance of each criterion by conducting a pairwise comparison between the criteria set, which is called criterion weight [108] . the second aspect indicates that the importance of the criterion values is identified by the comparison process between the values of each criterion, which is called criterion value weight. for example, the pao 2 /fio 2 ratio is the ratio of arterial oxygen partial pressure to fractional inspired oxygen. it is a widely used clinical indicator of hypoxemia and can determine the level of respiratory distress in patients with covid-19. its weight of criterion value does not depend on the highest or lowest value but rather on the normal level of respiratory distress (200-300 as mild, 100-200 as moderate and below 100 as severe). in such cases, the pairwise comparison would be between the values of the pao 2 /fio 2 criterion to specify the accepted value that the physician/medical staff considers as normal, which is called the value of the criteria. in general, objective and subjective assessment methods have been developed to identify criterion weights. the objective methods use each criterion information to identify the criterion weight; such techniques include entropy and criterion importance through intercriterion correlation [109] [110] [111] . these techniques do not rely on a decisionmaker's subjective judgment in weight assignment [112] . weight is typically allocated directly to attributes via a mathematical method [113] . these techniques are widely used in previous works, and no inconsistency problem has been generated; however, subjective weight is the most significant in evaluating findings as it reflects the views and experiences of highly qualified experts [114] . when there is a need to assign weights for criteria subjectively, these approaches cannot incorporate decision-makers' knowledge and subjective value into one decision, which is the drawback of these techniques. subjective assessment provides weight to attributes on the basis of decision-makers' perceptions and subjective significance to each attribute. subjective weights represent cumulative decision-makers' experience and subjective judgment in current decision-making scenarios [115] . examples of these techniques are ahp and best-worst method (bwm) [116] . ahp is one of the most common methods used in multi-criteria decision-making. ahp depends on human preference [117] . this method was developed by thomas l. saaty. despite its popularity, the method has a major drawback of inconsistency during criterion weighting. in ahp, the calculated priorities are plausible only if the pairwise comparison matrices have passed the consistency test. furthermore, many decision problems cannot be structured hierarchically when the interaction of higher-level elements with lower-level elements and their dependency should be considered. in bwm, the weights of criteria are generated on the basis of pairwise comparisons between the set of criteria [107] . bwm is a new and important mcdm method that requires less pairwise comparisons than ahp; it derives the weights of criteria with high consistency. bwm was proposed by rezaei in 2015; it can determine the weights of criteria on the basis of pairwise comparisons with a small number of comparisons (i.e. 2n-3, where n is the number of criteria). furthermore, bwm is better than ahp in terms of consistency. bwm executes reference comparisons, indicating that it only needs to determine the preference of the best criterion over all other criteria and the preference of all criteria over the worst criterion [61] . the benefits of few comparisons are the absence of the need to use fractional numbers and easier understanding by decision-makers (experts) compared with most mcdm methods. bwm utilises a 1-9 scale to perform pairwise comparisons. as mentioned above, bwm successfully reduces pairwise comparison from in ahp to in bwm. similar to ahp, this method suffers from two issues, namely, the difficulty to determine the best and worst criteria and importance level of the best criterion over other criteria and the importance of all criteria over the worst criterion. in general, when the comparison uses a 1-9 scale, the decision-maker needs to state how many times a particular criterion is better than the other criteria. this comparison requires high cognitive power due to the unusual subjective comparisons. thus, comparing two uncorrelated criteria is not a natural process and is difficult to achieve. on the basis of viewpoints in the above discussion, the objective weighting approach computes the weight of the criteria without an inconsistency issue. however, it neglects human opinion, which is vital in making a proper decision. by contrast, the subjective weighting approach identifies the importance of criteria by computing the weight of each criterion. however, it faces an inconsistency issue. both directions ignore the importance of the criterion value, which is essential in making correct and accurate rankings and selections. therefore, to address the issues discussed above, this study proposes sodosm, a novel mcdm method. this method can acquire the relative importance of various criteria with their values within cp and patient decision matrices objectively and subjectively without any inconsistency issue and provides a ranking for alternative cps/patients.the proposed sodosm behaviour comparison is conducted amongst each criterion within the cp decision matrix (i.e. albumin, igm/igg, cytokine/chemokines, peroxiredoxin ii and c-reactive protein) and patient decision matrix (i.e. albumin, igm/igg, cytokine/chemokines, peroxiredoxin ii, c-reactive protein and pao 2 /fio 2 ) per alternative cp/patient to identify the worst solutions. this method can be divided into four steps, namely, data input, data transformation, linguistic data scale conversion and computation of the importance of criteria and ranking alternatives, as shown in figure 4 . in sodosm, an expert selects the worst value for each criterion and performs a reference comparison between the worst and the other values in the same criterion. an opinion matrix is then created. the opinion matrix is converted into equivalent likert scale numbers ( table 3 ). the importance of any criterion is determined using objective weight. lastly, a compromise technique is applied to achieve the final rank of alternative cps/patients. the evaluation criteria are identified, and a scheme that relays goals is created. evolving alternative schemes are used to reach the goals. alternative patients and/or cps are estimated in relation to the criteria of cp decision matrix (i.e. albumin, igm/igg, cytokine/chemokines, peroxiredoxin ii and c-reactive protein) and the criteria of patient decision matrix (i.e. albumin, igm/igg, cytokine/chemokines, peroxiredoxin ii, c-reactive protein and pao 2 /fio 2 ). the decision matrix r is then created as follows:b. data transformation upon the development of both decision matrices (the output of step a), the decision-makers (i.e. specialist) must select the worst solution from each decision matrix r for either cps or patients. the worst solution is defined by three values, namely, max, min and critical values.where max i represents the benefit criteria (i.e. albumin, igm/igg and pao 2 /fio 2 ) amongst alternatives and min j represents the cost criteria (cytokine/chemokines, peroxiredoxin ii and c-reactive protein) amongst alternatives. these values are utilised to specify the worst solution relative to the benefit or cost criteria. is the critical value of a worst solution but is neither a max value nor a min value. and represent the benefit and cost criteria, respectively. this step identifies the worst solution that is limited to the maximum and minimum on the basis of the benefit and cost criteria. hence, the specialist has the flexibility to choose the worst outcome. after selecting the outcome, the worst solution and criteria per alternative are then compared ( figure 5 ). figure 7 opinion decision matrices (i.e. cps and/or covid-19 patients) figure 6 comparisons between worst solution and criteria per alternative (i.e. cps and/or patients with covid-19 patients)in this study, each recorded response made by an expert in the form of a likert linguistic scale is converted into an equivalent scale number (table 3) . the outcome of this step produces converted-opinion decision matrices (i.e. cps and/or patients with covid-19), which have values without any unit and with the same scale.the criterion weights are calculated objectively by an entropy process based on the measurement of uncertain data provided in both decision matrices (i.e. cps and/or patients with . this process immediately produces weights for a particular criterion on the basis of a reciprocal contrast between different criteria of variants for each criterion and then all of the criteria simultaneously. objective criterion weights wj are determined according to the entropy procedure in three steps.information entropy is an important element for calculating criterion weight. high information entropy indicates that the information supplied by the criteria is increasing and that the weight is large. the information entropy (e i ) is measured using equation (5):if f ij values are equal, then the entropy values of each criterion are maximum (e i = 1). if f ij is 0, then f ij ln f ij is 0 [118] . computation of weight vector: the weight of individual criterion (wj) is calculated by the entropy process after calculating the information entropy. equation (7) expresses the significance of the criteria in the proposed method:where n is the number of criteria used. in this step, entropy process is employed on the alternative (i.e. patients and/or cps) values per criterion to find the criterion weight.after the criteria are weighted objectively by the entropy process, each criterion function is evaluated, and the measure of closeness is compared with the ideal solution. the compromise solution is the practical alternative that is nearest to the ideal solution and has a mutually concessional compromise [119] . patients/cps will be prioritised via the following steps:step i: weighted decision matrices (i.e. cps and/or covid-19 patients) are defined as [wm = [wm ij ] mxn ] by applying equation (8):step ii: d* and d− are identified, where d* is the maximum achievement for all alternatives (i.e. cps and/or covid-19 patients) in the wm per criteria and d− is the minimum achievement for all alternatives (i.e. cps and/or covid-19 patients) in the wm per criteria. these values are determined using equations 10 and 11, respectively:(10)step iii: s and r are measured, where s is the summation the patient/cp values and r is the maximum value in those alternatives, by using equations 12-14:step iv: the final rank score (q) is measured using equation (15) . (14) where v is introduced for the strategy of maximum group utility and (1 − v) is the weight of the individual regret. the value for v is 0.5. however, any v value can be assigned to the 0-1 range.=max si, =min si, =max ri and =min ri. the patients/cps with the lowest q value are the best alternatives.step v: the patients/cps are ranked in ascending order by sorting the results from q. finally, the set of alternatives (cps/patients) is ranked by their score in ascending order. a low mean value indicates a high priority rank.the limitation of this study is that the proposed framework has not been tested on infected cases due to the lockdown and global pandemic outbreak. collecting real datasets of patients with covid-19 and donors who have already recovered is difficult.the covid-19 pandemic has caused an unmatched human and health crisis [120] . the virus can be eliminated by improving the healthcare quality of patients with covid-19 and providing them with protective antibodies from the blood of patients who have recovered from this disease. this procedure could theoretically help boost the immunity of infected patients. to help doctors accelerate treatments, this study presents an intelligent rescue framework for the transfusion of appropriate tested cps to the most severe covid-19 cases on the basis of biological requirements. a detailed description of the proposed framework has been discussed sequentially in two phases. moreover, several mcdm methods have been debated and analysed in terms of their capability in the adoption. these methods are utilised in the proposed framework. however, given their limitations, a novel mcdm method called sodosm is proposed to assign the comparative importance for the criteria used in both decision matrices proposed (i.e. cps and patients with covid-19) and then prioritise cps/patients effectively. this study presents seven recommendations for future work. firstly, the proposed framework will be implemented and tested to serve and help the healthcare sector in fighting the sars-cov-2 virus by improving the immunity of infected patients. secondly, the proposed framework can be used with any future generation of coronaviruses or other new viruses to rescue the newly infected patients based on the drawn strategies of this framework. thirdly, big data life cycle stages (i.e. collection of data, cleaning of data, classification of data modelling and its delivery) of the prioritisation process for donors and patients with covid-19 will be discussed in detail. fourthly, the possibility of adoption of the internet of things in the prioritisation process of covid-19 patients will be investigated. fifthly, the proposed framework can be run and performed in the indoor/outdoor hospitals over a telemedicine environment to rescue a huge number of patients widely. such a process can be provided in two different architectures, namely, centralised telemedicine based on data centre and decentralised telemedicine based on blockchain technology. in this line, the privacy and security of patients'/donors' information will be provided in addition to the network security of telemedicine architectures. sixthly, the proposed framework can be helped the administrative divisions of the healthcare organisation make the correct judgment/decision in choosing a proper ml hierarchical and/or multilabelled classification method for covid-19 on the basis of the proposed sodosm method. seventhly, if needed, the proposed sodosm can be extended to fuzzy and/or rough environments to manage uncertainty and ambiguous problems.the state of conflicts of interest nonecoronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is a respiratory disease, which can evolve into multi-organ failure (mof), leading to death. several biochemical alterations have been described in covid-19 patients. to date, many biomarkers reflecting the main pathophysiological characteristics of the disease have been identified and associated with the risk of developing severe disease. lymphopenia represents the hallmark of the disease, and it can be detected since the early stage of infection. increased levels of several inflammatory biomarkers, including c-reactive protein, have been found in covid-19 patients and associated with an increased risk of severe disease, which is characterised by the so-called "cytokine storm". also, the increase of cardiac and liver dysfunction biomarkers has been associated with poor outcome. in this review, we provide an overview of the main biochemical characteristics of covid-19 and the associated biomarkers alterations.biochemical biomarkers alterations in coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19)coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is a respiratory disease, which can evolve into multi-organ failure (mof), leading to death. several biochemical alterations have been described in covid-19 patients. to date, many biomarkers reflecting the main pathophysiological characteristics of the disease have been identified and associated with the risk of developing severe disease. lymphopenia represents the hallmark of the disease, and it can be detected since the early stage of infection. increased levels of several inflammatory biomarkers, including c-reactive protein, have been found in covid-19 patients and associated with an increased risk of severe disease, which is characterised by the so-called "cytokine storm". also, the increase of cardiac and liver dysfunction biomarkers has been associated with poor outcome. in this review, we provide an overview of the main biochemical characteristics of covid-19 and the associated biomarkers alterations.biochemical biomarkers alterations in coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19)coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is a respiratory disease, which can evolve into multi-organ failure (mof), leading to death. several biochemical alterations have been described in covid-19 patients. to date, many biomarkers reflecting the main pathophysiological characteristics of the disease have been identified and associated with the risk of developing severe disease. lymphopenia represents the hallmark of the disease, and it can be detected since the early stage of infection. increased levels of several inflammatory biomarkers, including c-reactive protein, have been found in covid-19 patients and associated with an increased risk of severe disease, which is characterised by the so-called "cytokine storm". also, the increase of cardiac and liver dysfunction biomarkers has been associated with poor outcome. in this review, we provide an overview of the main biochemical characteristics of covid-19 and the associated biomarkers alterations.biochemical biomarkers alterations in coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19).timely detection and diagnosis are urgently needed to guide epidemiological measures, infection 26 control, antiviral treatment, and vaccine research. in this review, biomarkers/indicators for diagnosis of 27 coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) or detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 28 (sars-cov-2) in the environment are summarized and discussed. it is concluded that the detection 29 methods targeting antibodies are not suitable for screening of early and asymptomatic cases since most 30 patients had an antibody response at about 10 days after onset of symptoms. however, antibody detection 31 methods can be combined with quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction 32 (rt-qpcr) to significantly improve the sensitivity and specificity of diagnosis, and boost vaccine 33 research. fast, sensitive and accurate detection methods targeting antigens need to be developed urgently. cost diagnostic tools to screen infected individuals so that proper isolation and treatment can be facilitated. 57diagnostic cases of ct scan, various rna detection methods and antibody detection methods are also 74 summarized and discussed. more interestingly, ai assisted diagnosis and potential ultrasensitive 75 biosensor are emphasized. a comprehensive schematic diagram of current diagnostic methods and 76 potential portable biosensors for covid-2019 is presented in figure 1 . structural proteins, including spike (s) glycoprotein, small envelope (e) protein, matrix (m) protein, and 134 nucleocapsid (n) protein, and also several accessory proteins. 135detection of specific antibodies directed to sars-cov-2 in patient blood is another choice for 137 diagnosis of covid-19. it is widely accepted that immunoglobulin m (igm) provides the first line of 138 defense during viral infections, prior to the generation of adaptive, high affinity immunoglobulin g (igg) 139 responses which are responsible for immunological memory and long-term immunity ). 140 diagnostic factors which are significantly related to positive covid-19 diagnosis were revealed. among 159 them, white blood cell count (wbc), eosinophil count, eosinophil ratio, 2019 new coronavirus rna 160 (2019n-cov) and serum amyloid a (saa) have the greatest clinical significance. some cytokines were 161 also be tested and analyzed and the results showed their levels are abnormal, but the linkage to 162 sars/mers is not so significant. however, another study shows that the level of interleukin-6 (il-6), 163 il-10, il-2 and interferons-γ (ifn-γ) in the peripheral blood of the severe cases increased compared to 164 those in the mild cases. the degree of lymphopenia and a proinflammatory cytokine storm is higher in 165 severe covid-19 patients than in mild cases, it is associated with the disease severity (liu et specimens are highly related to detection efficiency and accuracy. now, specimens from the upper 172 respiratory tract (contain throat, nasal deep throat saliva), lower respiratory tract (contain sputum and 173 bronchoalveolar lavage fluid), feces, fibrobronchoscope brush biopsy, and blood are being investigated. 174for the rt-qpcr based rna detection, specimens from the lower respiratory tract induce a relatively loads than that of the throat (zou et al. 2020 ). although the nasopharyngeal or throat swabs are feasible 177 for diagnosis, the sampling process can make the patient or suspected case uncomfortable and induce 178 coughing and sneezing, which generates aerosol and creates a potential health hazard for medical staff. 179another study reveals that sputum swabs (76.9 %) showed a significantly higher positive rate than throat table 2 . 191 in conclusion, deep throat saliva and induced sputum are desired for rt-qpcr tests. however , 192 developing methods which allow the patient to collect the samples by themselves are more desirable. simultaneously. this method is now being applied for sars-cov-2 protein detection. 89 ultrasensitive and specific laboratory diagnostic method and portable devices are critical for 2 controlling the rapidly evolving sars-cov-2-associated covid-19 pandemic. nowadays, ct scan, rt-3 qpcr, and lfics based on au nps colloid (colloidal gold method) have been developed. many 4 diagnostic kits or strips have been cleared in china for laboratory detection of sars-cov-2 (loeffelholz 5 and tang 2020). unfortunately, due to an overwhelming situation in local hospitals at the severe outbreak 6 areas, many suspected cases cannot be efficiently confirmed. hence, more reliable, rapid, low-cost and 7 widely available diagnostic tools or detection strategies are needed. (1) for early diagnosis, on-site, fast, 8 and ultrasensitive biosensors targeting virus antigen detection has a great potential. they can be used in 9hospitals, clinics, test laboratories, and even at home, airports or other high traffic areas. the novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) by a reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification assay.the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), a new family of coronavirus, can cause severe respiratory infections [1] . the disease caused by sars-cov-2 has been recently named as the coronavirus disease-2019 (covid-19) by the world health organization (who). since the first report in december 2019, a severe outbreak caused by sars-cov-2 in china has rapidly spread to multiple regions of the world [2] [3] [4] . who has defined covid-19 as a pandemic due to the speed and scale of transmission.among a total of 81 385 case records reported by the chinese center for disease control and prevention, most covid-19 patients were classified as mild (81%), 14% were severe and 5% were critical. the overall casefatality rate (cfr) was 2·3%, and no deaths were reported in mild and severe cases. however, the cfr among critical cases was 49% [5] . some patients, particularly those of older age and with pre-existing co-morbid conditions, could develop to critical illness, and died of multiple organ failure in a short period of time [5, 6] . thus, efficient indicators for evaluation of disease severity and clinical progression still need further investigation, which is urgently needed for reducing covid-19 mortality.previous studies have shown that many laboratory biomarkers, such as lymphocyte numbers, lactate dehydrogenase and d-dimer, are out of normal ranges in covid-19 patients [6, 7] . these laboratory biomarkers are routine and are the most available in clinics. another study compared plasma cytokine levels between patients admitted to the intensive care unit (icu) and those not requiring icu admission, and found that many cytokines, such as interleukin (il)-2, il-7, il-10, granulocytecolony-stimulating factor (g-csf), interferon gammainducible protein-10 (ip-10p, chemotactic protein-1 (mcp1), mip1a and tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-α, had higher levels in icu patients compared with non-icu patients [8] . however, available markers for predicting the progression of patients with covid-19 are limited.in this study, we analyzed the differences of different biomarkers, including blood routine, cytokine profiles, procalcitonin (pct), c-reactive protein (crp) and ferritin, among covid-19 patients with different severity illness. our data showed that il-2r/lymphocytes could be used for early identification of severe covid-19.this study recruited covid-19 patients from 24 january to 15 february 2020, admitted at tongji hospital, wuhan, china. patients who had clinical symptoms (fever, cough or shortness of breath) and radiological characteristics (unilateral pneumonia, bilateral pneumonia or ground-glass opacity), and with positive sars-cov-2 real-time reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) results, were continuously recruited. patients younger than 18 years were excluded. symptoms, signs and laboratory tests during the hospital stay were collected. this study was approved by the ethical committee of tongji hospital, tongji medical college, huazhong university of science and technology, wuhan, china (grant number: tj-c20200128, date: 2020-2-12).covid-19 patients were classified into three groups with different illness severity, according to the guidelines of diagnosis and treatment for covid-19 made by the chinese national health commission, as follows -(1) mild: patients had typical symptoms and radiological findings; (2) severe: patients met one of the following criteria -respiratory distress (respiration rate ≥ 30 times/min), blood oxygen saturation (spo2) ≤ 93% in the resting state and arterial partial pressure of o 2 to fraction of inspired oxygen (pao 2 / fio 2 ) ratio ≤ 300 mmhg; and (3) critical: the patients met one of the following criteria -respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation, septic shock and/or multiple organ dysfunction or failure needing icu treatment. clinical information related to patient classification was collected from the medical records of the patients.throat or nasal-swab specimens from the upper respiratory tract of all patients on admission were collected and maintained in a viral transport medium. sputum specimens were also collected in some patients. sars-cov-2 infection was confirmed using taqman one-step rt-pcr kits from shanghai huirui biotechnology company ltd and shanghai biogerm medical biotechnology company ltd, both of which were approved by the china food and drug administration. in brief, rna was extracted from clinical samples with commercial rna extraction kits. then, 5 μl of rna template was used for real-time rt-pcr, which targeted the open reading frame (orf)1ab and nucleoprotein gene. conditions for applications of real-time rt-pcr were as follows: 50°c for 15 min and 95°c for 5 min, 45 cycles of amplification at 95°c for 10 s and 55°c for 45 s. the positive covid-19 real-time rt-pcr result was defined if both orf1ab and nucleoprotein cycle thresholds were < 35.serum samples were collected from the included participants on admission or at the time of disease aggravation. in those who recovered from illness, the serum samples prior to hospital discharge were also collected. the levels of il-1β, il-2r, il-8, il-10, and tnf-α in serum were measured according to an automatic procedure of a solid-phase twosite chemiluminescent immunometric assay via immulite 1000 analyzer (siemens, munich, germany). the level of il-6 was measured using the electrochemiluminescence method (roche diagnostics, basel, switzerland).the results are presented as mean ± standard deviation (s.d.). differences of markers among the three groups were compared by analysis of variance (anova). the differences of markers between different time-points from the same patients were analyzed using the paired student's t-test. spearman's rank correlation test for non-parametric data was employed to analyze the relationship between two factors. all statistically significant variables were taken as candidates for multivariable logistic regression analyses, and the regression equation (predictive model) was obtained. the regression coefficients of the predictive model were regarded as the weights for the respective variables and a score for each patient was calculated. receiver operating characteristic (roc) analysis was performed to determine the best threshold value of the laboratory markers for distinguishing critical illness patients from mild or severe illness patients. area under the curve (auc), sensitivity and specificity were reported. statistical analyses were performed using graphpad prism version 6, medcalc version 11.6 and spss version 22.0. statistical significance was determined as p < 0·05.this study included 389 hospitalized patients with confirmed covid-19. the patients were classified into three groups with different severity of illness. the basic characteristics of mild (n = 168), severe (n = 169) and critical (n = 52) patients are shown in table 1 . the ages of severe (64·7 ± 12·2) and critical (65·7 ± 14·2) patients were significantly higher than mild patients (56·6 ± 13·9). the percentage of males was higher than females in severe and critical groups. the most common symptoms at onset of illness were fever, cough, fatigue, expectoration and shortness of breath. other symptoms were chest distress, diarrhea, muscle ache, headache, nausea and vomiting. more than half the patients had chronic diseases, including hypertension (32·9%), diabetes (10%), cardiovascular (8·2%) diseases and chronic kidney disease (3·3%) ( table 1 ).the results of blood routine, infectious biomarkers and cytokine profiles in different groups are shown in fig. 1 . we observed that leukocytes, neutrophils, crp, pct and ferritin were significantly increased, while lymphocytes were significantly decreased in severe and critical patients compared with mild patients (fig. 1a,b) . these biomarkers also showed statistically significant differences between severe and critical patients. the cytokine profiles, including il-1β, il-2r, il-6, il-8, il-10 and tnf-α on admission, were detected. we found that the cytokine profiles, except il-1β, were all significantly increased with increased severity of illness (fig. 1c) . moreover, the concentration of il-2r was positively correlated with that of il-6, il-8, il-10 and tnf-α ( fig. 2a-d) . we also observed that the amount of il-2r was negatively correlated with lymphocyte numbers (fig. 2e) . we then further calculated the ratio of il-2r to lymphocytes and found that the value of il-2r/lymphocytes was remarkably increased in severe and critical patients compared with mild patients (fig. 2f) .for the prediction of severe covid-19 patients, all statistically significant variables were taken as candidates for further multivariable logistic regression analyses. we found that the increase of il-2r/lymphocytes, crp and ferritin were associated with increased odds, and chosen as the prediction model indicators of severe covid-19. odds ratios (or) and their corresponding confidence intervals are shown in table 2 . roc analysis showed that il-2r/lymphocytes had a higher auc (0·948) than crp (0·886) and ferritin (0·812) to differentiate critical from mild patients. the performance of il-2r/lymphocytes to distinguish severe from mild patients was poor (fig. 3a) . however, il-2r/lymphocytes showed a sensitivity of 90·9% and a specificity of 66·5% to differentiate between critical the normal reference ranges of il-1β, il-6, il-8, il-10 and tnf-α were 5, 1·5, 5, 5 and 4 pg/ml, respectively. if the concentrations of the corresponding cytokines were lower than the normal range, we recorded the minimum values. differences of markers among the three groups were compared by analysis of variance (anova). results of the test were significant with p < 0·05. and severe patients (fig. 3b) and a sensitivity of 94·2% and a specificity of 82·1% in distinguishing critical from mild patients (fig. 3c) .furthermore, we monitored the change of lymphocytes and cytokine levels in the disease progression of sars-cov-2-infected patients. in the 28 recovered patients lymphocyte numbers gradually increased to normal levels, while the levels of il-2r, il-6, il-8, il-10, tnf-α and il-2r/lymphocytes were significantly decreased between the time of admission and hospital discharge (fig. 4) in contrast, lymphocyte numbers were further decreased, while cytokines and il-2r/lymphocytes were significantly increased in the deteriorated patients (fig. 5 ).the prevalence of covid-19 began from december 2019, then quickly spread worldwide, and has now become an urgent public health challenge. in this study, we report a cohort of 389 patients with laboratory-confirmed sars-cov-2 infection. most patients presented with fever, cough and fatigue, which share similar clinical features with previous beta-coronavirus infections, such as sars and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) [9, 10] . highly pathogenic human coronaviruses (hcov) infections frequently lead to lower respiratory tract disease, and disease severity was influenced by initial viral titers in airways, age and comorbid conditions [6, 11, 12] . we observed that in severe and critical patients the percentage of males was higher than females, and the mean ages of these patients were much older than mild patients. moreover, critical patients were accompanied by high percentages of manifestations and co-morbidities, indicating the poor prognosis and high spearman's rank correlation test for non-parametric data was employed to analyze the relationship between two factors. the differences of il-2r/lymphocytes among the three groups were compared by analysis of variance (anova). results of the test were significant with p < 0·05. 1·0379  0·9739  1·1062  0·2515  il-2r  0·9993  0·9983  1·0004  0·2078  il-6  1·0000  0·9903  1·0097  0·9936  il-8  0·9985  0·9929  1·0041  0·5934  il-10  1·0163  0·9769  1·0573  0·4234  tnf-α  1·0115  0·9443  1·0834  0·7450  lymphocyte  1·2623  0·7412  2·1499  0·3911  neutrophil  1·0638  0·9467  1·1953  0·2986  pct  2·5333  0·7287  8·8067  0·1437  il-2r/lymphocytes  1·0013  1·0005  1·0021  0·0020  crp  1·0085  1·0008  1·0163  0·0300  ferritin  1·0006  1·0001  1·0010  0·0206 covid-19 = coronavirus disease-2019; or = odds ratio; ci = confidence interval; pct = procalcitonin; crp = c-reactive protein; il = interleukin; tnf = tumor necrosis factor. cfr of these patients. therefore, it is of crucial significance to find potential markers to identify critical patients early and give timely effective treatment.lymphopenia was observed during sars and mers infections [13] . similarly, the developed lymphopenia was also very common in covid-19 and this phenomenon was more obvious in icu patients [6, 7] . the mechanisms of lymphopenia in sars-cov-2 infection might be due to inhibition of the cellular immune effective function, and more cells underwent apoptosis following overactive inflammatory responses, as reported in sars infection [14] . the results of lymphocytes might be associated with disease severity and mortality.massive inflammatory cell infiltration and cytokine storms could result in acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome during sars and mers infections, which have been specially emphasized for the pathogenesis of hcov infections [15] . in covid-19, both t helper type 1 (th1) and th2 cell responses were initiated and the increased amounts of cytokines (e.g. il-1β, ifn-γ, ip-10, mcp1, il-10 and il-4) were associated with disease severity [6] . a recent pathological report of covid-19 has also shown that the counts of cd4 + t and cd8 + t cells were decreased, but with high expression of human leukocyte antigen d-related (hla-dr) and cd38. the over-activation of t cells, including the increase of proinflammatory th17 cells and high cytotoxicity of cd8 + t cells, might lead to the severe immune injury [16] . during viral infection, adaptive immune cells not only played a crucial role in virus clearance but also in dampening innate immunity and limiting further damage to the host [17, 18] . however, exuberant inflammatory responses promoted t cell apoptosis, thus resulting in uncontrolled inflammatory responses due to diminished t cell responses. our data demonstrate that infection biomarkers such as crp, pct and ferritin and the concentrations of il-2r, il-6, il-8, il-10 and tnf-α were all significantly increased with the increased illness severity, suggesting that the magnitude of the cytokine storm results in high morbidity and mortality attributed by immunopathology.reliable and feasible early identification of severe patients is crucial in clinical practice, as the mortality of these patients is extremely high [5] . however, the available laboratory markers have limited value at present. during immune activation, cd25 is expressed by t cells and its soluble form (scd25), also known as il-2r, is released into the bloodstream [19] . our data show that increased il-2r and lymphopenia were both correlated with the severity of covin-19. moreover, the concentration of il-2r was positively correlated with il-6, il-8, il-10 and tnf-α, and negatively correlated with lymphocytes. therefore, the value of il-2r/lymphocytes was superior to reflect the imbalance of inflammation and immune response.il-2r/lymphocytes, crp and ferritin were selected as prediction markers of severe illness by multivariable logistic regression analyses. these markers show that infection, injury of immunity and an exaggerated inflammatory response might exert synthetic efforts on the progression of severe illness. the performance of il-2r/ lymphocytes exhibited higher sensitivity and specificity in differentiating critical patients from mild or severe patients. the application of il-2r/lymphocytes would allow the early diagnosis and treatment of critical patients and decrease mortality. furthermore, concentrations of cytokines, including il-2r, il-6, il-8 and tnf-α, were decreased, but lymphocytes were increased in recovered patients. however, lymphocytes were further decreased with high levels of cytokines in disease-deteriorated patients. therefore, the monitoring these laboratory markers and cytokines could also be used to predict the progression of covid-19.several limitations of this study should be mentioned. first, not all laboratory tests have been included, as these markers are also valuable in covid-19, such as coagulation and chemistry markers. secondly, the percentage of factor (tnf)-α (g) and il-2r/lymphocytes (h)] were compared between the time of admission and hospital discharge. differences of markers between different time-points of the same patients were analyzed using the paired student's t-test. results of the test were significant with p < 0·05. severe patients was high in the included population, as tongji hospital was a designated hospital for admitting severe patients, so the prediction model might have some bias. thirdly, continuous monitoring data in one patient at different disease courses is limited, and needs to be further validated in larger populations. in summary, this study demonstrates that lymphopenia and high concentrations of cytokines were associated with the pathogenesis of covid-19, and the findings of the study could help in more clearly understanding the immune disorder of the disease. il-2r/lymphocytes are a prominent biomarker for early identification of severe patients and predicting the clinical progression of covid-19.a type of pneumonia with an unknown etiology, termed coronavirus disease 2019 , caused a rapidly spreading outbreak induced by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) [1] [2] , and was declared a public health emergency of international concern on january 30, 2020, by the world health organization (who).china has enforced the most drastic of all classic public health measures to bring the epidemic under control, but the situation in other countries is not optimistic. since late february 2020, new cases have been reported daily in other parts of the world. by march 25, 2020 , the cumulative number of confirmed cases abroad passed the 340000 mark, with more than 15000 deaths, which far exceeded the cases in china. in addition to taking strict preventative measures against the epidemic to curb rapid large-scale outbreaks, the timely treatment of severely or critically ill patients play a significant role in reducing covid -19 fatalities.previous studies on the emergence of this novel coronavirus and its clinical features suggested that older age, male gender, underlying comorbidities, elevated d-dimer at admission, and progressive radiographic deterioration on follow-up ct might be risk factors for patients infected with sars-cov-2 [3] [4] . until now, no antiviral treatment or vaccine has proven effective against the coronavirus infection. infected patients classified as being severely or critically ill may develop multiple organ malfunctions, including acute respiratory distress syndrome and acute cardiac injury [5] [6] [7] , emphasizing an urgent need to establish a a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 6 predictive model for monitoring a patient's risk of developing critical disease symptoms and reducing the mortality rate.this study identifies a significant, independent covid-19 signature in patients via multivariate cox regression, which may serve as a foundation for accurate individual diagnosis and treatment of severely or critically ill patients.this research represented a single-center retrospective study performed from january 27, 2020, to february 26, 2020, by wuhan fourth hospital. here, 270 patients infected with laboratory-identified sars-cov-2 were classified into two groups, namely moderately ill and severely or critically ill, according to the guidance for corona virus disease 2019 (6th edition) [8] , as announced by the national health commission of china. the definitions of moderately ill, severely ill, and critically ill are shown in table s1 .the research team consisted of experienced respiratory physicians, radiologists, and laboratory physicians. missing data or data requiring clarification via the available records were obtained through direct communication with the attending physician and other healthcare providers. finally, the patients were randomly divided into training and test groups.the patient characteristics were obtained from electronic medical records and included clinical features, signs and symptoms, comorbidities, imaging features of the chest, a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 7 laboratory findings, treatments, and antiviral or anti-inflammatory drugs. this information was documented on a standardized record form.throat swab samples were collected from the patients suspected of being infected with covid-19 for the extraction of sars-cov-2 rna. then, the respiratory samples were transferred into a collection tube containing 2 ml cell lysates, and vortexed for 30 s. the rna was extracted from the samples using the appropriate kit (liferiver, shanghai, china). after the clinical laboratory investigation included a complete blood count and biochemical serum tests (including liver and kidney function), as well as the determination of the coagulation mechanism and myocardial enzyme spectrum.a previously reported method was adopted for the construction of the signature module [9] [10] [11] .first, a univariate cox regression analysis was used to determine which indicators were associated with disease prognosis, after which 25 significantly correlated indicators were identified (p-value<0.05). furthermore, a multivariate cox regression analysis was employed to construct a model consisting of five indicators (neutrophil count, lymphocyte count, procalcitonin, age, and c-reactive protein) to assess the risk of prognosis (p-value <0.05, concordance index:0.93 and aic lowest ) and screen for the most powerful determiners. this process allowed for the construction of a model capable of assessing the risk factors of prognosis according to the following equation: the signature of covid-19 selected above was used to construct a risk model, employing the median risk score as the cutoff value to divide the training and test patients into either high-risk or low-risk groups. then, the predictive value of the signature in the test dataset was validated using survival analysis, as well as roc analysis. all assessments were performed using the r project (https://cloud.r-project.org/)(version 3.5.1) with the proc and disease prognosis packages downloaded from bioconductor (https://bioconductor.org).a total of 270 patients with confirmed covid-19 participated in this study, of which 203 (75.2%) were moderately ill, and 67 (34.8%) were severely ill. as shown in table 1 the selected technical route of the prognostic signature of covid-19 is displayed in figure   1 . the training group (n = 210) was used to explore the association between disease prognosis and the occurrence of the indicators. univariate cox regression analysis of the indicator data was initially performed, with the survival time and overall status as the dependent variables. here, 25 indicators were identified that significantly correlated with the disease prognosis in the patients (p-value <0.05, figure 2 , table s2 ). furthermore, a multivariate cox regression analysis ( figure 3 ) was employed to construct a model consisting of five indicators (neutrophil count, lymphocyte count, procalcitonin, age, and c-reactive protein) to assess the risk of the prognosis and screen for the most powerful prognostic determiners. the risk scores (table s3 ) of the combination of these five indicators were determined as follows:where rs is the risk score, and id is the indicator value. the analysis represented the risk score of the selected signature of covid-19 for each patient. a median risk score was used to divide the training group into a low-risk group (n = 104) and a high-risk group (n =106). the results of the survival analysis revealed that the high-risk group demonstrated significantly lower survival rates than the low-risk group (logrank test p<0.001; figure 4a ). as the duration after disease diagnosis increased, the survival probability of the high-risk group was 0.59, while the low-risk group was not faced with lifethreatening risk. the same disease prognosis risk score model was used to calculate the signature-based risk scores of the test group patients, validating the prediction power of the signature. similarly, the test data set was divided into two groups, namely a high-risk group (n=12) and a low-risk group (n=48). the two risk groups in the test dataset were displayed using survival analysis ( figure 4b ). the median survival rate of the high-risk group in the test was significantly lower than in the low-risk group (log-rank test p<0.001). the results indicated that when the disease progressed for 14 days, the survival probability of the highrisk group was only 0.3, which was significantly lower than in the low-risk group (survival probability =0.85).roc analysis was performed to test the prediction power of the signature of covid-19, which considered the larger auc as a better model for predicting the disease prognosis in covid-19 patients. in the training group, the predictive ability of the five-indicator signature was high (auc signature =0.955, figure. 4c), further demonstrating that the signature in this a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 12 study was a novel and highly accurate survival biomarker. a similar, highly accurate result was evident in the test group as well (auc signature =0.945, figure 4d ).covid-19 is a highly infectious disease characterized by a long incubation period, and rapid onset, with no specific treatment method currently available. it is crucial to find a signature factors for the contraction of covid-19 [12] . furthermore, a recent study found that cardiac troponin i(≥ 0.05 ng/ml) is also an important predictor for the prognosis of covid-19 [13] .here, multivariable cox regression analysis was used to assess the independence of the m a n u s c r i p t 13 signature with an auc of 0.955 in the training group and 0.945 in the test group, indicating its potential as a powerful survival biomarker. the signature combined with the five indicators (neutrophil count, lymphocyte count, procalcitonin, age, and c-reactive protein) was strongly associated with the physiological status of covid-19 patients, such as inflammation and immune function. therefore, the signature could be a more effective biomarker in a multi-dimensional model.cases to severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and respiratory failure [14] , as didsevere pneumonia and acute heart injury [5] .complement-mediated systemic inflammation may be an underlying mechanism for the pathogenic response to the sars infection. previous research found that complementdeficient mice displayed reduced pulmonary neutrophils and an attenuated pro-inflammatory response [15] . neutrophils infiltrate the tissues infected with coronavirus, promoting the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, which might induce extensive lung damage in sars, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2 infection [5, [16] [17] . furthermore, studies have revealed that a high neutrophil count in patients with sars when admitted to the hospital, is more likely to present a poor prognosis [18] [19] . a recent study found that patients with refractory covid-19 exhibited higher neutrophil levels on admission [20] , corroborating the findings of this study. this result may be closely related to the inflammation caused by neutrophils, which leads to tissue damage.a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 14 both c-reactive protein and procalcitonin can reflect the inflammatory state of the body.procalcitonin shows a certain correlation with microbial invasion and is one of the most promising biomarkers for the diagnosis of sepsis [21] . c-reactive protein can be induced by inflammation, playing a crucial role in activating the complement system and neutrophils, while promoting the secretion of il-6, il-1b, and tnf-α, which contribute to further inflammation [22] . severely or critically ill patients with covid-19 may develop sepsis, which is a significant contributor to the mortality rate. c-reactive protein and procalcitonin are reportedly helpful in the diagnosis of sepsis [23] , while serum procalcitonin levels appear to correlate with the severity of the microbial attack. elevated c-reactive protein and procalcitonin levels are more common in covid-19 patients with heart injury, placing them at a higher risk of hospital death [24] . moreover, high levels of c-reactive protein and procalcitonin exhibit a significant correlation with pulmonary inflammation [25] and are reportedly associated with patients who are severely ill with covid-19 [26] . in a recent retrospective study involving covid-19, the c-reactive protein and procalcitonin levels were higher in deceased patients [3, 27] , which corresponds with the results of this study. the indicators of the prognostic factors help to identify the severity of the covid-19 disease while showing that secondary bacterial infections cannot be ignored.a high lymphocyte count is considered a protective factor for covid-19 since severe lymphopenia was predictive of poor outcomes [28] . t-cells play a critical role in inhibiting the overactive innate immune response while maintaining immune homeostasis during sars-prevent re-infection [29] [30] . a previous study indicated that the lymphocyte count is crucial during the early screening, diagnosis, and treatment of critically ill covid-19 patients [31] .this study found that serious lymphopenia was more common in severely ill patients, a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 15 indicating that sars-cov-2 might affect lymphocytes, while cell-mediated immunity might be associated with disease severity. research indicated that the depletion of t-cells resulted in immune dysregulation, accompanied by increased inflammation, cytokine storms, and the aggravation of damaged tissue [31] , which was consistent with the supposition of this study.older age has always been a risk factor for a series of diseases, and this research was no exception. previous reports indicated that the median age of patients at the time of death was older for sars-cov-2 infection[32-33]. as suggested in recent studies on a similar topic [3, 34] , this study showed that the median age of severely or critically ill patients was older than that of moderately ill patients. therefore, it seems that the elderly may have a high likelihood of developing chronic underlying comorbidities (diabetes, hypertension, and heart disease)and are more susceptible to covid-19 with a poor outcome [6] , which could be attributed to the elderly often being physically fragile with weak immune systems. therefore, people belonging to this age group would experience immune senescence[35], accompanied by decreased immune defense functionality, a weakened ability for the proliferation and differentiation of t-and b-cells in the lymph nodes, reduced effector functionality, as well as poor coordination between innate immunity and acquired immune response, contributing to increased morbidity and mortality[36]. these results indicated that disease prognosis in the elderly requires careful attention and timeous treatment.the risk score of the selected signature of covid-19 was calculated to further verify its ability as a prognostic biomarker in patients infected with the disease. the training group was divided into low-risk and high-risk groups according to the median risk score. the resultsshowed that the high-risk group displayed a significantly lower survival rate than the low-risk group. therefore, the risk model based on the signature combined with the five indicators a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 16 could be used to predict the disease prognosis and the survival rate, fully utilizing medical resources to provide critically ill patients with better treatment and reducing the mortality rate of covid-19.this study exhibited several limitations. first, since this was a retrospective, single-center sample study, potential biomarkers such as underlying diseases, which could predict prognosis of covid-19, were not included in the model. therefore, a multi-center large sample study would be preferable for assessing the prognostic markers of covid-19.second, although a retrospective study of moderately and severely or critically ill patients was performed to establish the signature combined with the clinical indicators, the laboratory data regarding cardiac troponin i, oxygen partial pressure, and the characteristics regarding bmi were not available. therefore, these elements were not included in the risk factor analysis due to the severity of the epidemic at that specific time and the shortage of medical resources. third, notwithstanding these limitations, the consistent correlation of the signature with the overall survival rate in this study indicates that it is a dominant independent signature of covid-19.the signature of covid-19 is an effective prognostic biomarker that can be used during the risk assessment of patients infected with the disease. it allows for close monitoring to provide timely treatment for severely or critically ill patients.a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 17we thank the all medical staffs and patients involved in the study.the we declare no competing interests. multivariate cox regression analysis of the signature associated with disease prognosis. m a n u s c r i p t a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 32 figure 4 can therefore be difficult to distinguish clinically. however, lntx patients may lack classical signs of infection due to heavy immunosuppression, and rejection may be asymptomatic. in addition, there are possible links between infection and the development of rejection. 4 for example, viral pneumonia has been associated with chronic lung allograft dysfunction and graft loss. 5 antimicrobial peptides in respiratory secretions play an important role as a first line of defence against infections. 7 lysozyme is the most abundant airway antimicrobial peptide, and is secreted primarily by neutrophils and sub-mucosal glands. 8 heparin-binding protein (hbp) was initially recognized for its broad antimicrobial activity, but is now known to be a multifunctional inflammatory mediator that induces vascular leakage and acts as a chemoattractant and activator of monocytes. 9, 10 the protein is stored in secretory and azurophilic granules of neutrophils, and is rapidly released upon cell activation. 11 plasma hbp has been described as a promising biomarker for severe sepsis and septic shock, 12 and elevated hbp levels have also been shown in cerebrospinal fluid during bacterial meningitis 13 and in urine during urinary tract infections. 14 neither hbp nor lysozyme has previously been evaluated in balf of lntx patients. in this study, we quantified the two proteins together with the pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin (il)-1β, il-6, il-8 and tnf, and anti-inflammatory il-10 in balf collected during the first year after transplantation. the primary aim was to evaluate hbp and lysozyme as potential biomarkers for infection, and to determine their ability to discriminate infection from rejection in lung transplant recipients.this prospective cohort study was conducted at skåne university hospital, one of two centers in sweden that performs lntx. adult patients accepted for lntx during the study period from october 2012 to december 2014 were eligible for inclusion. patients younger than 18 years of age and patients with postoperative follow-up at other sites were excluded. all study participants were followed for a maximum of 1 year after transplantation. written informed consent was obtained from all study patients. the study was approved by the regional ethics committee (reg nr 433-08) and performed in accordance with the ethical standards of the 1964 declaration of helsinki and its later amendments. standard protocol for immune suppression included induction therapy with atg (anti-thymocyte globulin), followed by tacrolimus or cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil, and steroids. all lntx recipients were treated with cytomegalovirus and fungal prophylaxis for 3-6 months.balf samples were collected at routine scheduled bronchoscopies at 3 and 6 months after lntx or at diagnostic bronchoscopies performed in response to clinical symptoms. a minimal interval of 7 days was allowed between bals to be included as a new sample in the study. bal procedure followed a standardized protocol. study samples for analyses of hbp, lysozyme, and cytokines were obtained after installation of 20 ml phosphate-buffered saline (pbs), where the initial 10 ml of balf was discharged after which a study sample of 10 ml was collected. portions of 20 ml of pbs were then instilled to collect balf according to a standard protocol for bacterial, fungal, and cytological analyses. balf was sent to the skåne university tbbs was semi-quantitatively reported as no, mild, or acute/abundant inflammation.the likelihood of pulmonary infection at the time of balf sampling was independently, and blinded to the results of the biomarkers, to adjust for dilution of balf in estimating the biomarker concen- chi-square, rank sum, kruskal-wallis, and mann-whitney u tests were using logistic regression, we calculated odds ratios (ors) for infection (dichotomized into definite and probable vs no or possible infection and rejection) for each biomarker. we used generalized estimating equation (gee) models to account for the possibility of dependency due to multiple observations from the same patient.the different biomarkers were first analyzed in univariable models and secondly in models adjusted for time after lntx. all statistical tests were two-sided, and 95% confidence intervals (cis) that in total, 39 patients were transplanted during the study period. five patients were not eligible for inclusion due to follow-up at another center, and one patient declined participation. consequently, 33 patients were included in the study. four participants died shortly after transplantation, before any study samples were collected, leaving 29 lung transplant recipients prospectively followed in this study. the patients, 12 women and 17 men, had a median age of 56 years, 86% underwent double lung transplantation, and cystic fibrosis was the most common underlying disease. for details on patient characteristics, see table 2 . patients were assessed for infection at the time of bal as described in table 1 bacterial growth was detected in 54 balf samples (48%).pseudomonas aeruginosa was the most commonly isolated bacterial species (12%), followed by escherichia coli (9% at an hbp cut-off value of 150 ng/ml, sensitivity was 75% and specificity was 92% for the detection of infection; positive predictive value (ppv) and negative predictive value (npv) were 92% and 76%, respectively. il-1β and il-8 performed similar to hbp, whereas lysozyme showed poor sensitivity and specificity (table 3) . in this prospective study on lung transplant recipients comparing different biomarkers for prediction of infection, we found that hbp, similar to hbp and lysozyme, all cytokines increased with the likelihood of infection, mirroring increased inflammation. il-10 has anti-inflammatory properties but showed the same pattern as the pro-inflammatory cytokines in this study. il-10 is believed to play an important role in balancing the inflammatory response in order to limit host tissue damage. 19 for example, compared to wild-type mice, il-10-deficient mice demonstrate more efficient bacterial clearance but higher mortality and increased neutrophil recruitment to the lung in response to streptococcus pneumoniae infection, 20 which underscores the regulatory role of il-10 during infection. it could therefore be speculated that il-10 increases simultaneously with pro-inflammatory cytokines in order to avoid excessive inflammation that would be harmful to the host.to correct for dilution factors of balf, we used the urea method as in this study, we found no significant differences in levels between rejection and noninfection for any of the biomarkers. contrary to our results, patella et al have demonstrated increased levels of il-10 during rejection compared to no rejection. 22 one possible reason for this discrepancy is that rejection is defined differently in the two studies. here, we identify rejection with tbb to ensure correct diagnosis. all tested biomarkers have in common that they indicate neutrophil-dominated inflammation. in contrast, rejection is primarily a t cell-driven process, 23 in late 2019, a novel coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 [sars-cov-2]) was identified as the cause of an outbreak of acute respiratory illness in wuhan, china. in february 2020, the world health organization designated the disease as coronavirus disease 2019 . so far, the infection has spread to include hundreds of thousands worldwide, with confirmed cases increasing despite the austere measures applied [1, 2] .the novel coronavirus causes a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations in humans, with a large fraction of patients developing a short period of moderate clinical illness [1] [2] [3] . nevertheless, a small but substantial number of patients experience severe pneumonia, which may rapidly progress to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), sepsis and septic shock, and multiple organ failure [4] . the disease severity is influenced by many factors, such as the initial viral titers in the airways, the age, or the comorbid conditions of the infected individual [5] .the pathogenesis of covid-19 disease is not completely understood. virus may spread through the respiratory mucosa and infect other cells, inducing a cytokine storm in the body. a recent study demonstrated that patients with covid-19 pneumonia who developed ards had significantly higher neutrophil count and more severe cytokine storm than those without ards [5] , while several authors have reported a substantial decrease in the total number of lymphocytes, indicating the consumption of immune cells, which may be fatal in older patients or patients with comorbidities [6, 7] . in addition, although we know that coronaviruses are able to initiate myocardial injury, it is too early to fully characterize and quantify the cardiovascular impact of covid-19. however, arrhythmias, hypotension, and coronary syndromes have been reported in patients diagnosed with covid-19. of note, by march 11, italy had 12,462 confirmed cases and 827 deaths (6.6% mortality), with more than two out of three of them reporting diabetes or cardiovascular disease. at this time, the full breadth and kinetics of immune responses in covid-19 patients remain largely unknown, but it seems that a common manifestation among severe cases is the high levels of proinflammatory cytokines [1] . considering that this cytokine storm can initiate viral sepsis and inflammatory-induced complications which may lead to organ damage and death, a reliable prognostic biomarker would be invaluable today for the triage of covid-19 patients.the soluble urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (supar) is the soluble form of the cell membrane-bound protein urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (upar). supar has a secondary structure of 17 anti-parallel β-sheets with three short α-helices. there are three homologous domains of supar, causing its distinct ligand binding properties. the gpi-anchor links upar to the cell membrane, making it available for upa binding. although there are three different supar forms (supari-iii, suparii-iii, and supari), only suparii-iii is known to be a chemotactic agent for promoting the immune system. supar and its ligand are involved in numerous physiological and pathological pathways, including the plasminogen activating pathway, modulation of cell adhesion, and migration and proliferation through interactions with extracellular matrix proteins.the predictive ability of supar has been reported to be equal to or better than other scoring systems, and thus, its addition to conventional triage algorithms may improve risk stratification [8] . in a study of 42,452 acutely presenting patients, supar had the highest area under the curve of all investigated individual predictors, including c-reactive protein (crp), while there was no significant difference in the predictive value between age groups [9] . in another study, including 17,312 acutely admitted medical patients, the addition of supar to national early warning score significantly improved risk prediction of both low-and highrisk acute medical patients [10] . interestingly, patients with low national early warning score, but elevated supar had mortality risks comparable to that of patients with higher national early warning score. three other studies reported that supar is significantly associated with 28-day, 30-day, and 90-day mortality [11] [12] [13] . of note, nayak et al. confirmed the previous findings and also reported an association between supar and long-term readmission rates [14] . these cumulative data suggest that high supar level at admission is a marker of severe disease; supar is associated with increased risk of readmission, morbidity, and mortality and can facilitate discrimination between survivors and non-survivors [15] [16] [17] [18] . it may therefore provide benefit for evaluation of covid-19 patients to determine the requirement for a more intensive clinical assessment and care [19] .inflammation and oxidative stress are central components of the pathogenesis of acute kidney injury, and emerging reports indicate that covid-19 manifestations can include renal tubular injury and collapsing glomerulopathy [20] [21] [22] . the latter is an aggressive and distinct histological variant of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis characterized by segmental or global glomerular tuft collapse with hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the overlying podocytes [23] . although the pathogenesis of collapsing glomerulopathy in covid-19 patients is likely multifactorial, upar is required for the development of podocyte foot process effacement and proteinuria [24] . in addition, the recent identification of cellular sources of supar demonstrates its pathogenic role as a circulating mediator of kidney disease, indicating the devastating effects of inflammation and cytokine storm on the kidneys [25] .hayek et al. identified an association between elevated plasma supar levels and the development of acute and chronic kidney disease. this association was observed in patients with normal baseline kidney function and was independent of conventional risk factors for kidney disease [26, 27] . not surprisingly, the inclusion of the supar level in a prediction model significantly improved discrimination of future risk of chronic kidney disease, with the risk reclassification being greater than that with well-established biomarkers, such as high-sensitivity c-reactive protein (crp). considering that there has been little progress in the overall risk stratification, prevention, and treatment of acute kidney injury, these data suggest that supar meets critical requirements for a biomarker of acute and chronic kidney disease in patients with covid-19.what is most important is that supar increases with the severity of the infection or organ dysfunction, reflecting the body's immune response, and may have a strong prognostic value in covid-19 patients, especially in those with systemic inflammatory response syndrome and sepsis/septic shock [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] . in patients with systemic inflammatory response syndrome, supar is a stronger marker of 2-day, 30-day, and 90-day mortality than crp or interleukin-6 [28] , while its levels do not correlate with the crp in patients with sepsis [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] . therefore, supar reflects general activation of the immune system rather than exerting inflammatory actions. this may be extremely important considering that the reported sensitivity for mortality and the negative predictive value of supar are > 80% and 94.5%, respectively [31] . furthermore, supar may be able to assist in the discrimination between an excessive immune response and immunosuppression, facilitating early modulation of treatment strategy.supar is an inflammatory biomarker that can be easily measured in plasma or serum. the available test allows a fast prognosis for patients, as the results can quickly be obtained on-site in the emergency room or other in-hospital settings, avoiding the need for samples to be passed through the clinical laboratory, or can even be obtained prior to hospitalization (time to result 20 min). based on the aforementioned evidence, the supar could serve as a quick triage test and independent marker of clinical severity, 30-day readmission, complications, and mortality in this pandemic [10, 19, 35, 36] . we believe that the results of ongoing trials in germany, the uk, denmark, greece, and the usa will be important for clinicians worldwide.in conclusion, supar seems extremely promising as a covid-19 prognostic marker and may assist in the early selection of patients who can stay at home or must be admitted to the hospital and/or intensive care unit. in this difficult outbreak, humanity must use all the available weapons, and supar may prove a powerful triage biomarker.funding the authors have no funding to declare.the authors (athanasios chalkias, angeliki mouzarou, evangelia samara, theodoros xanthos, eleni ischaki, and ioannis pantazopoulos) declare they have no conflicts of interest.rapid and reliable identification of microorganisms without extensive manipulation is a major goal in environmental and clinical microbiology. analysis of biological samples will always be challenging because of their great diversity and complexity (1 ) . the accurate identification of microorganisms using classic techniques is time-consuming and complicated. early de-tection and characterization of microorganisms can help minimize health hazards and avoid the spread of microbe-related diseases. the requirements of modern methods suitable for microorganism identification and characterization are robustness, simple handling, low cost, rapidity, and high-throughput capability. because it satisfies most of these requirements, mass spectrometry (ms) 2 is emerging as a technology capable of identifying microorganisms (1 ). fig. 1 presents a flow chart of the microbial enrichment and analysis strategies used to identify microorganisms. in general, a sufficient number of microbial cells are collected, using culture or nonculture methods, before ms-based analysis. nonculture approaches often use affinity techniques based on biochemical, chemical, and physical interactions with target cells. after collection of the cells, ms analysis of the samples is then performed. direct sampling techniques such as bioaerosol mass spectrometry have been developed to analyze individual aerosolized microbial particles in real time. coupling of nucleic acid amplification to ms combines the high amplification power of the former and the high mass-resolving power of the latter. to comprehensively investigate potential biomarkers, extraction of biomarkers from microbial cells followed by fractionation steps is conducted before mass spectrometric analysis. in the flow chart, direct analysis means that microbial cells are directly analyzed without using biomarker extraction and separation steps.in biological systems, biomolecule-conjugated nanoparticles have been used to understand and manipulate biomolecular interactions, recognize molecular targets, and perform medical diagnoses. in addition, nanoparticles play important roles in the msbased identification of microorganisms (2, 3 ) . using functionalized magnetic nanoparticles to detect bacteria at ultralow concentrations requires less time and offers obvious benefits and advantages in clinical research.the development of 2 so-called soft ionization techniques-maldi and electrospray ionization (esi)-has provided practitioners of ms with the means to generate gas-phase ions from moderate to high molecular weight thermally labile compounds. microorganism identification using maldi-and esi-ms techniques is an excellent alternative to traditional laboratory methods used in medicinal and clinical microbiology. recently, advanced techniques such as desorption electrospray ionization have been applied to identification of bacteria. direct identification of bacteria using maldi, esi, and bioaerosol mass spectrometry provides several advantages, such as simplicity and rapidity.sample pretreatment is an important issue in the analysis of microorganisms. careful sample pretreatment is required to achieve sufficient detection capability and selectivity, but the time taken should be kept to a minimum to ensure high throughput. the complexity of microbial biomarkers may be reduced through various chromatography-based methods. this review describes the ms-based analyses of various classes of biomolecules and the applications for each class achieved through chromatographic techniques, including gas chromatography (gc), capillary electrophoresis, liquid chromatography (lc), and affinity methods, such as seldi.ms approaches toward the identification of microorganisms may take advantage of variations in microbial genomic sequences resulting from measurable differences in the molecular masses of pcr products. although current pcr assays may be specific, rapid, and analytically sensitive, they cannot be used directly for classification, especially in the case of unknown microbial samples. methods combining pcr and ms draw on the strengths of each technique and, in some cases, provide additional information not supplied by either technique alone (4 ) . this review also summarizes the methods of data analysis, including library searches and statistical approaches, for the differentiation of pathogens, and concludes with selected examples of clinical applications of microbial analysis and some perspectives.in general, the presence of proteins or metabolites in biological fluids will suppress the signals of the biomarkers generated from the microorganism cells during ms analysis. therefore, the development of specific affinity probes for target bacteria is an approach that can effectively minimize interference from sample matrices and concentrate the microorganisms of interest. afonso and fenselau (5 ) described the detection of bacteria from complex biological mixtures using affinity capture coupled with maldi-ms; they used an affinity method-using a lectin-immobilized substrate-to trap traces of bacterial cells from complex biological mixtures.immunomagnetic separation is a well-known technique that involves application of antibody-coated magnetic particles to separate pathogenic microorgan- isms and biological cells from clinical, food, and environmental samples. madonna et al. (6 ) developed a rapid method for identifying target bacteria from complex biological sample solutions by coupling immunomagnetic separation with maldi-ms. this method requires only microliter volumes of materials; for example, a minimum of 1.0 ϫ 10 7 bacteria cells/ml could be detected from a physiological buffer in an analysis time of ͻ1 h. in addition, nanoparticles (nps) have become interesting probes for the separation of analytes from sample solutions because of their large surface-to-volume ratios. covalent binding between nps and targets is readily achieved by self-assembling thiolated molecules onto np surfaces. lin et al. (7 ) used mannose-encapsulated gold nps as nanoscale probes to recognize type 1 pili in escherichia coli. gu and colleagues (2, 8 ) proposed that vancomycinmodified fe-pt nps (biofunctional magnetic nps) could be used as affinity probes to trap vancomycinresistant bacteria; they used s-pt bonding to capture the pathogens at concentrations of ca. 10 1 colonyforming units (cfu)/ml within 1 h (2 ).in a similar study, chen and colleagues (9 ) fig. 2 provides a representation of this process. the poa-bound magnetic particles were mixed with s. saprophyticus and e. coli j96. e. coli j96 was selectively trapped, isolated through magnetic separation, and characterized by direct ms analysis of the np-bacterium conjugates.direct analysis of microorganisms using maldi-ms provides a number of advantages, such as rapidity, low detection limits, simplified mass spectra (featuring the signals of predominantly singly charged ions), and tolerance to contaminants. the protein profiles in wholecell maldi mass spectra have taxonomically characteristic features that can be used to differentiate bacteria at the genus, species, and strain levels, although only a small portion of the bacterial proteome is detected. direct analyses of intact bacterial cells through maldi-tof ms have been used to differentiate bacterial species and subspecies in many clinical microbiology laboratories (10 ). fig. 3 presents maldi mass spectra obtained from the direct analyses of intact bacterial cells of 4 pure cultures including s. aureus, enterococcus faecalis, e. coli, and vibrio parahaemolyticus. because the protein profiles clearly differ, they can be used to differentiate these 4 bacteria. identification and typing of microorganisms using maldi-ms has been very successful and reviewed by many authors (1, (11) (12) (13) (14) . we do not attempt to cover this area here.although esi-ms has been used less frequently for direct microbial identification, xiang et al. (15 ) bacillus thuringiensis, bacillus subtilis, and salmonella typhimurium-based on their desi mass spectral profiles. distinguishable desi mass spectra, in the mass range 50 -500 da, have been obtained from whole bacteria using both positive and negative ion modes; the analysis time can be ͻ2 min (17 ) .bioaerosol mass spectrometry (bams) has been developed to analyze and identify individual aerosolized microbial particles in real time (14 ) . bams has the potential to instantaneously detect species-level differences between single cells without the need for sample workup or preconcentration; it offers a high degree of detection specificity and analysis times in the millisecond range. it has been applied to the differentiation of the bacillus spore species b. thuringiensis and b. atrophaeus (18 ) and to the detection of airborne mycobacterium tuberculosis bacteria (19 ) . the reagentless bams reflectron mass spectra of bacillus spores and vegetative cells have been limited to signals having masses of less than m/z 300. although bams has provided some success at species-level differentiation, it has been hindered by low sensitivity at high mass (18 ) . improved high-mass sensitivity will extend the fingerprint mass range and increase the probability of detecting more robust species-specific biomarkers.the high-mass analyses of airborne pathogens can be improved by combining aerosol time-of-flight ms with maldi (20 ) . in general, the aerosol and matrix vapor are mixed and then transported into a cooling chamber, where the matrix is condensed onto the aerosol. the coated particles are then analyzed using a timeof-flight mass spectrometer. van wuijckhuijse et al. (20 ) developed an online system for analyzing proteins and other biological material present in single aerosol particles. protein aerosol particles having masses of up to 20 000 da can be detected; this mass range encompasses those of useful biomarkers for bacteria including bacillus spores (20 ) .gc-ms has been applied successfully to metabolite profiling for the characterization of microorganisms (21 ) . the maximum molecular weight of compounds that can be analyzed by gc-ms is ͻ1000 da. for nonvolatile analytes, conversion of samples to volatile compounds through derivatization or degradation is often required before gs-ms analysis. ishida et al. subtilis and e. coli. similar coverage (95%-97%) for the same microorganisms and s. cerevisiae required the application of 6 different analytical methods (25 ) . in total, 905 different metabolites were present in these 3 in silico metabolomes, with 410 metabolites being unique to 1 of each of these 3 microorganisms.gc-ms/ms can improve the detection limit and specificity of the analysis of carbohydrate biomarkers (e.g., muramic acid) in complex environmental and clinical samples. specifically, this technique involves monitoring the specific transitions of precursor ions to fragment ions in the multiple reaction monitoring mode. with this approach, wunschel et al. (21 ) studied the feasibility of using 2 variants of the alditol acetate procedure to analyze agar markers associated with spores of bacillus anthracis. these methods could detect the agar background component, 3,6-anhydro-␣l-galactose, in the presence of spores. pyrolysis-ms is often used to obtain a pyrolysate fingerprint to classify and identify bacteria. pyrolysis is a process in which chemical or biochemical compounds are decomposed by heating. pyrolysis products derived from many classes of compounds including lipids (26 ) and proteins (27 ) have all been used for bacterial discrimination.capillary electrophoresis (ce)-ms is a well-accepted multidimensional analytical approach that is complementary and/or competitive to classic ms-coupled separation techniques (28 ) . ce in combination with esi-ms has the ability to perform the rapid, automated, miniaturized, and highly efficient separation of complex mixtures. ce-ms is a useful technology for the discovery of biomarkers from pathogens (28 ) . hu et al. (29 ) identified bacterial species-specific proteins in a sample by performing ce-ms analysis on the proteolytic digest of the cell extract and monitoring only the selected marker peptide masses using ms/ms. through database searching, they identified peptides that matched proteins associated with pseudomonas aeruginosa, s. aureus, and staphylococcus epidermidis and selected these peptides as marker ions for bacterial identification of the mixtures. the method was later termed selective proteotypic-peptide analysis (spa). the spa method has also been used to identify the pathogens present in a saliva sample spiked with bacterial mixtures. minor bacterial species present at even 1% relative abundance were identified with high confidence. furthermore, the rate of data analysis was greatly improved because only selected markers, rather than whole protein digests, were analyzed. they also reported the identification of bacterial species using ce-ms and a database search algorithm with an empirical scoring function (30 ) .liquid chromatography coupled on-or off-line with ms is currently the most widely used analytical method for the separation and analysis of such biological samples as proteins, peptides, nucleotides, and metabolites. it is a separation technique presumably best suited for clinical applications in microbial analysis because of its chromatographic separation ability and flexibility of coupling multiple separation columns. the effects of the sample preparation methods on the detection of bacterial proteins obtained from e. coli by lc-esi-ms have been investigated (31 ) . furthermore, the effect of variations in the protein patterns on bacterial identification using a database search approach has been examined. lo et al. (32 ) used an lc-selective proteotypic-peptide analysis method to identify multiple bacterial species in a single ms analysis. the corresponding bacterial species could be identified if the selected peptides eluted during the preset time window and could be identified correctly from the database. this method has been applied to identify up to 8 pathogens present in bacterial mixtures in a single lc-selective proteotypic-peptide analysis experiment (32 ) .a multidimensional lc-ms method has been used for the rapid determination and identification of bacterial proteins. by combining affinity purification with multidimensional protein identification technology, krishnamurthy et al. (33 ) reported the separation and characterization of a highly specific protein biomarker (antigenic protein ea1) from sporulated b. anthracis cells.although the lipid profiles may depend on the growth conditions, phospholipids have proved to be useful biomarkers for some microorganisms (34 ) . phospholipids can be ionized as intact entities for ms and ms/ms analyses. individual fatty acids present in bacterial cells can be identified from product ion (ms/ ms) spectra acquired in the negative ion mode. dramatic improvements in the detection limits for phospholipid analysis have been achieved using esi-ms and ms/ms (35 ) . bacteriohopanepolyols (bhps) are membrane lipids produced by a wide range of eubacteria. talbot et al. (36 ) described the detailed lc-ms analyses of a number of less commonly reported, but highly useful, bhp markers derived from bacterial cultures.seldi-ms is based on the retention of analytes on a target plate before maldi-ms analysis. using affinity chromatography, proteins are captured on a chemically or biochemically modified protein chip surface. an advantage of the seldi technique is that target proteins can be characterized after they have been retained and purified on an affinity surface uniquely designed according to the specific properties of the proteins (37 ) .a protein profiling approach based on seldi-ms has been used for phenotypic discrimination of 4 closely related subspecies of francisella tularensis (38 ) . the method is based on the differential binding of protein subsets to chemically modified surfaces. the ability of the selective array surfaces to retain subsets of the proteome and to wash and desalt proteins on the array surface allows the direct analysis of bacterial lysates or other protein-containing samples, thereby minimizing sample losses and accelerating sample preparation. lancashire et al. (39 ) used seldi-ms to identify potential biological markers for well-characterized strains of neisseria meningitides and created a model to distinguish them from closely related species. shah et al. (40 ) analyzed intact cells of human pathogens (strains of fusobacterium nucleatum, prevotella intermedia, and prevotella nigrescens) using maldi-and seldi-ms to obtain specific spectral profiles that could be used to delineate bacterial species. one key challenge for profiling methods is to achieve reproducible results. standardized sample preparation protocols are always required to improve spectral reproducibility.methods for microbial identification can be classified into phenotyping and genotyping categories. genotypic techniques are based on the genetic conservation of a species and genetic variability among different species. phenotypic testing, which relies on physiological or biochemical characteristics, can provide information about specific metabolic pathways or antibiotic resistance. whereas traditional biochemical analysis remains a major approach used in clinical laboratories, nucleic acid-based methods are gaining increasing popularity in clinical applications.the rapid analyses of pcr products through esi-ms and maldi-ms have been applied success-fully to the identification of pathogens. for instance, mayr et al. (41 ) reported the identification of bacteria using a combination of pcr and lc-ms; the specificity of this method in a human background was successfully tested by amplifying and analyzing 1000 -10 000 genome equivalents of s. aureus spiked into human plasma. they also analyzed dna fragments amplified from the 16s rrna region that were amenable to the esi-ms-based genotyping of 10 different bacterial species generally found in clinical environments.to achieve a more accurate distinction among species, rflps can be used after pcr to identify species based on the 16s rrna fragment patterns. the fragments are obtained from digestion of the pcr products with restriction enzymes. the decreased size of the digested pcr products also results in more favorable ionization and mass spectroscopic analysis. the rflp method has been combined with maldi-ms to detect hepatitis b and c viruses (hbv and hcv) in human serum samples (42, 43 ) . this method allowed the detection of as few as 100 copies of the hbv gene per milliliter of serum and the differentiation of wild-type and variant viruses (43 ) . in all the reports discussed above, the microbial species were distinguished based on size determination of the pcr-amplified specific marker genes. using these approaches for accurate microbial identification is limited, however, because of length heterogeneities of specific marker genes. von wintzingerode et al. (44 ) developed a method for 16s rrna gene-based bacterial identification that combines base-specific fragmentation of pcr products with maldi-ms. amplification of 16s rdna signature sequences in the presence of dutp is followed by uracil-dna-glycosylase-mediated fragmentation at t-specific sites. ms analysis of the base-specific fragment patterns has allowed unambiguous discrimination of several cultured bordetella species and as-yetuncultured bacteria.because of the difficulties associated with maldi-ms-based analyses of dna, several research groups have analyzed the more stable rna transcribed from dna. pcr amplification of the16s rdna was performed using rna promoter-tagged forward primers, and the in vitro transcription was followed using a t7 rna polymerase. the base (g)-specific fragments were produced by rnaase t1 cleavage of the rna transcript and analyzed using maldi-ms (45 ) .single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) arise from single base changes at specific positions in a genome. snps are the most abundant form of genetic variation and can be used for pathogen identification. many methods are available for determination of the alleles of a snp. in addition to the conventional rflp approach mentioned above, primer extension, oligonucleotide ligation, and hybridization have all been combined with ms for genotyping (46 ) . ilina et al. (47 ) used primer extension and maldi-ms to genotype hcv from hcv-positive blood sera and plasma. they designed 3 oligonucleotide primers to detect 2 sets of genotype-specific snps. the primer extension reaction was performed using modified thermostable dna polymerase in the presence of dideoxynucleosides; the reaction products were analyzed using maldi-ms. we note that the diversity of microbial strains and the occurrence of novel mutations limit the use of genotypic methods based on single nucleotide differences between strains. genotypic identification assays using base-specific cleavage strategies, however, allow not only the differentiation of known sequence strains but also the detection of new strains.triangulation identification for the genetic evaluation of risks (tiger) is a promising approach for the detection of a broad spectrum of microorganisms (48 ) . it uses high-performance esi-ms to detect the base compositions of pcr products. the essential aspect of this approach is the use of "intelligent pcr primers" that target broadly conserved regions of microbial genomes that flank variable regions. the pcr products in the 80-to 140-bp size range can be measured using high-resolution fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance or time-of-flight ms in a high-throughput mode. accurate mass measurements allow determination of the base compositions obtained from multiple primer pairs. these base compositions were used to "triangulate" the identities of the pathogens. the approach is equally well suited to the detection of bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa. fig. 4 presents esi-ms mass spectra of pcr amplicons derived from both strands of the tkt genes for 6 campylobacteria jejuni strains (49 ) .the same approach has been applied to the rapid identification and strain-typing of respiratory pathogens (50 ) . broad-range pcr primers targeted highly conserved regions of 16s and 23s dna genes. additional primers targeted to highly variable regions of specific bacterial genomes have been used for highresolution genotyping of specific species. identification of 14 isolates of 9 diverse coronavirus spp., including the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-associated coronavirus, has been demonstrated using the tiger approach, with a detection limit of 1 pfu per milliliter of human serum.data analysis methods for the differentiation of pathogens can be based on the most straightforward profiling of intact proteins or on the complicated statistical treatment of ms data. maldi-ms analysis of whole intact cells has been used for protein profiling of water-borne pathogen aeromonas (51 ) . a library of mass signatures was established for 17 species of aeromonas; the abundances of the ions were not taken into account-only their masses were used to compile the library. this approach has several advantageous features: the ability to detect intact biomarkers (e.g., proteins), simple sample preparation, and high throughput. the challenge facing this technique is spectral reproducibility, which is markedly influenced by variations in culture conditions and analytical parameters.because of the complexity of mass spectral data, many statistical algorithms have been developed to match the analyzed spectra to reference spectra or to generate biomarker spectra for microbial differentiation. a biomarker-selective algorithm has been used to extract key signals from spectra; the constructed biomarker library has been used to identify bacterial mixtures (52 ) . the identification process involved comparison of the sample spectra with the library spectra using an algorithm similar to a statistical test of significance. a maldi mass spectral database including ͼ100 genera and 350 species has been compiled to characterize bacteria implicated in human infectious diseases (53 ) . the authors noted that species-or subspecies-specific markers in the spectra are sometimes difficult to identify because the number of overlapping signal ions increases along with the number of strains registered in the database.the 2 mathematical methods used most often for the classification of spectral data are multivariate anal-ysis (mva) and the artificial neural network (ann). mva is based on multivariate statistics, which involves observation and analysis of more than 1 statistical variable (in this case, m/z) at a time. many mva techniques-including principal component analysis and cluster analysis-have been applied to the differentiation of microorganisms. the ann is an algorithm for machine learning. this type of artificial intelligence allows the identification of biomarkers that are capable of distinguishing microbial species.multivariate statistics is often used to analyze pyrolysis mass spectra of bacterial samples. principal component analysis (pca) has been applied to pattern recognition of fatty acid methyl esters profiles obtained from b. anthracis, yersinia pestis, vibrio cholerae, brucella melitensis, and f. tularensis (54 ) . pca is the most commonly used multivariate data analysis tool. pca is a technique for forming new variables (i.e., principle components) which are linear combinations of the original variables (i.e., m/z values in mass spectra). the principle components account for the differences among spectra. ilina et al. (55 ) reported the direct bacterial profiling of 2 human pathogens, n. meningitidis and neisseria gonorrhoeae, using maldi-ms. cluster analysis grouped mass spectra into clusters by measuring similarities between spectra. the method successfully separated the mass spectra collected from 3 groups that corresponded to the pathogenic and nonpathogenic neisseria isolates. because the protein chip technique seldi may yield thousands of data points per bacterial sample, computer algorithms must be used to identify useful biomarkers for bacterial identification. seibold et al. (56 ) differentiated single strains within the subspecies f. tularensis by combining seldi-ms with cluster analysis and pca. ann combined with seldi-ms has been used for the identification of n. meningitides (39 ) and s. aureus (57 ) . the relative abundance for each m/z value was used in the input layer of the ann model. the output layer consisted of nodes representing target bacterial categories. the model was trained using bacterial spectra to generate good correlation between input and output layers. the model was further tested and validated using different sets of spectra. demirev et al. (58 ) developed an approach for microorganism identification that combines ms with protein database searches. the protein masses in mass spectra are compared with those in the proteome databases. probable organism sources are assigned to each mass, with the best match (i.e., that having the most matched proteins), in theory, leading to identification of the correct microorganism. when using this approach, spectral reproducibility is not critical as long as the observed masses match the protein masses in the database. to avoid the limited mass accuracy of protein mass measurements, the sequence information of the peptides from virus and bacterial samples has been used to identify the proteins and deduce the microorganism's source (59 ) . the sequence information can be derived from fragmentation of intact proteins or proteolytic peptides of the intact proteins by searching fragment ion (ms/ms) mass spectra against proteome databases. top-down proteomics methodology identifies intact proteins without the need for biomarker digestion, separation, and cleanup. this methodology has been used successfully for microbial proteomics in the analysis of bacterial species, either pure or in a mixture (60, 61 ) . microbial identification has been demonstrated using experimentally derived databases of virus-specific tryptic peptide masses (62 ) and bacterial protein masses (63 ) .data analysis using protein database search algorithms should be very accurate and useful as long as the protein databases are available for the pathogens of interest. analysis of spectra using statistical methods is complicated. further, identification results may be inaccurate when the spectra are not reproducible. however, as mentioned above, various statistical methods have been employed for differentiation among species or subspecies and proved to be useful. pca has advantages because it is better to reveal differences between biomarker profiles than cluster analysis. ann holds especially great promise for high throughput because it may require less computer time.ms-based identification of microorganisms currently plays a crucial role in clinical research because mass analyzers provide low detection limits, universality (yet with potential for selectivity and specificity), and amenability to qualitative and quantitative analyses over a wide dynamic range. cell culturing is by far the most used sample preparation technique for purifying and enriching microbial cells before mass spectrometric analysis. although enrichment of pathogens using functionalized magnetic particles has not been applied to clinical samples, the approach has proved successful for bacteria-spiked biological samples and should play an important role in the near future. clinical specimens, obtained from pus, wound, sputum, and urine samples, have all been analyzed using selective ce-ms/ms methods (64 ) . the analyses of bacteria-specific marker peptides provided additional advantages of excellent selectivity and high confidence in microbial identification. the bacteria in these clinical samples were cultivated directly, without prior isolation of a pure colony, before performing the selective ms/ms analyses. many pathogen species (table 1) intact-cell ms has been used for the discrimination and identification of burkholderia cepacia complex species, including strains of the novel taxon k, recovered from cystic fibrosis patients (67 ) . carbonnelle et al. (68 ) reported the rapid maldi-ms-based identification of intact staphylococci isolated in clinical microbiology laboratories; they identified 23 clinically relevant bacterial species or subspecies belonging to the micrococcaceae family.real-time pcr is at present the leading nonculturebased technique for the determination of infection (69 ) . pcr-ms is currently conducted as a reference laboratory technique; it has been used successfully to determine nucleotide compositions for strain typing in epidemiological studies of outbreaks of respiratory infections with streptococcus, hemophilus, or neisseria (50 ) . extended-spectrum ␤-lactamases (esbls) are among the most clinically significant ␤-lactamases because they confer resistance to all penicillins, cephalosporins, and aztreonam. ikryannikova et al. (70 ) applied a maldi-ms-based minisequencing method to the rapid detection of tem-type esbls in clinical strains of the enterobacteriaceae family. hujer et al. (71 ) demonstrated that esi-ms analysis of pcr amplification products could be used to identify quinolone resistance mediated by mutations in the quinolone resistance-determining regions of 2 essential housekeeping genes. the analysis provides critical information for therapeutic decision-making in the treatment of acinetobacter sp. infections.the tools for determining the identity of a microbial sample include genetic and nongenetic methods and informatics. ms has proven to be a useful method for the identification of biomarkers from microbial samples. one of its major challenges, however, is the detection of candidate biomarkers from complex samples. methods for sample analyses without pretreatment or after extensive biochemical and chromatographic fractionations have been developed to overcome the issues associated with sample complexity. direct ms-based analyses of microorganisms have a number of advantages, including rapidity and ease of operation. the maldi interface is best suited for use in field-portable mass spectrometers deployed on battlefields or in our surroundings to detect microbial threats. microbial analyses usually use a pure culture of microorganisms to avoid interference from the background-unless the interferents are absent (or removed) or data analysis algorithms are implemented. the complexity of microbial biomarkers may be simplified through the use of various chromatography-based methods (e.g., hplc and ce); although the rate of identification is sacrificed to some extent, the selectivity, accuracy, and dynamic range are improved substantially.since the us anthrax mailing incidents in 2001, means of dealing with microbial threats have gained tremendous attention. several recent outbreaks, including the sars outbreak caused by coronavirus and the h1n1 flu outbreak caused by a novel influenza a virus, have further triggered the development of more rapid, sensitive, and accurate real-time detection methods. improvement of the detection limits for microbial cells will continue to be a major task in the years to come. to this end, cell enrichment through affinity techniques will play an increasingly important role. top-down protein analysis and selective biomarker analysis coupled with affinity techniques will boost the detection capability and accuracy of microbial identifications. pcr amplification of nucleic acids and ms detection might be an alternative approach toward improving sensitivity, especially for the analyses of nonculturable microorganisms. in addition to maldi, several new ionization techniques, including desorption electrospray ionization (72 ) , direct analysis in real time (73 ) , and esi-assisted laser desorption ionization (74 ) , hold great potential for use in the real-time direct ms-based analyses of pathogens. furthermore, advances in other ms-related technologies will provide more powerful tools for characterization of pathogens; these technologies include high-speed and highresolution lc, ion mobility spectrometry, and highcapacity linear ion trap and various high-resolution mass analyzers, such as fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance, fourier transform-orbitrap, and time-of-flight mass detectors. the combination of these methodologies and instrumentation will certainly enhance the capabilities of ms for the analysis of pathogens.author contributions: all authors confirmed they have contributed to the intellectual content of this paper and have met the following 3 requirements: (a) significant contributions to the conception and design, background: since the covid-19 global pandemic emerged, developing countries have been facing multiple challenges over its diagnosis we aimed to establish a relationship between the signs and symptoms of covid-19 for early detection and assessment to reduce the transmission rate of sars-cov-2 methods: we collected published data on the clinical features of covid-19 retrospectively and categorized them into physical and blood biomarkers common features were assigned scores by the borg scoring method with slight modifications and were incorporated into a newly-developed hashmi-asif covid-19 assessment chart correlations between signs and symptoms with the development of covid-19 was assessed by pearson correlation and spearman correlation coefficient (rho) linear regression analysis was employed to assess the highest correlating features the frequency of signs and symptoms in developing covid-19 was assessed through chi-square test two tailed with cramer's v strength changes in signs and symptoms were incorporated into a chart that consisted of four tiers representing disease stages results: data from 10,172 covid-19 laboratory confirmed cases showed a correlation with fever in 43 9% (p = 0 000) cases, cough 54 08% and dry mucus 25 68% equally significant (p = 0 000), hyperemic pharyngeal mucus membrane 17 92% (p = 0 005), leukopenia 28 11% (p = 0 000), lymphopenia 64 35% (p = 0 000), thrombopenia 35 49% (p = 0 000), elevated alanine aminotransferase 50 02% (p = 0 000), and aspartate aminotransferase 34 49% (p = 0 000) the chart exhibited a maximum scoring of 39 normal tier scoring was ≤ 12/39, mild state scoring was 13-22/39, and star values scoring was ≥7/15;this latter category on the chart means covid-19 is progressing and quarantine should be adopted moderate stage scored 23-33 and severe scored 34-39 in the chart conclusion: the hashmi-asif covid-19 chart is significant in assessing subclinical and clinical stages of covid-19 to reduce the transmission rateearly detection and assessment of covid-19coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), caused the current global pandemic (2) . during this pandemic, the most critical questions aroused pertains to patients and clinicians in understanding how the disease spread to cause an epidemic, what its clinical presentation with a severity profile is, what assessment or diagnostic measures should be used, and what projected treatments and influences to prognosis and recurrence there are.covid-19 has threatened the entire world. for the health services providers, it became a challenge to make rapid forward planning to evaluate the transmission rate of sars-cov-2 without ready access to diagnostic techniques and future planning based on the sustainability of healthcare systems to cope with the outbreak (3) . pragmatic understanding of the novel pathogen sars-cov-2 revealed an essential genetic sequencing similarity to the previously known pathogen, sars (4) . a mean incubation period of 5.2 days of sars-cov-2 has been reported to cause the onset of symptoms and a mean 12.5 days for hospitalization from day of infection (5, 6) . fauci et al. emphasized the time interval during the incubation of sars-cov-2 to hold crucial information on pathogenesis and asserted the need to understand it to design an effective containment policy (7) . current understanding of covid-19 pathogenesis focuses on the angiotensin converting enzyme 2(ace2) based sars-cov-2 cell entry that infects lung epithelial cells and synergistic entry through endosome proteases cell prime entry that infects the host cell (8) . novel coronavirus also infects t-lymphocytes (9) . recent retrospective studies revealed that elders are more prone to covid-19 and were more likely to require invasive mechanical ventilation with a high mortality among covid-19 infected patients, and robust research revealed the clinical presentation of covid-19. currently, covid-19 is detectable with reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), which detects presence of genetic fragments of sars-cov-2 within secretions from nasal and pharyngeal epithelial mucus membrane. employed techniques of rt-pcr and immunoglobulin presence detection methods have their own limitations of detection within a specific time period. prior to detection through rt-pcr, no method is available to assess covid-19 infection during incubation and after the onset of symptoms. consequently, a high transmission rate has been reported and needs to be reduced for effective containment (7) . in this study, we evaluated the current knowledge of covid-19 pathogenesis and its manifestation to formulate an easy method to detect and assess the covid-19 course of infection and to counter outbreaks by reducing transmission rates through early sensing and adopting appropriate measures.comparatively similar clinical features were previously reported to be caused by influenza. influenza, caused by h1n1, h3n2, and h5n1, produced variable symptoms in humans. median incubation periods are 2 days, 1-6 days, and 2-5 days, respectively. all strains cause acute symptoms variable in nature and intensity (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) . h1n1 causes a fever similar to h3n2, with a relatively shorter duration of 1-2 days while h3n2 causes a fever of 1-6 days. avian influenza (h5n1) presents with baffling symptoms aggressive in nature, like inexplicable diarrhea or encephalopathy. intensity of the symptoms is high and related with areas of known outbreaks. fever (temperature > 38 • c) is present in symptomatic patients with abdominal features including vomiting, diarrhea, myalgia or arthralgia, rhinorrhea, cough, and sputum production. all signs and symptoms appeared concomitantly on median 2 or 3 days after infection (10) . h1n1 causes symptoms to appear on day 2. the virus is detectable during a median period of 2-6 days after infection. sore throat, nasal congestion, nausea, vomiting, and myalgia are common symptoms with a mild to severe fever. distinguishing signs are enlarged lymph nodes, tonsillitis, and throat congestion while prominent features are leukopenia, lymphopenia, and hypokalemia (11, 12) . h3n2 significantly reduced the weight of patients during the early days of infection (13, 14) . severe cases of h5n1 presents with cardiomyopathies, ventricular tachycardia, renal failure, ventilation assisted viral pneumonia, reye's syndrome, and pneumothorax. death occurred due to multi-organ failure. blood biomarkers abruptly developed leukopenia, lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia, and elevated aminotransferases (15, 16) .clinical manifestations of sars-cov-2 appeared variable as compared to influenza. symptoms of covid-19 also vary slightly from region to region. abdominal symptoms were more frequent in the usa than china (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) . asymptomatic, mild, and severe symptoms were observed in various studies (22) (23) (24) (25) (26) (27) . asymptomatic or milder cases did not seek medical intervention; mild symptoms included a temperature >37.5 • c and dry cough initially and could develop to moderate symptomatic cases. fever, cough, abdominal discomfort, and deranged blood biomarkers were recorded in moderate cases. severe cases presented with shortness of breath, dyspnea, and tachypnea and required mechanical ventilation (28) . persistent cough, fever, and fatigue were associated symptoms of an underlying pathology or pre-existing pathology not restricted to cardiovascular issues, hypertension, liver compromise, and diabetes. blood po 2 levels decreased. blood biomarkers developed lymphopenia, thrombopenia, and elevated aminotransferases in moderate and severe cases. white blood cells deteriorated in severe cases and required mechanical ventilation. persistent fever and characteristic consistent coughing-initially dry for several days followed by a productive cough-are the main features in patients with pre-existing respiratory infections; a few symptoms were variable with geographical regions (29) (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) . in the current study we emphasized the pathogenesis of covid-19 assessed through signs and symptoms and its manifestation to formulate a practicable approach to detect and assess covid-19's course of infection to counter outbreaks by reducing the transmission rate through early sensing and adopting appropriate measures.we used a retrospective approach to collect observational data about the most common presenting signs and symptoms in reported cases of covid- 19 data was assessed for common presentations made by collected publications for sensing essential common symptoms. the hashmi-asif covid-19 formula was designed based on collected data that adhered to the most common and easily accessible symptoms which can affect an early diagnosis of covid-19 or, due to their absence, could delay diagnosis or cause misdiagnosis. the important differentiating clinical features, signs, and symptoms were aligned in table form providing a sketch of the most common essential symptoms. data about the frequency of symptoms in relation with covid-19 diagnosis were categorized into clinical features and blood biomarkers. we categorized common symptoms and blood biomarkers for covid-19 extracted from the collected data and these were categorized into two groups.the classification of normal to severe symptoms was determined from collected data containing values, ratios with interquartile ranges, and percentages of occurrence in observational studies. four scoring tiers were formulated. each sign and symptom were assigned a score by using the borg scale scoring method previously described by hommerding et al. (39) with slight modifications. signs and symptoms were given a score between 1 and 4. normal signs and symptoms were given a score of 1 and placed in the first tier, mild presentation in signs and symptoms were given a score of 2 and placed in the second tier, third tier includes moderately presenting symptoms given a score of 3, and severe cases were given a score of 4 in the fourth tier. the highest score in the fourth tier scores 39 which represents severe disease while the lowest in the first tier scores 11 and showed normal or no disease. mild disease scored between 13 and 22 and moderate disease scored between 23 and 33. variable scoring showed stages of the disease as mild, moderate, or severe. minimum and maximum scores were calculated and evaluated for the available data collected and compiled in table 1 . all data were calculated on the score chart to evaluate its efficacy for detecting early common signs and symptoms to make an easy decision on whether to hold isolation and other immediate measures surrounding the early confirmation of covid-19. the chart was given the name of the hashmi-asif covid-19 formula for calculating early common signs and symptoms of covid-19 for early detection and disease assessment.we investigated the relationship of frequent appearances of common signs and symptoms with diagnosed covid-19 cases by pearson correlation and spearman correlation coefficient (rho) two-tail (38) . cumulative frequencies of each common sign and symptom were assessed by chi-square test two tail with cramer's v strength methods (40) . highly significant symptoms and signs showing correlation were assessed by the linear regression method to establish ostensible correlation. compiled data was analyzed statistically by using ibm spss version.20.results of 10,172 confirmed covid-19 cases showed the appearance of signs and symptoms in relation to the pathological progression of covid-19. infection leads to initial changes that occurred in blood biomarkers and, when reaching threshold level, produced symptoms (details are shown in table 1 ). all signs and symptoms cumulatively showed a 39.33% sensitivity correlation with the cumulative scoring method and a 48.11% through star values scoring method among all cases evaluated for covid- 19 . data showed that if all the confirmed cases were analyzed before confirmation with the early signs and symptoms at 39.33 and 48.11% with star values, cases could be detected earlier than usual in the course of disease, and would be considered at very high risk of developing covid-19.twenty studies containing detailed information of 10,172 covid-19 laboratory confirmed cases showed a common symptomatic correlation with covid-19 were statistically significant (sig.<0.000) for each sign and symptom. fever at 43.9% was significant 0.000. cough at 54.08% and dry mucus membrane at 25.68% values were equally significant 0.000, hyperemic mucus membrane at 17.92% was significant with p < 0.005, leukopenia (28.11%) and lymphopenia (64.35%) showed a significance of 0.000. thrombopenia (35.49%) showed a strong correlation (sig.0.000) with covid-19 at significant p (<0.01). amino transferases alt and ast (50.02 and 34.49%, respectively) showed a strong correlation and were statistically significant (<0.001). thereafter, symptoms holding high sensitivity correlations (star values) with the development of covid-19 were extracted by linear regression model. statistical data is shown in table 2 . symptoms frequency appearance in covid-19 was assessed by chi-square method and results shown in table 2 . fever and lymphopenia frequency showed a similar significance (p < 0.000). cough showed a significance frequent appearance in covid-19 (p > 0.02). dry mucus membrane and thrombopenia showed a similar significance (p < 0.006). hyperemic mucus membrane did not show a significant value (p < 0.062), while aminotransferases showed an equal significance (p < 0.001).symptoms of covid-19 were classified into early symptoms and late symptoms based on severity. early symptoms can be a point of consideration for getting early detection. covid-19 diagnosis could be missed during the early stage because of early symptoms being mild in nature. however, distinct evaluations for covid-19 could be made by calculating scores of correlated blood biomarkers analysis through the hashmi-asif covid-19 chart as elaborated in chart 1. common signs and symptoms were classified according to severity including normal with no disease, milder, moderate, and severe cases. the formula contains a maximum of 39 (15+24) scores, out of long incubation period (6, 37) . a longer incubation period means certain opportunities to get prepared and prompt early action against covid-19 to be opted. asymptomatic cases may be diagnosed on the onset of the disease and earlier symptoms appearing during the course of the disease also holds a credible opportunity to make an earlier than usual diagnosis. early detection could only be possible by assessing signs and symptoms evaluated from various studies. we showed a strong correlation between the early and common signs and symptoms leading to the development of covid-19 and designed the hashmi-asif covid-19 chart which holds the potential of diagnosing 48.11% of asymptomatic covid-19 cases earlier than usual. for symptomatic cases of covid-19, the hashmi-asif covid-19 chart holds a sensitivity of 95% to early detection, which will surely reduce transmission rate and prevent an epidemic outbreak or slow down its spread. the chart is also useful to assess the status of covid-19 in patients through regular scoring. the score decreases with amelioration of the covid-19 situation. the chart can provide essential information about the efficacy of the management method being applied and whether it is useful or not, whether disease severity is reducing or not, and whether the bodily response is either ameliorating or worsening. this chart will help healthcare workers to implement timely measures for critical patients to save lives by opting for appropriate measures, and to make containment strategies to counter covid-19.our study has various limitations. it is a retrospective study based on reported clinical manifestations and probable courses of disease from available data around the world. individual data of patients of covid-19 were less reported and collective analyzed data was evaluated. a prospective study is underway to evaluate the utilization of the hashmi-asif covid-19 assessment chart and its efficacy within domestic covid-19 patients.the datasets generated for this study are available on request to the corresponding author.ethical review and approval was not required for the study on human participants in accordance with the local legislation and institutional requirements. written informed consent for participation was not required for this study in accordance with the national legislation and the institutional requirements.in late 2019, clusters of patients with pneumonia of unknown etiology were reported in wuhan, china. the causative agent was identified as a novel coronavirus, sars-cov-2; the disease was named covid-19. as of march 2020, it has caused many hundreds of thousands of confirmed cases and tens of thousands of deaths worldwide (john hopkins university coronavirusmap) . sepsis is the most frequently observed complication, followed by respiratory failure, acute respiratory deficiency syndrome (ards), heart failure and septic shock (zhou et al., 2020a) . old people, and particularly those affected by one or more comorbidity, are the most vulnerable subjects, where the highest morbidity and mortality has been reported, associated with sequential organ failure and high d-dimer levels (onder et al., 2020; shi et al., 2020; zhou et al., 2020a) . moreover, in some countries like italy men appear to be more affected and have a higher mortality than women. in order to react effectively to the ongoing and future pandemics, we must improve diagnostics as well as biomarker discovery and validation, for prognosis and for intervention. moreover, minimum standards are necessary for all sampling procedures. it is not enough to just diagnose; good prognostic and predictive biomarkers are needed.for long-term gain, we suggest that the most useful biomarkers are the ones that allow us to understand the agerelated mechanisms underlying a respiratory infectious disease pandemic such as covid-19. here, we can build upon conceptual frameworks developed over the last decade, describing how immune status is influenced by aging processes (see also section 3). in brief, aging processes such as chronic inflammation and cellular senescence affect the innate as well as the adaptive immune system (oh et al., 2019) . specifically, older and multi-morbid people are suffering from "inflammaging" franceschi et al., 2018a; franceschi et al., 2018b) , a chronic, low-level inflammation caused by exposure of the immune system to misplaced and/or misfolded self-antigens originating from dying cells, fragments of mitochondria, extracellular vesicles and senescent cells (franceschi et al., 2017a) . the higher mortality from covid-19 in older people, in subjects with comorbidities and in males can then be explained in part by their higher inflammatory status, including an activation of the innate immune system and the triggering of an inflammatory "storm" that includes il-6 and other cytokines (bonafè et al., 2020; herold et al., 2020; mehta et al., 2020; moore and june, 2020; santesmasses et al., 2020; storci et al., 2020) , as well as inflammatory molecules such as mitochondrial dna fragments (pinti et al., 2014) , all assumed to be associated with dramatic changes of the peripheral blood lymphocyte subsets (cossarizza et al., 2020) . moreover, a difference in the amount of inflammaging between men and women (bonafe et al., 2001) could explain, in part, the higher vulnerability of males to covid-19 (marquez et al., 2020) . specifically, bonafè et al. (2020) suggests that men feature higher levels of subclinical systemic inflammation, connected with a blunted acquired immune system, a blunted type i interferon response, and with accelerated biological aging, as well as downregulation of the ace2 sars-cov-2-receptor, which (paradoxically) triggers inflammation in the aged and comorbid. thus, there is a strong specific rationale for implicating aging-related processes in covid-19 mortality, suggesting that interventions into these processes can contribute significantly to better outcomes in this pandemic and the next. here, we do not just call for action, but we provide a detailed outline of what can be done, and must be done, for maximum health gain for the elderly, in addition to the standard diagnostic tests.implemented. these would be based on using (i) the remainders from the "standard" diagnostic (swab-based) sample, (ii) a double-headed swab (using one head for diagnostics), (iii) in addition to the diagnostic swab, one or more further swabs and (iv) dried capillary blood spot samples. overall, sampling methods have to be in agreement with downstream laboratory uses, and of course they have to comply with the corresponding who and/or local standards.the sampling modalities for biomarker identification to be considered at time of pandemia screening are depicted in supplement 1. nasopharyngeal and throat swabs are the standard for the diagnosis of respiratory infections such as covid-19. as diagnostic testing will always be performed, we strongly suggest to use remainder material from the diagnostic swab for additional analyses. of interest, lopez et al. (2019) elegantly developed a minimally invasive sample collection protocol that allows for multiple diagnostic and research investigations including bacterial culture, viral detection (pcr), cytokine expression (pcr), and 16s ribosomal rna gene sequencing from a single nasopharyngeal swab. cutting the tip of the swab also allowed for rna sequencing. further, there are a number of additional swab collection options ranging from an additional swab to a double-headed swab. flocked swabs are most often used and transferred into universal transport medium (utm) (von allmen et al., 2019) . dried capillary blood sampling is another "easy" option, routinely applied for neonate screening and drug monitoring. an optimized protocol for the extraction of rna from dried blood spots yielded similar transcriptome gene counts compared to rna isolated from venous blood in tempus tubes (reust et al., 2018) ; thus, dried blood spots for transcriptome studies could be a viable option facilitating rna studies. blood collection, application onto filter paper, drying, transport and storage can all affect the accuracy of the analysis and comparability with blood serum/plasma; however, handling and transport of the samples is far less problematic (lim, 2018; rutstein et al., 2015; zakaria et al., 2016) . we acknowledge that sampling of whole blood may not be practical in times of a health emergency. nevertheless, specific measurements that require whole blood (e.g. of circulating antibodies) may still be clinically useful, and then the remaining blood should be used for biomarker analyses, such as transcriptomics based on circulating immune cells. for all samples, for investigating immunity and inflammation, cytokine (or related) protein assays are an obvious first choice; a second choice are modalities allowing unbiased gene expression measurements (transcriptomics).the most appropriate sampling workflows should be prioritized depending on a number of factors incl. screening location (emergency rooms, specific screening centers, etc.), availability of respective sampling materials, the condition of the proband (asymptomatic, mild, severe) and the objective of the screening. appropriate preanalytic sample processing is important particularly for rna analyses (stellino et al., 2019) , even if standard tubes are used (lippi et al., 2019) . we recommend in the short term the recording of date and time of collection, and of storage and transport conditions, and attention to rna stability; long term uniform standards must be established.measuring the host response to infectious pathogens provides a rapid but rather unspecific means of aiding in diagnosis, compared to direct pathogen detection. however, monitoring the host response over time enables evaluation of patient response to therapy. white blood cell counts and single protein or metabolomic biomarkers (such as crp, procalcitonin and lactate) have historically been used in case of infectious and immunological diseases (gunsolus et al., 2019; ross et al., 2019) . moreover, cytokines and other proteins were measured using technologies ranging from elisa to flow cytometry (vazquez et al., 2019) . postulating that a broad assessment of host response in terms of gene expression (transcriptomics) will yield superior diagnostic and prognostic accuracy, global changes in gene expression in response to acute infections, trauma, and sepsis were studied intensively (sweeney and wong, 2016) . biomarker discovery has initially focused on whole blood or specific blood cell populations (holcomb et al., 2017; zaas et al., 2013) , but more recently, samples from the respiratory tract have been used more often (landry and foxman, 2018) . for example, host gene expression profiles in nasopharyngeal (np) swabs and whole blood samples were investigated during respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) and human rhinovirus (hrv) infection (do et al., 2017) . rsv infection induced strong and persistent innate immune responses and the observed rsv-induced gene expression patterns did not differ much in np swabs compared to blood. in contrast, hrv infection did not induce expression of innate immunity pathways as strongly, and significant differences were observed between np swab and blood specimens. with respect to biomarkers for outcome risk stratification, whole blood transcriptomics alongside with clinical data in sepsis patients leads to a significant j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f improvement in the prediction of 30-day mortality (sweeney et al., 2018) , which is useful as a template for investigations in covid-19 patients. moreover, dried capillary blood spots (dbs) provide a minimally-invasive, low-cost option since results often correspond to those derived from gold-standard venous blood samples (mcdade et al., 2016) . dbs can be used for quantification of virus antigens, rna (nguyen et al., 2018) and antibodies (muzembo et al., 2017) , for studies of gene expression (mcdade et al., 2016) and age-dependent dna methylation (knight et al., 2016) . multiplexing by mass spectrometry is available (chambers et al., 2015) , and global metabolite profiles can be generated, assuming stability at ambient tem-perature (drolet et al., 2017) . large numbers of samples can be taken and stored in biobanks (bjorkesten et al., 2017) , and be used to characterize inflammatory responses. for example, multiplex immuno-mass spectrometry can measure acute phase response (inflammatory) proteins from dsb with high precision (anderson et al., 2019) , also allowing longitudinal analyses of inflammation markers, and generating biomarker trajectories of inflammation dynamics. overall, swabs and dried blood have proven their value, specifically for the identification of infection-and immunity-related biomarkers.we outlined how cytokine assays and transcriptomic estimates of immunity and inflammation in particular are measurable with a minimum of invasion, based on swabs or dried blood, towards predicting age-related outcomes regarding disease manifestation, hospitalization and long-term health deterioration after respiratory infection such as covid-19. as already pointed out in the introduction, aging-related processes are an important contributor to inferior covid-19 outcomes. here, we describe how immunity and aging are related; see supplement 2 for more details. in brief, aging is the primary risk factor for all chronic diseases, and for inferior outcomes in infectious diseases, and covid-19 is no exception. in people with chronic respiratory disease such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, this risk is attributed to inflammation of the airways, dominated by cd4 + t cells and eosinophils in case of asthma and by cd8 + t lymphocytes, macrophages and neutrophils in case of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (cukic et al., 2012) , exacerbated by respiratory infection (barnes et al., 2015; holgate et al., 2015) . the heterogeneity of responses to infections such as covid-19 depends not only on the general health condition, predisposition on the genetic level, and the disease history, but in particular on the individual immunobiographies (franceschi et al., 2017b) knowledge of the individual life experience, surrounding ecosystem, cultural habit, history of natural infections, vaccinations or allergies should thus additionally be collected. the most important mechanisms underlying severe adult covid-19 pneumonia cases are a reduction in cd4+ and cd8+ t cells and a decrease in regulatory t cells. as the thymus is a central lymphoid organ responsible for the release of t lymphocytes, inflammaging associated with the absence or a marked reduction of thymopoiesis could be a predisposing condition that sustains the cytokine release storm observed in many older patients with severe clinical courses (scarpa et al., 2020) . in accordance with this assumption, the clinical manifestations are relatively mild in children (hong et al., 2020) . with ageing, antigen stimulation and thymic involution lead to a shift in t cell subset distribution and loss of expression of co-stimulatory molecules such as cd27 and cd28, with increased susceptibility to infections , and a (putatively compensatory) upregulation of cytokines. on the other hand, reduced killing ability by t cells at an early stage after birth could explain susceptibility to sars-cov-2 in very young infants (yuki et al., 2020) .in general, inflammaging, immunosenescence and cellular senescence, all closely related to each other (fulop et al., 2017) , are involved in a deterioration of the performance of the immune system with age, starting with an involution of the thymus (fagnoni et al., 2000) , despite homeostatic mechanisms. infection with, e.g., cytomegalovirus then leads to repeated reactivation of cd8 + cells, which increases the fraction of specialized t cells and decreases the amount of naive t cells (vescovini et al., 2010) , and to downregulation of cd28, which is an important co-stimulatory signal (pangrazzi and weinberger, 2020) . although no cell type of the immune system has been identified that shows all hallmarks of cellular senescence, some immune cells secrete several senescence-related components (cytokines, chemokines, extracellular matrix remodelling proteases) (callender et al., 2018) , indicating that the removal of cells with a senescent like phenotype may prepare elderly people for future infections, despite a protective role also described (baz-martinez et al., 2016) . in particular, the interference of oncoviruses with senescence pathways suggests that senescence may also be part of the host cell response to fight viruses and that the sasp could cotrigger the recruitment of immune cells (baz-martinez et al., 2016) ; some experiments with vesicular stomatitis virus point to this possibility. moreover, there are indications that senescent (lung) cells are an ideal host target for sars-cov-2 viral infection, possibly due to better conditions for replication such as enhanced protein synthesis, which is also required to produce sasp inflammatory mediators (sargiacomo et al., 2020) . there are clearly many more possible interrelationships between sars-cov-2 infection and senescence mechanisms regarding genomic instability, telomere attrition, impaired autophagy, mitochondrial dysfunction, immunosenescence and inflammation, which may help to explain the increased pathophysiological responses to sars-cov-2 among older individuals (mueller et al., 2020; salimi and hamlyn, 2020) . for example, two suggested host receptors for sars-cov-2, cd26 and ace-2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2), are upregulated in senescent cells (sargiacomo et al., 2020) . moreover, a major cause of immune exhaustion is telomere shortening in viral-specific memory cd8+ t cells (mueller et al., 2020) , which induces cellular senescence and p38 mapk-dependent sasp (callender et al., 2018) . this is of interest insofar as certain subtelomeric genes are upregulated in aged cells with short telomeres by a mechanism called telomere position effects over long distances (tpe-old). one of these tpe-old genes, interferon stimulated gene (isg-15, (robin et al., 2014) ) is the most significantly activated isg in response to viral infection (salimi and hamlyn, 2020) . notably, isg-15 plays a key role in the innate immune response to viral infection and inhibits viral release by blocking viral assembly (sadler and williams, 2008) most therapeutic considerations so far focus at blocking sasp and viral replication (using substances as rapamycin and doxycycline) or at the removal of infected senescent cells by senolytics (malavolta et al., 2020; sargiacomo et al., 2020) . in any case, cellular senescence overlaps with immunosenescence and inflammaging, and cytokine assays are a method of choice for discovering biomarkers related to inflammation, immunity, cellular senescence and aging. whole-genome transcriptomics could enable the further unbiased hypothesis-free exploration of biomarkers.while the majority of current efforts focus on implementing diagnostic testing capacity, little attention is paid to prognostic testing, e.g. by estimating immune or inflammation status. however, while diagnostic testing is of critical importance to identify and quarantine infected patients, prognostic testing is equally important to allow decisions on the level of care for those that are asymptomatic or show mild symptoms but may deteriorate. as described above, we suggest that the association of covid-19 with old age may specifically be due to inflammaging-and senescenceassociated failures of the immune system, and that it is important to test this hypothesis in more detail, based in particular on molecular biomarker measurements. the human host response to coronaviruses in general was reviewed by (channappanavar and perlman, 2017) . the coronaviruses sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2 all trigger a strong immune response, i.e. higher plasma levels of cytokines and chemokines in intensive care patients . there are several reports describing extensive lung damage in patients infected in previous sars pandemics, associated with high initial virus titers , increased mononuclear infiltration in the lungs (nicholls et al., 2003) and elevated levels of serum proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines (wong et al., 2004) . thus, the clinical deterioration of patients with coronavirus infections appears to result from a combination of direct virus-induced cytopathic effects and immunopathology induced by cytokine activation.most biomarker-related studies with respect to covid-19 that are currently available were done in patients, not in probands undergoing screening, and these studies were done based on sophisticated blood analyses not usually available in the screening situation during a pandemic; we describe some examples because these studies, directly or indirectly, reflect the outcomes we are interested in. differences in immune responses in patients with severe versus those with mild covid-19 were investigated by (liao et al., 2020) , characterizing the lung immune microenvironment using bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from 3 severe and 3 mild covid-19 patients and 8 healthy controls. through single-cell rna sequencing combined with tcr-sequencing, monocyte-derived fcn1+ macrophages were identified as the dominant cell population in the lungs of patients with severe disease and ards whereas fabp4+ alveolar macrophages and clonal cd8+ t cells predominated in the lungs of patients with mild disease. the predominance of highly inflammatory cells points towards high cytokine activation. moreover, (qin et al., 2020) analyzed peripheral lymphocyte subsets from 452 severe and non-severe covid-19 patients. severe cases had significantly lower lymphocyte counts, higher leukocyte counts and neutrophil-lymphocyte-ratios, as well as lower percentages of monocytes, eosinophils, and basophils. most of the severe cases demonstrated elevated levels of infection-related biomarkers and inflammatory cytokines. finally, for patients with severe covid-19, monitoring the inflammation and immunity status may suggest treatment options such as immunosuppression by steroids, intravenous immunoglobulin, selective cytokine blockade or jak inhibition, and specific biomarkers may be increasing ferritin, decreasing platelet counts, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and the hscore (mehta et al., 2020) (monteleone et al., 2020) . overall, the role of immune and inflammation-related mechanisms underlying disease protection and progression in covid-19 need further elucidation, and inflammaging-related processes are a promising focus (see also the introduction), based on the analysis of local (mucosal) and systemic immune responses, following our suggestions in section 2 and supplement 1.we suggest that all covid-19 test probands that are able to give informed consent shall participate in systematic surveys as motivated here. it is important to record confounders, and, as in any analysis, potential bias must be considered. some confounders (time-of-day) can be recorded immediately, while others may need to be established post-hoc (i.e. after sampling) by questionnaires (asking for (co-)morbidity, for anthropomorphic data, etc.). data analyses shall follow standard procedures for biomarker discovery; since in many cases the data are in a time-to-event format, survival analyses are usually done, as exemplified in some recent reviews, see (lee and lim, 2019; wang et al., 2019) . in these analyses, gender must be considered as a confounder, and the immunobiographies of the study participants shall be considered as well. of note, biological knowledge about the sars-cov-2 virus is assembled at a rapid pace, see https://covid.pages.uni.lu/map_curation, can be combined with other knowledge on pathways & gene/protein interaction (zhou et al., 2020b) , and be used to interpret omics data. it is also important to maximize data sharing, fostering open science.tradeoffs are an issue in any biomarker discovery or validation effort; they arise between maximizing the quantity versus the quality of the data, in real-world versus standardized situations, enabling cost-efficient yet safe measurements. as described in section 2, in any respiratory disease epidemic, and specifically in case of covid-19, we suggest that with highest priority, swabs and dried blood shall be done based on a simple set of rules, observing minimum standards, to limit the influence of systematic confounders as well as random influences, while still reflecting the real-world situation. then, if there is sufficient signal for learning biomarkers, these can be expected to generalize well. a specific tradeoff are biosafety issues, see supplement 1.any taking of samples for research purposes, as well as the sharing of patient/proband data, must be subject to ethical approval by an institutional review board, and of informed consent from the side of the patient. nevertheless, while considering all essential data protection aspects, ethical approval and permission for data collection and analysis should primarily enable research promoting health. for the (additional) sampling during screening in times of a health crisis, the initial informed consent should thus be as simple as possible, and be restricted to taking and storing of samples for research purposes, and to processing the data needed to contact the patient/proband electronically or by telephone later. the actual use of the samples may then be consented after a detailed explanation of study purposes and participant rights, including data protection and rights of withdrawal. such post-hoc informed consent, preferably obtained electronically, also includes the agreements on follow-up exams (see supplement 3).motivated by recent pilot trials, specifically of intervening into cellular senescence towards improving the health status of idiopathic lung fibrosis (justice et al., 2019) (and osteoarthritis (unity, 2019)) patients, and given that inflammaging can be due in part to senescent cells, we suggest that modulating the immune status of the elderly by reducing inflammation or removing senescent cells (immune cells or cells of the lung) may improve their health and resilience also in the case of respiratory infections such as covid-19. the first step towards investigating this hypothesis is the confirmation of biomarkers related to inflammaging or senescence as being predictive for the outcomes considered here, such as hospitalization and long-term deterioration of lung function. the latter is of particular interest in "escapers" that survived serious complications of the disease; if biomarkers could be identified to predict their course of recovery, inferior outcomes may be prevented. more generally, it would be possible to design biomarker-guided intervention trials, where not only the choice of the anti-inflammatory and/or seno-therapeutic intervention(s) shall be guided by the biomarkers found to be most predictive, but patient-specific ("personalized") biomarker-based treatment is a conceivable option. moreover, as aging-related processes are at the core of susceptibility to infectious (respiratory) diseases in general, and of the chances to cope with these, any remaining sample material should be used to measure generic aging-related markers. for example, if there are leftovers of human dna, methylation-based estimates of biological age are possible, and these can help to understand how host age and viral challenge are responsible for the outcomes observed, and specific mechanisms of molecular aging that are related to these outcomes can be confirmed, or discovered anew. in fact, based on dna from buccal swabs, an epigenetic clock was already established (eipel et al., 2016) . finally, it was demonstrated in phase-2 studies, although not confirmed in a recent phase-3 study, that influenza vaccination response can be improved by targeting the mtor pathway by rapalogs (kaeberlein, 2020) . since mtor modulates cellular senescence, biomarkers for predicting the reaction of the immune system to mtor inhibition may be valuable for vaccination research, also for covid-19.ol is an employee of and holds equity in inflammatix inc., developing host response based tests for acute infections and sepsis. inflammatix does not have a commercial presence anywhere in the world at this time. all other authors: none declared.funding: gf is supported by the bmbf (fkz 01zx1903a) and the european commission (aging with elegans, grant agreement 633589). as is supported by the dfg (rtg 2155 promoage). dq is supported by the sfi (cúram research centre, 13/rc/2073), the european regional development fund and the dr. werner jackstädt-stiftung.the authors thank katja tränkner (writenow, berlin, germany) for preparing the drawing.screening strategy. we suggest screening, particularly of elderly and frail people, combining routine with minimally-invasive and longitudinal sampling for biomarker research, to test the hypothesis that resilience of the elderly during a pandemic can be improved by countering chronic inflammation (inflammaging) and cellular senescence. important outcomes are prognosis, occurrence of complications such as lung fibrosis, hints for therapeutic approaches and preventive measures.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fviruses have only become known as a microorganism involved in cap in the adult immunocompetent population in recent years. available data show that a virus is the only microorganism isolated in between 10% and 30% of immunocompetent adults hospitalized for cap, and accounts for as much as 40% of cases with established etiology. a bacterium as a co-pathogen of a virus can be found in association with cap (mixed viral-bacterial pneumonia) [1] [2] [3] [4] and this accounts for as much as 39% of cases in which an etiological agent is identified [1] [2] [3] . in these studies, streptococcus pneumoniae continues to be the most frequent producer of adult cap, though frequently in association with a co-pathogen, especially viruses (20%-40%) [2, 3, 5, 6] . it seems logical that, due to the lower sensitivity of techniques usually employed to diagnose bacterial infection, some pneumonias considered to be viral will actually be mixed cap [3] . this issue, together with the possible isolation of viruses from asymptomatic subjects, suggesting clearance of a past or current subclinical upper airway infection not related to a concomitant cap, has led to uncertainty as to whether some viruses are the real cause of cap or whether they must act as a co-pathogen with a bacteria in adults [2, 3, [6] [7] [8] ; the generally accepted opinion is that viruses other than influenza rarely cause pneumonia in healthy adults [9] .besides individual host responses, there is increasing evidence that several different causal microorganisms may trigger different inflammatory responses, and levels of several markers such as white blood cells (wbc), creactive protein (crp) and procalcitonin (pct) are associated with different etiological patterns [10, 11] . clinical signs and symptoms of bacterial and viral pneumonia are highly variable and overlap, and there is no clinical or radiologic algorithm that can discriminate between the two causes of cap [12] . some attempts at differentiation based on biomarkers have been made, and it is now well established that crp and, especially, pct show higher levels in bacterial than in viral (or atypical) pneumonia [12] [13] [14] . lack of viral pct response to viral infection is thought to be related to post-infection release of interferon, which inhibits pct synthesis [15] .there are very few studies of mixed viral-bacterial cap that involve biomarkers. the only available data concern h1n1 influenza, from retrospective studies with a limited number of patients, mostly in those admitted to the icu, showing increased pct [16] [17] [18] [19] and crp [18, 19] levels in bacterial coinfection; this suggests that the biomarkers may be used as a tool for discriminating mixed cap from h1n1 viral cap. the capnetz study included a large number of patients (1337) with cap, of which 58 (4.3%) showed mixed etiologies; however, this group was heterogeneous, as it included two or more typical or atypical bacteria and combinations of typical with atypical and any bacteria with a virus [10] .we wanted to determine wbc, crp and pct levels in mixed viral-bacterial cap, and wondered whether biomarkers in mixed disease showed a different pattern than in either bacterial or viral cap alone.this study received written approval from the instituto aragonés de ciencias de la salud (iacs) review board.from february 2009 to december 2010 (22 months), consecutive adult (>18 years) patients admitted to a university hospital with a diagnosis of cap were prospectively recruited within 24 hours of their arrival. cap was defined as an acute disease with a new radiologic infiltrate not due to another known cause, in association with symptoms of lower respiratory-tract infection. exclusion criteria were severe immunodepression (hiv infection, severe hematological disease); immunosuppressive therapy (prednisone or equivalent daily dose of >20 mg for >2 weeks), or any immunosuppressive regimen (azathioprine, cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide and/or other immunosuppressant drugs); leucopenia < 1000/mm 3 or neutropenia <500/mm 3 and/or chemotherapy in the previous year; pulmonary abscess (x-ray cavitation), aspiration pneumonia and obstructive pneumonia; possible nosocomial origin (less than 30 days after hospital discharge); and known active neoplasia. the study was approved by the ethics committee and all patients signed an informed consent form. all patients were followed up during their hospital stay and those with a definitive diagnosis other than cap were excluded.throughout the study period, a sex-matched and agematched control group was collected from subjects admitted to the orthopedic-surgery, digestive medicine, and neurology departments. none of these patients had had any suspected infectious or respiratory disease in the previous two months, immunosuppression, known neoplasia, or recent trauma, and none had recently undergone surgical procedures. the objectives of this control group were to determine the false positive rate of our viral pcr techniques in the same period than our cap group, as well as to compare biomarker levels in both populations.the following variables were recorded: age, sex, anti-influenza vaccination <1 year, antipneumococcal vaccination <5 years, tobacco (non-smoker, ex-smoker, pack-years) alcohol (non-drinker, ex-drinker, current drinker [<80 g/day, >80 g/day]), comorbidities, previous pneumonia, recent (1 month) antibiotic treatment. on admission: days of duration of disease, symptoms prior to infection, myalgia, cap signs and symptoms, vital constants on admission to the emergency department (ed) (respiratory and heart rates, arterial pressure, sao 2 ), number of hours in the ed, arterial blood gas determinations (when performed), number of lobes involved and type of x-ray condensation (alveolar, interstitial, mixed), and pneumothorax/atelectasis/bleeding. pneumonia severity index (psi) and the severity score from british thoracic society (curb65) were calculated for all patients. all patients were admitted to hospital for at least 24 hours.venous blood samples were collected from cap patients and controls on admission to the ed, within 6 hours of arrival. a sample was submitted to the hematology lab for a wbc count, and another sample with edta was submitted to the biochemistry lab for crp and pct assessment. these latter samples were centrifuged and stored at −80°c until biomarker tests were performed. serum crp was measured by means of immunoturbidimetry using the highly sensitive near-infrared particle immunoassay (nipia) method (immage 800, beckmancoulter, san diego, usa). the assay has an analytical detection limit of 0.06 mg/l and a functional assay sensitivity of 0.11 mg/l. procalcitonin concentrations were determined using sandwich immunoassays and time-resolved amplified cryptate emission (trace) measurement (pct sensitive kryptor, brahms, hennigsdorf, germany), as described in detail previously [20] . the analytical detection limit and the functional assay sensitivity for the assays were 0.02 ng/ml and 0.06 ng/ml, respectively, for procalcitonin. measurements of pct were performed in our laboratory in a blinded fashion without knowing the clinical parameters and microbiological results.blood was drawn from cap patients in the ed shortly after cap diagnosis for bacterial culture. sputum was obtained when possible and before antibiotics were administered, and immediately sent for gram staining and culture; only samples containing a preponderance of leukocytes and a few squamous epithelial cells were considered acceptable. another blood sample was obtained for mycoplasma pneumoniae (complement fixation test, virion serion institut, würzburg, germany) and chlamydophila pneumoniae (elisa test, savyon diagnostics ltd, st. ashdod, israel) first serum test. second serological tests were performed on blood obtained during the 30-day follow-up visit, when possible. urine was taken in the first 24 hours and tested for streptococcus pneumoniae and legionella pneumophila antigens (binax now, binax, portland, me, usa).nasopharyngeal aspirate was obtained and processed for viral antigens using the direct fluorescence antibody (dfa) assay, and two different polymerase chain reaction (pcr) viral tests. dfa was performed for influenza a and b, parainfluenza 1, 2 and 3, adenovirus (adv), human metapneumovirus (hmpv) and respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) (d3 double duet dfa respiratory virus screening and id kit, diagnostic hybrids, athens, usa). the first pcr was a multiplex rt-nested pcr assay for 14 respiratory viruses (influenza a, b and c, respiratory syncytial virus a and b, adenovirus, coronavirus 229e and oc43, enterovirus, parainfluenza 1, 2, 3 and 4, and rhinovirus) [21] ; the second test was a rt-pcr commercial kit, the resplex ii plus panel (qiagen liquichip system, hamburg, germany) [22] for detection of 18 viruses: influenza a and b, rsv a and b, parainfluenza 1, 2, 3 and 4, hmpv a and b, enterovirus (coxsackie/ echovirus), rhinovirus, adenovirus b and e, coronavirus nl63, hku1, 229e and oc43, and bocavirus. nucleic acids were extracted from nasopharyngeal aspirates immediately after their reception.after excluding atypical-involved cap (m pneumoniae and c pneumoniae), patients with cap were divided into 3 groups: bacterial, viral and mixed. patients with no microbiological findings were considered as cap of unknown cause.s pneumoniae, other potentially pathogen gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria classically considered producers of cap (haemophilus influenzae, moraxella catarrhalis, staphylococcus aureus, etc.) and l pneumophila, were included in the group of "bacterial" cap. one or figure 1 flow diagram for patient enrollment or exclusion in the study. after excluding patients who did not meet the inclusion criteria, those with no comprehensive microbiological study, those with a final diagnosis other than cap, and those with negative microbiological diagnosis, we obtained 185 patients with cap and isolation of at least 1 microorganism. we subsequently excluded 4 patients with atypical bacteria-involved cap, all of which were mycoplasma pneumoniae (1 m pneumoniae + e coli, 1 m pneumoniae + influenza a, 1 m pneumoniae + influenza a + influenza b + syncytial respiratory virus [rsv], and 1 m pneumoniae isolated), and a further 7 due to a bacterial yield of improbable cap cause because of their low pathogenicity (2 from bacterial group [1 enterococcus faecalis and 1 staphylococcus hominis) and 5 from mixed (2 s. hominis + adenovirus, 1 s. hominis + virus influenza a + rsv, 1 staphylococcus coagulase-negative + metapneumovirus, and 1 morganella morgagnii + coronavirus]). we then had 174 patients with viral, bacterial and mixed pneumonia. a biomarker search could not be performed in three patients, and we finally included 171 patients in our study with both etiology and biomarkers. more typical bacteria (including legionella) in association with one or more virus were considered as mixed cap.viral cap was defined as a cap with detection of a virus and no isolation of bacteria or atypicals. overall viral and bacterial was the result of adding viral and bacterial groups of cap. bacterial-involved was the addition of mixed (bacterial and viral) and bacterial cap. both positive microbiological findings and biomarker test were required to include patients in the study group ( figure 1 ). age, comorbidities (renal failure, chronic liver disease, diabetes, copd), clinical (fever, dyspnea, pleuritic pain, purulent sputum) and radiological data (type of infiltrate, number of lobes involved), severity scores (psi and curb65), and biomarkers (pct, crp and wbc). the best model was selected by a stepwise procedure. we constructed receiver operating characteristic (roc) curves and determined the area under the curve (auc). the auc and its 95% confidence intervals were estimated for each biomarker to predict different cap etiologies (bacterial, viral, mixed, and bacterial-involved) and compared using a nonparametric method. sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values, and positive and negative likelihood ratios (lhr + and lhr-, respectively) were calculated for each cut-off value of the biomarkers.statistical analysis was performed using the spss statistical software package, version 15.0. the level of significance for all statistical tests was a 2-sided, p value of 0.05.we selected 280 patients from those admitted to the emergency department due to cap, after excluding those who did not meet inclusion criteria, those without a comprehensive microbiological study and those with a final diagnosis other than cap on discharge. a total of 185 cases were finally selected. the figure 1 shows a flowchart explaining the process of enrollment of patients. our final three groups were as follows: 59 (34.6%) bacterial, 66 (38.5%) viral and 46 (26.9%) mixed viral-bacterial cap, and their main clinical characteristics are summarized in table 1 . ninety five patients had a negative microbiological study, and 3 of them had no biomarker results (92 of unknown cause).patients were distributed, according to psi and curb65 scores, as severe (psi 4-5 and/or curb65 2-5) and nonsevere (psi 1-3 and/or curb65 0-1). severe bacterial cap included 38/59 (psi) and 36/59 (curb65); viral cap, 43/66 (psi) and 40/66 (curb65); and mixed, 28/46 (psi) and 29/46 (curb65) patients. no differences were found for either clinical score (p = 0.831 for psi and 0.950 for curb65) when proportions of severe and non-severe cap were compared in the three groups.after excluding atypical and low-pathogenicity bacteria, we selected 174 patients with viral, bacterial and mixed cap. a biomarker search could not be performed in 3 patients, and we finally included 171 (61%) patients in our study with both etiology and biomarkers (see figure 1 ). of these, one patient from the viral group and another from the mixed group lacked pct determination.etiological agents isolated in each group are shown in table 2 . with the exception of atypical serology, every patient underwent all diagnostic tests. streptococcus pneumoniae was the most frequent agent associated with cap [67/280, 23.9% (67/171, 39.2% of cap of known etiology)] and was found in 34/59 (57.6%) patients in the bacterial group: 29 as a single microorganism and 5 in association with other bacteria. it was also identified in 33/46 (71.7%) of mixed bacterial/viral etiologies, in which the most prevalent associations were s pneumoniae with rhinovirus (12), influenza a (10), and adenovirus (8) . in the viral cap group, the most frequently isolated pathogens were influenza a (21), adenovirus (17) and rhinovirus (15) . of 67 cases of pneumonia in which s pneumoniae was isolated, 33/67 (49.2%) were associated with viruses.viruses were involved in 40% [(112/280) and 65.5% (112/171) of cases of cap with established cause (excluding atypical)], whereas 46/280 (16.4%) and 46/171 (26.9%) of those of known etiology had a mixed bacterial-viral etiology. this information is summarized in table 2 .the control group was composed of 100 subjects matched for age and sex. comorbidities in this group were similar to those of cap patients. biomarker levels were checked in all of them. nasopharyngeal aspirates were obtained in 60 of the subjects for viral searches, including both pcr tests. paired blood samples for serological studies were not obtained in these subjects. in the control group, 4 viruses (3 adenovirus and 1 parainfluenza 4) were isolated in 4 subjects (4/60, 6.7%). pct, crp and wbc were significantly higher in cap patients than in the controls, as shown in table 3 .bacterial and mixed cap showed no differences for pct (p = 0.416). viral cap had significantly lower pct values than both bacterial and mixed (p = 0.02 and 0.007, respectively). crp was significantly higher in mixed cap than in bacterial (p = 0.027) and viral (p = 0.005) cap, and there were no differences between the latter two groups table 4 ). see figure 2 . pct, crp and wbc showed similar results in influenza cap and non-influenza viral cap (p = 0.299, 0.345 and 0.091, respectively) ( table 5 ). when influenza a and b were removed from viral (n = 25) and mixed (n = 15) groups, pct and crp levels showed significantly higher levels in mixed cap compared to viral cap without influenza (p = 0.019 and 0.046, respectively). wbc showed no differences in either biomarker (table 6 ). crp levels were also higher in mixed involving influenza than in viral cap due to influenza virus (table 7) .to differentiate mixed from overall bacterial and viral cap, a cut-off of crp of 25.95 mg/dl, near our median values, showed a ppv of 0.45 (95% ci, 0.32-0.58) and an npv of 0.83 (0.76-0.9).with regard to pct, a cut-off of 2.10 ng/ml (near our median values) discriminated bacterial-involved (bacterial and mixed) from viral cap with a positive predictive positive value (ppv) of 0.78 (95% confidence interval [ci], 0.68-0.88) and a negative predictive value (npv) of 0.48 (95% ci, 0.38-0.57).a large number of univariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses were performed to investigate the factors associated with mixed viral-bacterial cap. the final multivariate logistic regression model selected by a stepwise procedure included only one independent variable, the crp that was the only independent factor associated with mixed etiology. the other parameters showed no association with viral-bacterial cap after adjusting for the rest of variables (table 8) .receiver operating characteristic (roc) analysis for pct to discriminate bacterial-involved (bacterial and mixed) from viral cap showed an area under curve (auc) of 0.640 (p = 0.002). the auc was 0.621 (p = 0.02) for discriminating between bacterial and viral cap, and 0.651 (p = 0.007) for discriminating between mixed and viral cap. the crp auc for discriminating between bacterialinvolved and viral cap was not significant (0.579, p = 0.081), but there were differences between mixed and bacterial (0.626, p = 0.027), mixed and viral (0.657, p = 0.005), and mixed and overall bacterial and viral (0.642, p = 0.004) ( table 9 ). see figures 3 and 4 .the main conclusions of our study are that biomarkers in adult, immunocompetent, mixed viral-bacterial cap show different inflammatory behavior than bacterial and viral cap, as follows:a) mixed cap had similar pct levels to bacterial cap but different from viral cap, and crp levels were higher in mixed than in either bacterial or viral cap (table 4 ). pct and crp levels were higher in mixed than overall viral and bacterial group, and than cap of unknown cause (table 4 ). these differences were not associated with a different severity. b) pct levels above 2.10 ng/ml on admission may indicate bacterial-involved pneumonia (bacterial or mixed viral-bacterial) with a high probability (78%). elevated crp levels was the only independent factor associated with mixed etiology, and a value below 25.95 mg/ml ruled out mixed etiology with 83% probability.in recent years, some studies have shown the importance of mixed viral-bacterial pneumonia, reporting a prevalence of 4%-28% of cap in adults, and 11%-39% of cap with known etiology (1-7) . these wide ranges are due to different study designs and, especially, to the number and type of diagnostic techniques used. in our study we included every test commonly used in clinical practice, as well as two different pcr assays for respiratory viruses, as these techniques are not standardized, in order to obtain the most complete virus yield possible. by following this protocol, we were able to identify a very definite group of mixed pneumonia and compare it to pure bacterial and viral groups.the importance of mixed cap has been recognized in recent years, and has been clearly underestimated so far. some studies have found these types of cap to be more severe than bacterial cap [2, 7, 23] , whereas others, like our study, found no differences in etiology-related severity [5, 6] . the importance of suspecting mixed cap is justified because these cases can be more severe and some of the viruses isolated can be treated.most mixed bacterial-viral cap had pneumococcus as the causative agent, and half of our s pneumoniae pneumonias were associated with viruses. these data indicate that many cases of cap usually considered pneumococcal cap, are in reality mixed viral-bacterial infections, because viruses are not usually looked for. conversely, when viral pcr is used, many considered as viral cap can be in reality mixed, with missed bacteria [3] .it is true that a viral genome may be isolated from the upper airways of some asymptomatic subjects and, therefore, in patients with cap, this may suggest previous or concomitant upper respiratory viral infection unrelated to the pneumonia. a study including bal in severe cap found that a viral genome was identified in upper respiratory samples without its alveolar isolation in only 13% of cases [24] , and we only identified a virus in 6.7% in our controls, similar to other studies [4] . not all authors are clear as to whether viruses other than influenza can, by themselves, cause pneumonia in adults or whether they must act in conjunction with other respiratory pathogens [2, 3, [6] [7] [8] . rhinovirus was the most common virus identified in bal of patients with severe cap in a recent study [24] , and our data showing a different inflammatory response of pure viral pneumonia compared with those of bacterial-viral cap also suggest that viruses, other than influenza, can, by themselves, cause pneumonia in adult patients.there is information in the literature confirming that viral pneumonia induces a different biomarker response compared to bacterial pneumonia. in fact, other studies have confirmed these differences also including atypicals [11] [12] [13] . the lack of pct response to viral disease seems to be due to stimulation of macrophages to release interferon, which inhibits tumor necrosis factor (tnf) synthesis that, in turn, is necessary for tissues to synthesize pct [15] . in our study, pct levels were similar in mixed and bacterial cap, and higher than those of viral cap, and in terms of crp, we found that mixed cap showed significantly higher levels than bacterial and viral pneumonias. this biomarker was the only independent factor associated with mixed etiology. the high npv for crp, can help us to suspect an aetiology different than mixed bacterial/viral. however, it is true that its low ppv and auc limit its usefulness in the clinical setting. some studies have suggested a potential role of biomarkers in differentiating pandemic influenza a h1n1 cap from its bacterial coinfection. all these studies were retrospective and involved a limited number of mainly critical (icu) patients (the largest series included 19 cases of mixed cap), and found lower levels of pct [16] and of pct and crp [18, 19] in viral cap than mixed h1n1bacterial cap, as well as their utility in clinical practice [16, 18, 19] . however, others showed limited sensitivity and specificity [17] . we also found a serum crp higher in mixed infections involving influenza, but differences could not be achieved for pct, probably due to low number of our cases (n = 15). with the exception of influenza, there is no information in adults on the behavior of biomarkers in mixed pneumonia. in our study, we found that the inflammatory response was higher in mixed cap compared to single bacterial and viral cap. we included mixed viral-bacterial cap not restricted to the influenza virus in a homogeneous adult group of patients, and both pct and crp were different in viral cap without influenza than mixed cap without influenza.the ability of crp to discriminate mixed viral-bacterial cap from bacterial cap was considered limited in children [13] , and the capnetz group showed 58 cases of mixed cap in adults that included two or more typical or atypical bacteria, and combinations of typical with atypical and any bacteria with virus, in which pct and crp levels were tested together [10] . although increased amounts of biomarkers, especially pct, have been associated with increased pneumonia severity [10] , this was not the case in our study, as we found no differences in either psi or curb56 scores among three etiological groups. median crp was highest in mixed cap, perhaps reflecting an increased level of systemic inflammation, as has been suggested [7] . it is difficult to explain with accuracy why mixed cap showed higher crp levels than both viral and bacterial pneumonias. it has recently been suggested that the main etiological agents of cap present different inflammatory profiles, according to their respective biomarker (crp, pct, tnf-α, and il-6) response, and that host-microorganism interplay may be useful for etiological diagnosis [11] . our results suggest that mixed bacterial/viral cap have a predominant crp response. findings of investigations approaching usefulness of pct and crp for etiological diagnosis of cap are contradictory [25] . this can be due, at least in part, to the lack of inclusion of mixed bacterial/viral pneumonias in these studies. there were no differences in wbc counts among the three etiological groups.our study is subject to certain limitations. this is a study from a single hospital, with a limited number of patients. we obtained no lower respiratory tract samples (bal) for viral study, and some of the nasopharyngeal viral findings may have come from concomitant viral upper respiratory infection. we did not use pcr techniques for diagnosing atypical bacteria, and our yield for these pathogens, based in serological testing, was low. nevertheless, our purpose was to study viruses and bacteria, and atypical findings were excluded. we are aware that some pneumonias classified as viral could, in fact, have been mixed, with a bacteria that could not be identified without a quantified pcr test for bacteria. finally, a sequential search for biomarkers might have given us more complete information. the major strength of our study is that we compared a very well defined population of mixed cap to other groups of very well defined bacterial and viral cap.our findings suggest a specific inflammatory profile in mixed viral-bacterial cap, which is different from that of both bacterial and viral cap. these findings can be useful by clinicians to include antiviral treatment especially during the influenza season, and to suspect a bacterial role in the case of either symptoms suggesting virus involvement or viral isolation. interestingly our results were similar when we excluded mixed influenza cases. this is the first study to assess biomarkers in a group of mixed viral-bacterial cap other than influenza, and compared with bacterial and viral adult cap. the biomarker profile in this group is different from that of viral cap. this suggests that the inflammatory response to viruses, even excluding influenza, is different from that in mixed cap and, therefore, that viruses do not always require a bacterial co-pathogen to produce pneumonia in adults. this may help us better understand the true role of viruses in cap and, perhaps, encourage the development of effective antiviral drugs [8] . despite their usefulness in some particular cases, we appear to lack an accurate biomarker to separate bacterial-involved cap from viral cap in clinical practice.abbreviations cap: community-aquired pneumonia; pct: procalcitonine; crp: c reactive protein; wbc: white blood cells; nipia: near-infrared particle immunoassay; trace: time-resolved amplified cryptate emission; pcr: polymerase chain reaction; dfa: direct fluorescence antibody assay; adv: adenovirus; hmpv: human metapneumovirus; rsv: respiratory syncytial virus.the authors declare that they have no competing interests clinicians often encounter the diagnostic challenge of distinguishing between bacterial and viral etiologies in a febrile patient [1] . medical history, physical findings, and other ancillary medical tests are frequently similar for different causative agents and do not provide definitive discrimination [2, 3] . misdiagnosis of disease etiology may alter the trajectory of patient care, including over and under use of antibiotics, with fundamental individual and global health consequences.to aid in accurate clinical decision-making, various laboratory tests are regularly requested [1] . routine cultures may aid in determining infectious etiology but their utility can be limited by lengthy time to result, low yield, and contamination [4] . molecular testing expands our capability to detect specific pathogens; yet, test interpretation can be confounded by pathogen co-infections and significant carriage rates of potentially pathogenic microorganisms, such that molecular tests may contribute to over and under diagnosis [5] . notably, pathogen-based tests are inherently limited by requirement to sample the infection focus, which is especially challenging in lower respiratory infections and fever without source. therefore, there is pressing need for new reliable and rapid testing to aid the clinician in discriminating between bacterial and viral infections.host biomarkers hold great promise as routine diagnostic tools as this approach can overcome many of the previously described challenges [6, 7] . multiple candidates have been documented, including traditional cellular markers (e.g., white blood cell count, wbc [2] and absolute neutrophil count, anc [8] ) and soluble host-proteins, both classical (e.g., interleukin-6, il-6 [9] ; c-reactive protein, crp [2, [10] [11] [12] ; and procalcitonin, pct [2, 10, [12] [13] [14] ) and others (e.g., human neutrophil lipocalin, hnl/ngal [15] ). there are also panels of host nucleic acids in the early stages of development [16] [17] [18] . additionally, various prediction models have been proposed that combined several markers, for example, the lab-score, which integrates pct, crp, and urinary dipstick results [19] . to date, wide adoption of such biomarkers and prediction rules for discriminating between bacterial and viral infections has been limited by one or more of the following: lack of rigorous clinical validation [7] , narrow applicability (to certain settings, populations, or clinical syndromes) [20] , disputed cutoffs [21] , and not enough added value beyond standard-of-care [22] [23] [24] .recently, a novel host-protein signature for differentiating between acute bacterial and viral etiologies in children and adults was described [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] . this is the first diagnostic test based on soluble host-proteins to include both viral-and bacterial-induced biomarkers: tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (trail), which exhibits induced expression in viral infections and reduced expression in bacterial infection; interferon gamma-induced protein-10 (ip-10) that is induced to a greater extent in viral infections and lesser extent in bacterial infections; and crp, which exhibits the opposite pattern to ip-10. the diagnostic performance has been validated in two double-blind studies [27, 28] , with sensitivity 86.7% (95% confidence interval 75.8-93.1%) and 93.8% (95% ci 87.8-99.8%) and specificity 91.1% (95% ci 87.9-93.6%) and 89.8% (95% ci 85.6-94.0%), respectively. in these former studies, a head-to-head comparison of its diagnostic performance with other biomarkers (at multiple cutoffs) and prediction rules was lacking in patients with respiratory infection (both upper and lower) and fever without source.in this study, focusing on two prevalent clinical syndromes that are difficult to diagnose as bacterial or viral, we compared the diagnostic performance of the host-protein signature not only to commonly applied crp and pct, as documented previously [25, 27, 28, 30] , but also in a head-to-head manner to multiple cutoffs of il-6, hnl, and several prediction rules that have been reported as candidate tools for aiding the clinician in discriminating between bacterial and viral infection.biomarker measurements were performed on specimens from defined subpopulations of the bcuriosity^study that was conducted prospectively at two secondary medical centers in israel (nct01917461; supplementary materials) [25, 26] . the curiosity study population comprised inpatients and emergency department (ed) arrivals, both children and adults, presenting with diverse clinical syndromes and a spectrum of pathogens. inclusion criteria included report of fever > 37.5°c since onset of symptoms and duration of symptoms ≤ 12 days. exclusion criteria included: evidence of acute infection in the 2 weeks preceding current presentation; congenital immune deficiency; treatment with immunosuppressive or immunomodulatory agents; active malignancy; and history of human immunodeficiency virus, or hepatitis b/c virus infection. the curiosity study was approved by the local institutional review boards. written informed consent was obtained from each participant or legal guardian, as applicable.the current study included only pediatric and adult patients presenting with one of two clinical syndromes, respiratory infection (upper or lower) and fever without source, and sera available to measure host-protein biomarkers. diagnosis of respiratory infection required signs or symptoms that involve the upper or lower respiratory tract including the nose, ears, sinuses, pharynx, or larynx as recorded in the electronic case report form. fever without source required no identified source of infection recorded at presentation after a careful history and a thorough physical examination and a negative urinalysis.data on demographics, medical history, physical examination, complete blood count, and chemistry panel were obtained at enrollment. data were also collected relating to additional diagnostic tests and imaging studies performed on a clinical basis, such as blood culture, throat culture, and serological testing for cytomegalovirus, epstein-barr virus, mycoplasma pneumoniae, and coxiella burnetii.a nasal swab was obtained for microbiological investigation. nasal swabs were stored at 4°c for up to 72 h before transport to a central laboratory, where two multiplex polymerase chain reaction analyses were conducted to detect common respiratory viral (seeplex rv15) and bacterial (seeplex pb6) pathogens: parainfluenza virus 1, 2, 3, and 4, coronavirus 229e/nl63, adenovirus a/b/c/d/e, bocavirus 1/2/3/4, influenza a, influenza b, metapneumovirus, coronavirus oc43, rhinovirus a/b/c, respiratory syncytial virus a and b, enterovirus, streptococcus pneumoniae, haemophilus influenzae, chlamydophila pneumoniae, legionella pneumophila, bordetella pertussis, and mycoplasma pneumoniae.a single blood specimen was obtained for measurement of the various biomarkers upon recruitment of the patient to the study; in the case of ed patients, this was at presentation to the ed and in the case of inpatients, it was within 48 h of admission. venous blood specimens were stored at 4°c for up to 5 h, subsequently fractionated into serum or plasma and total leukocytes, and stored at − 80°c. host-protein biomarkers were measured using the following kits: crp using either cobas-6000, cobas-integra-400/800, or modular-analytics-p800 (roche); trail and ip-10 using immunoxpert™ (memed); il-6 using a commercial elisa (r&d systems); pct using either elecsys brahms pct kit or liaison brahms pct kit; hnl using hnl bact elisa (diagnostics development). hnl was measured in the research lab of schneider children's medical center on a subset of specimens with sufficient volume (table 1) , with a dilution of 1:100 applied for serum and 1:50 for plasma, according to manufacturer instructions.the crp, trail and ip-10 measurements, and a small subset of pct (n = 76) and il-6 (n = 43) measurements were performed as part of the curiosity study [25] . the majority of the pct (n = 238), il-6 (n = 271), and all of the hnl measurements were conducted on frozen serum remnants from the curiosity study for the purpose of the present study.laboratory technicians conducting biomarker tests were blinded to clinical data and comparator method outcomes.cutoff values for wbc [2] , anc [8] , crp [2, [10] [11] [12] , il-6 [9] , and pct [12-14, 31, 32] were defined prior to data analysis based on literature and guidelines. due to the lack of established cutoff values for hnl, in addition to applying the previously reported cutoffs for serum [33] , we identified and applied additional cutoffs for the current cohort by optimizing for total accuracy for both serum and plasma. prediction rules combining biomarkers at different cutoffs were defined based on the relevant literature prior to data analysis [19, 34, 35] . the following prediction rules were [34] . the lab-score incorporates pct and crp, weighed differently according to their level, and urinary dipstick results: crp (< 40 mg/l: 0 points; 40-99 mg/l: 2 points; ≥ 100 mg/l: 4 points), pct (< 0.5 ng/ ml: 0 points; ≥ 0.5-1.99 ng/ml: 2 points; ≥ 2.0 ng/ml: 4 points), and positive urine dipstick (1 point).the host-protein signature score ranging from 0 to 100 is based on computational integration of trail, ip-10, and crp concentrations and was calculated using the immunoxpert™ software (memed) [25] [26] [27] . two cutoffs were applied according to manufacturer's instructions to generate three possible outcomes: (i) viral infection (or other nonbacterial etiology): immunoxpert™ score < 35; (ii) equivocal: 35 ≤ immunoxpert™ score ≤ 65; and (iii) bacterial infection (including mixed bacterial and viral co-infection): immunoxpert™ score > 65. an equivocal outcome is a nonmissing, non-erroneous result that does not provide diagnostic information, i.e., is inconclusive. patients with equivocal outcomes were excluded from analysis of the host-protein signature performance.the comparator method applied was expert panel adjudication in line with nhs health technology assessment guidelines for evaluation of diagnostic tests [36] . the panel comprised three independent, experienced, clinically practicing physicians who reviewed after discharge clinical, laboratory, radiological, and microbiological data accrued over the course of the patient's care, including pcr analysis of nasal swabs. the physicians were blinded to the diagnoses of their peers to prevent group pressure or influential personality bias. each panel member independently assigned one of the following diagnoses to each patient: (i) bacterial (including mixed bacterial and viral co-infection); (ii) viral; or (iii) indeterminate. the study cohort for the current analysis included only comparator method outcomes when the expert panel were unanimous, i.e., all three panel members independently assigned the same diagnosis. regarding the biomarkers and prediction rules under study, panel members were provided with crp, wbc, and anc data, and blinded to the following: hostprotein signature, il-6, pct, and hnl, and results of the prediction rules.analysis of diagnostic accuracy across the entire cohort was based on total accuracy ((tp + tn)/(p + n)), sensitivity (tp/ p), and specificity ( in addition, subgroup analysis based on different age groups, clinical syndromes, pathogens, and microbiological confirmation of unanimous expert diagnosis was performed. statistical analysis was performed using matlab (mathworks). the p values were calculated as follows: for the mean and standard deviation (sd), t test; for sensitivity, specificity, and total accuracy, fisher's exact test. p < 0.05 was deemed statistically significant. p values smaller than 0.01 are reported as p < 0.01.a total of 493 patients met the inclusion criteria and presented with either respiratory infection (upper or lower) or fever without source. of these, 430 had adequate serum volume for index test measurements and 314 (73%) were assigned unanimous expert panel diagnoses: 175 (56%) viral and 139 (44%) bacterial (including mixed bacterial and viral) (fig. 1) . the study cohort included 216 patients with a respiratory infection and 98 patients with fever without source (table 1 and  supplementary table 1 ). the ed was the most common recruitment site (59%), with median time from symptom onset to enrollment of 3 days.out of the 314 patients assigned unanimous expert panel diagnoses, there were 153 for whom there was clinically relevant microbiological confirmation of the diagnosis, with a total of 23 different organisms detected (supplementary table 2 ). for 16 out of the 98 patients initially presenting with fever without source, a specific clinical diagnosis was recorded at discharge (table 1) , including bacteremia, meningitis, peritonitis, and lymphadenitis. there were no deaths.comparison of host-protein signature to other biomarkers crp, il-6, and pct exhibited higher mean (standard deviation) levels in bacterial as compared to viral infections ( the host-protein signature yielded significantly higher total accuracy for differentiating between viral and bacterial infections than pct, crp, hnl, il-6, wbc, anc (all p values lower than 0.02; the host-protein signature yielded significantly improved total accuracy as compared to prediction rules using a combination of pct and crp to rule-in (crp > 80 mg/l or pct > 2 ng/ml) or rule-out (crp < 20 mg/l and pct < 0.5 ng/ml) bacterial infection (p < 0.02; table 3 two other prediction rules were examined that combined crp, pct, and wbc and, in each case, the total accuracy of the host-protein signature were found to be significantly superior ( the performance of the host-protein signature, pct, crp, and il-6 was compared across different subgroups (tables 4 and  5; supplementary table 3 the diagnostic performance was compared across the subgroup of patients presenting with respiratory infections (number of respiratory patients with unanimous expert panel diagnosis of bacterial infection = 112, number of respiratory patients with unanimous expert panel diagnosis of viral infection = 104). similar to the findings for the entire cohort, the host-protein signature exhibited superior total accuracy (supplementary table 2 ; p < 0.05).sensitivity and specificity was examined per pathogen type across the subgroup of patients presenting with respiratory infections (fig. 3) . out of the 216 patients with respiratory infections, there was microbiological confirmation of atypical bacteria (including chlamydophila pneumoniae, mycoplasma pneumoniae, legionella pneumophila) in 12 patients, and among the viral patients, there was microbiological confirmation of rsv, influenza (a + b) and adenovirus in 17, 27, and 17 patients, respectively. it is notable that in adenovirus infection, the specificity of crp significantly decreased at all cutoffs (p < 0.04), whereas that of the host-protein signature did not (p = 0.16) as compared to the specificity attained for all respiratory infections (supplementary table 2 (tables 4 and 5 ). in contrast, pct displayed significantly decreased sensitivity in adults as compared to children at all cutoffs (p < 0.01) and il-6 exhibited reduced specificity in children versus adults at all cutoffs, with significant reduction at cutoffs of 50 and 250 pg/ml (p < 0.03).out of the 175 patients unanimously assigned viral by the expert panel, 57 were given antibiotics, indicating a 33% rate of antibiotic overuse. the potential of the host-protein signature to reduce antibiotic use was estimated by considering the following ratio: (number of patients given antibiotics who were assigned viral by unanimous expert diagnosis and viral by host-protein signature, n = 50)/(number of patients given antibiotics who were assigned viral by unanimous expert diagnosis, n = 57). according to this calculation, the host signature has the potential to reduce unnecessary antibiotic use by 88%. the same estimation performed separately for children and adults, indicates overuse rates of 30 and 46%, respectively, and a potential of the host-protein signature to reduce unnecessary antibiotic use by 87 and 91%, respectively, in these subgroups. similarly, the same estimation performed separately for hospitalized and non-hospitalized patients, indicated overuse rates of 39 and 28%, respectively, with the potential of the host-protein signature to reduce unnecessary antibiotic use by 78 and 97%, respectively, in each clinical setting.in this study, we compared the performance of individual and combined biomarkers and prediction rules to a recently developed signature comprising three host-proteins-trail, ip-10, and crp-in patients with respiratory infections and fever without source. we observed that the host-protein signature yielded significantly superior performance for diagnosing bacterial versus viral infections in these patients as compared to the individual biomarkers crp, pct, wbc, anc, il-6, and hnl, and their currently used combinations. , the only diagnostic test to show promising utility both for rulingin and ruling-out bacterial infections. the signature also outperformed five prediction rules, including the lab-score, and exhibited robust performance across age and various pathogens. in particular, even in cases of adenovirus infection, which can trigger bacterial-like responses leading to misdiagnosis as bacterial infection [37] , the host-protein signature maintained performance. this study adds valuable information to previous studies introducing the host-protein signature, thayyil et al. [34] crp ≥ 50 mg/l and pct ≥ 2 ng/ml and wbc ≥ 15,000/mm 3 60.6 (55.2-66.1) 11.6 (6. . [19] in its head-to-head comparison to classical and other (e.g., hnl) biomarkers and to prediction rules, its detailed analysis of performance across specific pathogens and its estimation of the potential for this new diagnostic tool to reduce antibiotic use in two clinical syndromes that are challenging for the clinician to manage. the biomarkers and prediction rules in this comparative study were selected based either on the breadth of their current clinical use and/or their potential for application in real clinical settings for discriminating between bacterial and viral respiratory infections and fever without source [6, 7] . we did not examine nucleic acid panels as, although several research studies support promising performance for differentiating between bacterial and viral infections [16] [17] [18] , currently there are no affordable technologies for measuring multiple rnas in a quantitative manner in under an hour, restricting application of nucleic acid biomarkers at point-of-care. in contrast, proteins are amenable to affordable, user-friendly measurements within minutes, which is essential for broad application of a new test for aiding clinicians to discriminate between bacterial and viral infections. a point-of-care platform for measuring the host-protein signature in 15 min is currently under development.it is noteworthy that a unique feature of the host-protein signature as compared to the other biomarkers and prediction rules examined in the present study is the inclusion of viralinduced biomarkers. the diagnostic value of integrating bacterial and viral biomarkers is supported by a proof-of-concept study of 54 febrile emergency department patients that reported improved discrimination between microbiologically confirmed bacterial and viral infections when trail, ip-10, and pct were combined into a model as compared to any of the individual biomarkers [38] . in the case of the signature, it is likely that the distinctive expression dynamics of the three proteins in response to bacterial versus viral infections [25] [26] [27] [28] contributes to its superior performance.a key strength of this study is application of a comparator method based on rigorous expert adjudication. one of the challenges in evaluating tests to distinguish bacterial from viral infection is the lack of a gold standard for etiologic diagnosis [36] . to address this, many studies employ microbiological confirmation as a comparator method, which has the advantage of being well-established and reproducible but the notable disadvantage of restricting the cohort to a small proportion of patients, with likely enrichment for easy to diagnose cases. indeed, there were 153 patients in the subgroup for whom there was clinically relevant microbiological confirmation of the unanimous expert diagnosis as compared to 314 in the full cohort of patients with unanimous expert diagnosis. although employing expert panel adjudication has the potential to introduce errors, this comparator method has the fundamental advantage of encompassing a greater proportion of patients and consequently, a study cohort that more closely resembles the real clinical setting, especially relevant for respiratory infections and fever without source that can be hard to diagnose at presentation. other key strengths are the breadth of index tests compared and that their cutoffs were defined before data analysis.a limitation of the study is that the study population was restricted to secondary care medical centers. much antibiotic overuse occurs in outpatient settings, particularly for respiratory infections [39] , and since the prevalence of viral infections is typically higher and the severity of disease likely lower, future studies of the signature's diagnostic performance in physician's offices are planned. furthermore, immunocompromised patients and oncology patients were excluded from the host-protein signature assigned equivocal results to 10.3, 11.6, 11.5, and 14% of patients for the atypical bacteria, rsv, influenza, and adenovirus subgroups, respectively (see supplementary figure 1 for additional index test cutoffs this study, populations that would benefit greatly from such a test and merit future study. another limitation is that the expert panelists were provided with crp, wbc, and anc data, introducing a potential incorporation bias when evaluating the diagnostic performance of any tests that incorporate one or more of these biomarkers, including the host-protein signature. however, since clinicians often employ crp, wbc, and anc as part of routine care to decide the etiology of infection, it was reasoned that the comparator method may be impaired if the panelists were blinded to these data. notably, despite the largest potential incorporation bias, the individual biomarkers crp, wbc, and anc did not yield superior performance.in conclusion, in this study, the host-protein signature comprising trail, ip-10, and crp exhibited the highest diagnostic performance for distinguishing between bacterial and viral etiologies in patients with respiratory infections and fever without source. the need for such tests is highlighted by the finding that the treating physicians prescribed antibiotics to one third of the viral-infected patients in the present study cohort. the host-protein signature identified 88% of these cases as viral infections, and therefore, has the potential to reduce antibiotic overuse considerably. importantly, because both sensitivity and specificity are over 93%, this potential may be fulfilled, as the clinician can be confident about the signature's performance at both ruling-in and ruling-out bacterial infection. this said, the test is not a substitute for physician education on clinical diagnosis and judicious antibiotic use; the host-protein signature is intended for use in conjunction with clinical assessments and other laboratory findings as an aid to differentiate bacterial from viral infection. future health and economic outcome research is warranted to evaluate the impact of incorporating the signature into routine patient care.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) remains pandemic with considerable morbidity and mortality. similar to sars in 2003, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) is usually considered to be an acute process confined to the lungs and results in a high mortality rate in covid-19 patients. however, accumulating evidence points to myocardial injury as a covid-19-related complication with an incidence ranging from 7.2% to 12%. 1, 2 notably, an american college of cardiology clinical bulletin has highlighted the cardiac implications of covid- 19 . it suggests that patients with underlying cardiovascular disease face higher risks and recommends them to be triaged and treated with priority. 3 however, according to limited information on cardiac complication of covid-19, characteristics and clinical significance of myocardial injury for risk of death remain unclear. in this study, we determined the predictive value of myocardial indicators on in-hospital death, and investigated the features and potential causes of myocardial injury in cases of severe covid- 19. all consecutive patients admitted to renmin hospital of wuhan university with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 were included in the present retrospective study. renmin hospital of wuhan university, located in wuhan, hubei province, was assigned responsibility for the treatment of patients with severe covid-19 by the wuhan government.the patients with severe covid-19 enrolled in this study were diagnosed according to the guidelines for diagnosis and treatment of covid-19 (trial sixth edition) published by the chinese national health commission on 18 february 2020. the cases in this study included severe and critically ill disease, which was defined by the presence of any of the following: respiratory rate >30/min; oxygen saturation < _93%; pao 2 /fio 2 ratio < _ 300 mmhg; respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation; shock; or respiratory failure combined with other organ failure requiring icu treatment. the cases under 18 years of age and missing cardiac biomarkers, including levels of cardiac troponin i (ctni), were excluded. the clinical outcomes (i.e. discharges, mortality, and length of stay) of all included patients were monitored up to 23 february 2020, the final date of follow-up.this study was approved by the national health commission of china and the institutional review board at renmin hospital of wuhan university (wuhan, china). written informed consent was waived by the ethics commission of the designated hospital for emerging infectious diseases.the demographic characteristics (age and gender), clinical data (comorbidities, laboratory findings, treatments, complications, and outcomes), laboratory findings and results of cardiac examinations (cardiac biomarkers) for participants during hospitalization were extracted from electronic medical records by two investigators. all the data were independently reviewed and entered into a computer database by a trained team of physicians. patients were grouped according to whether they died (death group) or survived (survivors group). the study outcome was rate of in-hospital death, and clinical outcomes were determined based on the information of our hospital's real-time medical records system.myocardial injury was defined as blood levels of cardiac biomarkers ctni increased above the 99th percentile upper reference limit. 4 ards was defined according to the berlin definition. 5 the date of disease onset was defined as the day when the symptom was noticed.the detection principle of creatinine kinase-myocardial band (ck-mb), myoglobin (myo), and ctni is the double-antibody sandwich method of chemiluminescence immunotechnology, the detection instrument is siemens advia centaur xp immunoassay system, and the reagent is an original matching kit from siemens. the normal reference range of ck-mb is 0-5 ng/ml; the normal reference range of myo is 0-110 ug /l; the normal reference range of ctni is 0-0.04 ng/ml, and the minimum detectable concentration (analytical sensitivity) is 0.006 ng/ml in our hospital. the detection method of n-terminal pro-b-type natriuretic peptide (nt-probnp) is based on a double-antibody clip one-step enzyme immunoassay based on the heart detection principle. the detection instrument is a dimension exl with lm automatic biochemical analysis system. the reagent is a siemens dimension exl with lm kit. the normal reference range is 0-900 pg/ml.to confirm covid-19, the viral nucleic acid kit (health, ningbo, china) was used to extract nucleic acids from clinical samples according to manufacturer's instructions. a 2019-ncov detection kit (bioperfectus, taizhou, china) was used to detect the orf1ab gene (ncovorf1ab) and the n gene (ncov-np) according to the manufacturer's instructions using real-time rt-pcr. 6 an infection was considered as laboratoryconfirmed if both the ncovorf1ab and ncov-np showed positive results.descriptive statistics were obtained for all study variables. continuous data are expressed as median (interquartile range, iqr). categorical data are expressed as proportions. all categorical variables were compared for the study outcome by using the fisher's exact test or chi-square test, and continuous variables were compared using the student t-test or the mann-whitney u test, if appropriate. a receiver operating characteristic (roc) curve analysis was performed to establish a single cut-off point. multivariable cox regression models using all covariates available were performed to determine the risk factors for in-hospital mortality, with a time from admission to the end of follow-up. logistics regression analysis was performed to determine the predictors of myocardial injury. the cases missing biomarker data were excluded listwise with statistics software. data were analysed using spss 25.0 (ibm, chicago, il). statistical charts were generated using prism 5 (graphpad), minitab (version 18), and python. for all statistical analyses, p < 0.05 was considered significant.a total of 2253 cases with confirmed covid-19 were screened initially, from 1 january to 23 february 2020, in a tertiary teaching hospital with two integrated hospital districts and a cabin hospital. figure 1 depicts the flowchart for participant selection. briefly, after excluding cases with mild covid-19 (1095), duplicated cases (156), and cases without available core medical information (331), 671 cases (death, 62; survivors, 609) with severe covid-19 were enrolled in final analysis. in these patients, the median age was 63 years (iqr, 50-72 years), 48% of patients were male, and the median time from symptom and admission to end of follow-up was 23 days and 17 days, respectively. the most common main comorbidity was hypertension (29.7%), followed by diabetes (14.5%), coronary heart disease (8.9%), chronic renal disease (4.2%), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (3.4%), cancer (3.4%), chronic heart failure (3.3%), cerebrovascular disease (3.3%), and atrial fibrillation (1.0%). during hospitalization, 95.5% of patients were given oxygen treatment; however, use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and continuous renal replacement therapy was rare. the proportion of antiviral treatment use was 96.4% in included patients, and 59.5%, 56.5%, and 54.2% of patients, respectively, were treated with intravenous immunoglobulin, glucocorticoids, and antibiotics, table 1 the patients who died were older, more often male than the survivors (all p < 0.001, table 1) . prevalence of hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, chronic renal failure, chronic heart disease, and cerebrovascular disease was higher among the patients who died (all p < 0.01, table 1 ); however, frequencies of other comorbidities including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cancer, and atrial fibrillation were similarly distributed between groups (all p > 0.05, table 1 ). compared with survivors, patients who died had more often received mechanical ventilation, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, and continuous renal replacement therapy (all p < 0.001, table 1 ). the proportion of antiviral treatment use was similarly distributed between groups; however, the usage of intravenous immunoglobulin, glucocorticoids, and antibiotics was higher among the patients who died (all p < 0.001, table 1 ).on admission, most patients who died presented abnormal laboratory results, such as higher leucocyte counts, neutrophil rate, and levels of aspartic transaminase, creatinine, c-reactive protein, and procalcitonin (pct). moreover, non-survivors had significant higher levels of all cardiac indices than survivors, including ck-mb, myo, ctni, and nt-probnp (all p < 0.001, table 2 ). however, lymphocyte rate, platelet counts, albumin level, and creatinine clearance were lower in non-survivors than those in survivors (all p < 0.001, table 2 ).the rapid deterioration of the respiratory function was the main cause of death, followed by cardiovascular complications. table 3 summarized the distribution of death-related complications in included patients, including ards (98.4%), acute respiratory failure (90.3%), acute myocardial injury (30.6%), acute heart failure (19.4%), multiple organ failure syndrome (9.7%), shock (6.5%), and sudden death (1.6%). 11 /538 (2.0%); p < 0.001] above these cut-offs were associated with markedly higher hospitalized death ( figure 3a) . we performed a contour plot to determine the relationship between levels of cardiac biomarkers, age, and mortality. the results showed that the higher initial levels of ck-mb, myo, and ctni were consistently associated with higher mortality, which was pronounced in patients with senior age ( figure 3b) .to analyse the risk factors for in-hospital mortality by multivariable cox regression, the values of these biomarkers were transformed into categorical variables according to roc cut-off points (ck-mb, myo, and ctni) and the 99th percentile upper reference limit (pct, c-reactive protein, and nt-probnp) in model 1 ( figure 4a) , and all biomarkers remained as continuous variables in model 2 ( figure 4b ), respectively. in multivariable cox model 1, ck-mb > 2.2 ng/ml [hazard ratio (hr), 6.62 ; 95% confidence interval (ci), 2.49- 17.59 ; p < 0.001], ctni > 0.026 ng/ml (hr, 4.56 ; 95% ci, 1.28- 16.28 ; p = 0.019), and nt-probnp > 900 pg/ ml (hr, 3.12 ; 95% ci, 1.25-7.80 ; p = 0.015) were risk factors, figure 4a . in multivariable model 2, age (hr, 1.04; 95% ci, 1.00-1.07; p = 0.025), crp (hr, 1.01; 95% ci, 1.00-1.01; p = 0.044), 1.46 ; p = 0.004), and nt-probnp (hr, 1.00; 95% ci, 1.00-1.00; p = 0.045) were risk factors for death, figure 4b . after these continuous variables were ln-transformed, the results of multivariable cox regression model 2 showed pct (hr, 1.72 ; 95% ci, 1.20-2.45 ) and ctni (hr, 1.90 ; 95% ci, 1.44-2.49 ) were significantly associated with in-hospitalization mortality, but the other factors were no longer significant, including age, c-reactive protein, myo, and nt-probnp. in order to avoid the influence of collinearity among ck-mb, myo, and ctni, we excluded ck-mb and myo in two multivariable cox models, the results displayed that ctni was still a significant factor in both the models, with 11.18 (95% ci, 3.23-38.75 ) and 1.27 (95% ci, 1.10- 1.46 ) of hr in model 1 and model 2, respectively. moreover, coronary heart disease (hr, 2.25; 95% ci, 1.04-4.87) became a new significant factor in model 1, and chronic heart disease (hr, 3.37 ; 95% ci, 1.24- 9.18 ) was significant in model 2, respectively.a total of 106 patients (15.8%) had myocardial injury in all included patients on admission. patients with myocardial injury had older age, more comorbidities, and more abnormalities in laboratory findings than those patients without myocardial injury ( table 4) . patients who died had suffered more often from myocardial injury during hospitalization compared with survivors (75.8% vs. 9 .7%; p < 0.001). a contour plot for the distribution characteristics of myocardial indicators showed that these biomarkers were higher among patients who died ( figure 5a) . during the period from admission to death, cardiac indicators showed a dynamic change in the death group, especially in the figure 5b . because most patients were not continuously monitored during hospitalization, the serial biomarker results were based on a very small subcohort. in univariable logistic regression analysis, male, senior age, hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, chronic renal failure, chronic heart failure, cerebrovascular disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and high levels of pct and c-reactive protein were risk factors for myocardial injury ( table 5) . in multivariable logistic regression analysis, male, diabetes, chronic heart failure, cerebrovascular disease, and pct were no longer predictors ( table 5) .the major findings of the present study are as follows: (i) myocardial injury is not uncommon among patients with severe covid-19, especially among those who die; (ii) elevated levels of myocardial markers predict risk for in-hospital death; and (iii) senior age, inflammatory response, and underlying cardiovascular-related comorbidities are associated with myocardial injury in patients with covid-19. covid-19 has managed to supersede the death toll of sars and mers. severe respiratory distress is usually considered as a leading cause of coronavirus-induced death. 7 in a recent study on the largest clinical sample in china, severe pneumonia was independently associated with admission to icu, mechanical ventilation, or death. other complications also were associated with higher risk of in-hospital death. 8 cheng et al. documented a 3.2% prevalence of kidney impairment in hospitalized covid-19 patients in association with higher risk of mortality. 9 although information on cardiac complications is limited among covid-19 patients, cardiac impairment has been demonstrated as a direct or underlying cause of death in 27% of pneumonia-associated deaths. even after adjustment for baseline risk, cardiac complications are associated with a 60% increase in pneumonia-associated short-term mortality. 10, 11 however, there was insufficient evidence to suggest that patients with cardiovascular disease are more likely to develop covid- 19 . moreover, a larger and more representative sample is required to determine the exact mortality rate of covid-19 in china, because mortality varies in different regions and time points. in the present study, patients with severe covid-19 who died in hospital usually presented with a worse situation, such as older age, more comorbidities and abnormal laboratory findings, and more often required use of non-invasive or invasive ventilation. to analyse the potential risk factors for death, we found that several factors including older age, occurrence of chronic heart disease, elevated inflammatory response, and myocardial injury acted as co-effects on the risk for death. it is notable that in patients aged >60 years, the mortality seems independent of the elevation of myocardial indicator from the contour plot. wu et al. reported that older age was associated with the development of ards and progression from ards to death among patients with covid-19 pneumonia. 12 in general, senior age has an important effect on complications and mortality in patients with covid- 19. however, severe complications such as ards were not analysed in this multivariate model, since ards as the direct cause of mortality has always been identified in either mers or sars, and this time, in covid- 19. 13 consistently, we also found that ards and acute respiratory failure act as the main causes of mortality and present the highest proportion in dead cases. moreover, ards usually acts as an endpoint in recent studies and its risk factors are similar to those for death. in consideration of the fact that ards may be more generally thought of as a pathway to mortality, we considered it would overshadow the other early indicators of mortality if it was included in the analysis of the multivariate model.the elevation of ctni and ck-mb might predict risk for death. notably, these single cut-off points may include a number of individuals with a normal level of myocardial markers on admission. 4 although it is premature to say whether these patients are doomed with poor outcomes since only $30% of individuals died of myocardial injury, it plays a role as early warning for death in covid-19 when these indicators exceed cut-off points.circulating inflammatory mediators (i.e. cytokines and/or endotoxins) or direct viral invasion of cardiomyocytes, or both mechanisms, may lead to myocardial injury in covid- 19. it was recently reported that the novel coronavirus uses the angiotensin-converting enzyme ii (ace2) as a cell entry receptor, and sars-cov was detected in the heart of 35% of the subjects suggesting that sars-cov is capable of infecting the myocardium through ace2 receptors. 14 although one could posit that the direct invasion of cardiomyocytes by sars-cov-2 underlies cardiac impairment, a recent pathological study documented scarce interstitial mononuclear inflammatory infiltrates in heart tissue without substantial myocardial damage in a patient with covid- 19. 15 due to present limited evidence, whether sars-cov-2 can directly impair the heart remains to be further demonstrated.a meta-analysis reported cumulative rates of new or worsening myocardial infarction or unstable angina (5%, range 1-11%) in patients with pneumonia. 16 the serum concentrations of troponin increase during the acute phase of pneumonia, and the magnitude of this increase is associated with the severity and outcome of the infection. 17 recently, huang et al. documented that patients with covid-19 admitted to the icu had higher plasma levels of cytokines. 1 in the present study, we also found that levels of markers of inflammatory response such as c-reactive protein and pct were significantly increased especially among patients who died. to further analyse related factors of myocardial injury by multivariable regression, senior age, comorbidities (e.g. hypertension, coronary heart disease, chronic renal failure, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), and inflammatory markers (e.g. pct and c-reactive protein) were predictors of in-hospital myocardial injury in patients with severe covid- 19 . the latter findings indicate that occurrence of cardiac impairment is possibly secondary to severe pneumonia-related systemic inflammatory response and closely related with underlying cardiovascular disease or potential risk in patients with covid- 19. consistently, previous evidence demonstrated that risk factors for pneumonia-associated cardiac complications include older age, preexisting cardiovascular disease, and greater severity of pneumonia at presentation. 18, 19 nonetheless, about one third of transient cardiac complications occur in patients without a history of cardiac disease. 20 a study in sars also found that reversible left ventricular impairment appears common even among those without underlying cardiac disease. 21 however, sufficient evidence is needed to clarify whether the effects of covid-19 and sars on the myocardium are different. in the present study, patients who died had higher proportions of both myocardial injury and cardiovascular-related comorbidities, suggesting that cardiac complications with underlying cardiovascular disease or risk usually co-exist and develop to irreversible outcome. alternatively, the systemic inflammatory response to pneumonia can also increase the inflammatory activity within coronary atherosclerotic plaques, rendering them unstable and prone to rupture. 22 therefore, the presence of pre-existing cardiovascular disease or related risk factors may aggravate myocardial injury, which therefore cannot be ignored in management of covid- 19. in general, patients with covid-19 and myocardial injury are not actively recommended for emergency intervention strategies due to existing risk of crossinfection, and in most mid/moderate myocardial injury, the standard process of comprehensive management is generally based on risk stratification and patient classification. 23 although this study included a large number of patients, it has several limitations. first, some data (such as echocardiography and dynamic measurements of myocardial markers) were lacking from clinical examinations of patients in isolation ward or icu because of the logistical restriction at the onset of these emerging infections in wuhan. second, due to the existence of either unmeasured or unknown confounders, the causes of death or myocardial injury could be underestimated by analysis of multivariable regression. third, because the clinical observation of patients is still ongoing at the time of manuscript submission, most patients have not reached the clinical endpoint. finally, for the total number of 2 350 000 patients with covid-19 worldwide, the current sample size is still small. in order to avoid statistical bias as much as possible, data from multiple centres and larger samples are warranted to further confirm the results of the present study.myocardial injury is not an uncommon complication among patients with severe covid-19, especially among those who die. ctni and ck-mb levels predict risk for in-hospital death, and myocardial injury is associated with senior age, inflammatory response, and cardiovascular-related comorbidities.acute upper respiratory infections (uris), inclusive of acute pharyngitis, sinusitis, and tracheobronchitis, are the most common reason for antibiotic therapy in primary care and urgent care settings and account for nearly 90% of the 41 million antibiotic prescriptions per year for acute respiratory infections (ari) in the united states [1] . unfortunately, viral respiratory infections like influenza often lead to inappropriate prescribing of antibiotics, contributing to the expanding problem of microbial resistance. in addition, routine antibiotic overuse can lead to unnecessary consultations, emergency room (er) visits, allergic reactions including anaphylaxis, stevens johnson syndrome, and clostridium difficile infection [1] .clinical differentiation between a viral and bacterial uri can be challenging. diagnostic uncertainty, combined with patient or family pressures, frequently facilitates the misuse of antibiotics [1] . acute pharyngitis is primarily viral in adults, with only about 10% of patients having a bacterial cause, most commonly a group a beta-hemolytic streptococcus (gabhs) [2] . none of the symptoms, physical findings, or the clinical criteria scores are highly specific for differentiating gabhs from non-gabhs causes [3] . despite the relatively high frequency of viral pharyngitis in adults, physicians prescribe antibiotics for 78% to 98% of patients with clinical pharyngitis in an effort not to miss bacterial gabhs pharyngitis [4, 5] . furthermore, even though 90% of acute bronchitis is thought to be of viral etiology in the united states, the rate of antibiotic prescribing was shown to be between 60% and 80% [6] .rapid antigen testing, cell culture, and newer molecular tests are limited by their cost, availability, and inability to differentiate microbial colonization or carrier states from clinical infection [7] . this may result in unnecessary antibiotic prescriptions, underscoring the importance of accurately defining a clinically significant bacterial infection [3, 8, 9] .confirmation of a clinically significant active infection requires the identification of an infectious agent via antigen detection, culture growth, or molecular techniques in association with a positive immune response, whereas the lack of a systemic immune response suggests a carrier state or colonization.traditionally, paired serology is performed, necessitating 2 patient visits 2-4 weeks apart, and thus is impractical. antigen testing and molecular tests are more time efficient [10] but may overestimate the prevalence of true infection, leading to the prescription of unnecessary antibiotics [7, 8] .efficiently defining a clinically significant bacterial infection requiring antibiotic therapy is the rate-limiting step of antibiotic stewardship in the outpatient setting. biomarkers such as c-reactive protein (crp) or procalcitonin (pct) independently may identify clinically significant infections, thereby reducing the risk of missing a clinically significant bacterial infection. however, these biomarkers lack adequate specificity to differentiate a viral from a bacterial infection and ultimately lead to antibiotic overtreatment of viral infections. myxovirus resistance protein a (mxa), a protein induced by type i interferon, is selectively elevated in patients with viral infections and has the potential to greatly enhance the rapid distinction between viral and bacterial respiratory infections [7, 8] . combining crp or pct with an elevated mxa will help identify patients who most likely have viral infection, allowing physicians to consider reserving antibiotics in this patient population and proceed with a watchful, waiting strategy.major databases, including medline and the cochrane library, were searched for prospective human clinical studies, including children and/or adults published between january 1966 and november 2017 that evaluated myxovirus resistance protein a (mxa) as a biomarker for diagnosing viral infections as well as both c-reactive protein (crp) and procalcitonin (pct) as potential biomarkers for identifying and differentiating true bacterial upper respiratory infection (uri) from colonization.both viruses and bacteria may colonize the nasopharynx (np) and oropharynx (op) without causing infection. advances in molecular testing and microbial antigen detection with enhanced sensitivity may allow detection of colonization or postinfectious shedding of respiratory pathogens without clinical significance [10] . respiratory viruses, such as the herpes viruses, including epstein-barr (ebv) [11] , herpes simplex virus (hsv) [12] , and cytomegalovirus (cmv) [13] , are associated with chronic intermittent asymptomatic nucleic acid shedding.streptococcal carriers are at low risk to spread gabhs to close contacts. they do not require antibiotic treatment and are at minimal risk for development of rheumatic fever [14] . streptococcal carriage may persist for many months and frequently poses diagnostic challenges when a symptomatic viral uri develops in carriers. the low predictive value of throat swabs relates to the prevalence of carrier rates [15] , and neither the blood agar plate culture nor the rapid antigen tests can accurately differentiate individuals with true gabhs pharyngitis from gabhs carriers [16] . studies have shown that only 40%-50% of the children with gabhs isolated from the upper respiratory tract who presented with symptoms of tonsillitis or pharyngitis demonstrated a systemic immune response [16] [17] [18] .when group a strep is cultured from the op and associated with an antibody response characteristic of a true infection, crp will elevate 80%-90% of the time [15, 17] . conversely, patients with a negative initial crp test seldom show a rise in antibody titer [19] , and 96% have crp <10 mg/ml [20] . the high carrier rate of gabhs and false-positive diagnoses may contribute to the apparent "failure" rate of approximately 20% with penicillin therapy [21] . valkenburg et al. have shown that an antistreptococcal antibody titer is more accurate than a throat culture in predicting therapeutic outcome [22] .differentiation of infection from colonization requires the demonstration of an antibody response. however, proving this immune response is time-consuming and may lead to false-negative results following appropriate antibiotic therapy [23] . a study by ivaska et al. [3] showed that in 83 patients presenting with pharyngitis, there was no significant difference in the mean initial serum antistreptolysin o (aso) levels between the gabhs and non-gabhs patients and only 5 patients showed a 2-fold aso increase in paired serum samples. of the 5 patients with an antibody response, 3 of them were gabhs positive, 1 of them was gcbhs positive, and 1 was negative for streptococci by throat culture. conversely, blood mxa levels were found to be elevated in 79% of patients with viral pharyngitis and remained low in 90% of patients with gabhs without virus detection [3] .mxa expression in peripheral blood is a highly specific marker for viral infection [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] . mxa is an intracellular blood protein that mediates cellular resistance against a wide range of viruses and elevates in the presence of most acute active viral infections including influenza a and b, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenzaviruses, epstein-barrr, herpes simplex, cytomegalovirus, adenovirus, coronavirus, rhinovirus, and metapneumovirus infections. however, it is not specific to a particular type of virus [7, [25] [26] [27] 30] .interferons (ifns) are naturally occurring proteins that are an important part of the host's innate defense mechanisms and are released in response to viral infections [7, 31] . the mxa gene is expressed in blood mononuclear cells or locally in tissues, and expression is upregulated exclusively by type i ifns [25, 26] . the mxa gene does not respond to other cytokines such as il-1 or tnf-α. neither type i ifn nor mxa elevates in healthy patients or those presenting with bacterial infections [7] .in most cases of acute viral infections, type i ifn and mxa are released into the peripheral blood. detection of interferons in serum is difficult and unreliable, mainly due to their short half-life [30] . in contrast, mxa has a long half-life of 2.3 days, low baseline level of less than 15 ng/ml, and a fast induction time of 1-2 hours after infection [32] . the low basal levels of mxa protein in tissues, its exclusive expression by type i ifns, and its relatively long half-life make it an excellent biomarker for systemic ifn-α/β production in viral infections.recent studies show that other viral biomarkers, such as tnf-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (trail) and ip-10, are less effective than mxa at differentiating viral infection. trail and ip-10 show area under the curve (auc) specifically for viral infection of 0.72 and ip-10 of 0.72 [33] . other studies further support the superiority of mxa as a biomarker for identifying a viral infection, especially in uri [3, 24] .crp is a nonspecific, acute-phase protein that increases during an inflammatory process such as a severe infection. the normal crp serum concentration is less than 1-3 mg/l and can rise above 500 mg/l in the presence of severe inflammation or infection [7] . a high crp level generally indicates bacterial rather than viral infection and can also be used to assess disease severity. a systematic review of acute rhinosinusitis showed that a crp of less than 10 mg/l provided evidence against bacterial sinusitis and a crp greater than 20 mg/l showed evidence supporting bacterial sinusitis [34] . calvino et al. showed that crp elevated above 20 mg/l in nearly all cases of gabhs, ensuring that a clinically significant infection would less likely be missed, but could not differentiate viral from bacterial infection [35] . similarly, putto et al. found that in examining 62 children with positive bacterial cultures, 89% showed a crp elevated over 20 mg/l, consistent with a clinically significant bacterial infection [36] .typically, bacterial infection stimulates/elevates crp while having no impact on mxa levels [29] . crp elevates within 4-6 hours of infection, doubles every 8 hours, and peaks at approximately 36-50 hours [37] . although less common than bacterial infection, viral pathogens such as adenovirus, parainfluenzavirus, influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, epstein-barr virus, herpes simplex virus, and varicella zoster virus can raise crp levels significantly over 20 mg/l [7, 24-27, 30, 38] . therefore, a test system that utilizes both crp and mxa simultaneously can potentially differentiate viral infections from bacterial disease as the elevated crp from a viral infection would also be associated with an elevation in mxa, whereas the mxa levels would be normal in bacterial infection.pct is the peptide precursor of calcitonin, a hormone that is synthesized by the parafollicular c cells of the thyroid and regulates calcium homeostasis. standard reference values of pct in adults and children older than 72 hours are usually 0.15 ng/ml or less [39] . in response to inflammation associated with bacterial endotoxin or inflammatory cytokines, pct elevates within 2-6 hours, peaks at 12-24 hours, and has a half-life of 25-40 hours [37, 40] . higher procalcitonin levels in patients with bacterial sepsis are associated with a greater likelihood of severe sepsis, septic shock, and decreased survival [40] . colonization or carrier states without a systemic host response do not significantly raise procalcitonin levels [41] . procalcitonin levels fall with successful treatment of either severe bacterial infection or noninfectious inflammatory stimuli [40] .uris tend to cause modest elevations in pct [42, 43] . using a lower pct threshold of 0.1 ng/ml in association with polymerase chain reaction-confirmed bacterial cultures of common oral pathogens such as gabhs or atypical pathogens such as chlamydophila or mycoplasma, would suggest a true active bacterial infection. higher pct cutoffs of 0.15-0.25 ng/ml could be used in association with growth of typical bacterial colonizers or in association with a negative bacterial culture to suggest active bacterial infection in patients without another confirmed source of infection, such as a viral infection [8, 40] . the pct response to viral infections and noninfectious inflammatory stimuli such as autoimmune disease and chronic inflammatory processes typically do not exceed 0.75 ng/ml [44, 45] . branch et al. found that 17% of viral infections had a pct >0.25 ng/ml [46] . at low concentrations (<1.0 ng/ml), pct is inadequate by itself to differentiate viral from bacterial etiology [8, 47, 48] .ten prospective human studies, totaling 1683 patients, were identified that evaluated mxa as a viral biomarker in children and/or adults. both systematic review articles, meta-analyses, and randomized controlled clinical trials that examined crp and/or pct as a biomarker for identifying clinically significant bacterial infections and supporting antibiotic stewardship were identified.crp and pct levels do not correlate consistently with each other, but in primary care patients with uri, each has moderate predictive value for clinical outcome [49] . both crp and pct have been shown to elevate in infectious pharyngitis; however [42, 43] , crp is more sensitive and pct is more specific for detection of bacterial tonsillopharyngitis [43] . in most acute respiratory infections, including uri, antibiotic therapy based on either biomarker alone has led to reduced antibiotic prescriptions without increased morbidity [50] [51] [52] [53] [54] .numerous studies have delineated the utility of crp in antibiotic stewardship, specifically decreasing antibiotic prescriptions for patients with respiratory tract infections [50] [51] [52] [53] . in europe, a crp >20 mg/l is recommended in the pneumonia guidelines by the national institute for health and care excellence (nice) as a trigger for prescribing antibiotics [50] .using this crp threshold, there was no statistically significant increase in patient consultations, emergency visits, or adverse outcomes [50] . in a recent systematic review and meta-analysis of 13 studies in primary care including 10 005 patients, crp testing led to significantly reduced antibiotic prescribing at the index consultation without increasing morbidity [51] .the effect of crp testing on the outcome of patients in general practice was evaluated in a recent randomized clinical trial. a total of 179 patients were included, 101 in the crp measurement group and 78 in the control group. results suggested that crp testing in patients with acute cough may reduce antibiotic prescribing and referral for radiography without compromising outcome [55] . similar results have been demonstrated in identifying patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) exacerbations who do not need antibiotic treatment [56] .clinical trials using pct to guide antibiotic therapy for patients with acute respiratory tract infections have shown that a biomarker-driven algorithm can decrease antibiotic prescribing significantly and without an increase in adverse events or treatment failures [57] [58] [59] [60] [61] [62] . pct-guided antibiotic stewardship reduced initial antibiotic prescription rates by 40% to 50% in patients with lower respiratory infection (lri) presenting to the emergency departments [61] , 70% to 80% in ambulatory patients presenting to their general physicians [63] , and reduced total antibiotic exposure in community-acquired pneumonia by 40% to 50% [64] . in a single-center randomized controlled study, a significant reduction in antibiotic use in patients hospitalized with severe acute exacerbations of asthma was shown utilizing an algorithm of pct measurements. in this study, withholding antibiotic treatment did not cause any apparent harm [65] .several clinical studies have verified that high mxa protein levels are strongly correlated with a systemic viral infection while elevated crp levels are more closely associated with bacterial disease [3, 7, 8, [24] [25] [26] . simultaneously performing crp and mxa should predictably increase sensitivity and specificity for identifying bacterial disease.combining mxa detection with a marker specific to bacterial infection, such as crp, could be of greater predictive value and allow more reliable differentiation between viral and bacterial infections than using a marker of bacterial infection alone [7, 8, 24] . a high mxa with or without an elevated crp would strongly suggest a viral infectious process and the absence of a bacterial infection [24] . unlike the common occurrence of incidental identification of multiple pathogens in the op or np, true active co-infection that leads to a systemic viral and bacterial immune response is not common in uri [1, 8] . if both viral and bacterial pathogens are identified, an associated pct ≥0.75 ng/ml or crp ≥100 mg/l may support a diagnosis of a true co-infection result. others have suggested that a defined ratio of crp/mxa would optimize differentiation between a viral and bacterial infection [3] .rapid crp tests are shown to promote more prudent use of antibiotics in primary care and have led to a 19% reduction in antibiotic prescriptions [66] . a prospective, multicenter, cross-sectional study of adults and children with febrile uris evaluated the diagnostic accuracy of a 15-minute, single-use disposable immunoassay that includes both crp and mxa (febridx; rps diagnostics, sarasota, fl) [8] . during a multicenter, us-based study that enrolled 370 patients, 205 symptomatic patients with uri and 165 asymptomatic patients from 10 clinical sites, including academic emergency departments and community care centers, demonstrated a 97% negative predictive value (npv) for bacterial infection. also, the use of crp independent of mxa would have led to overtreatment of 38% of viral infections [8] . the pattern of results from test systems with crp or pct combined with mxa may assist health care professionals to identify an immune response to a suspected viral and/or bacterial infection and greatly enhance antibiotic stewardship in the outpatient setting [7, 24] . this was recently demonstrated in a febridx study of 21 children and adults (mean age = 46 years) that evaluated the use of mxa plus crp as a guide for outpatient antibiotic management. therapy was altered in 48%, and unnecessary antibiotic prescriptions were reduced by 80% without any adverse effects [9] .the value of inpatient antibiotic stewardship is embraced by many professional societies such as the idsa and the center for disease control and prevention (cdc). there are presently several recommendations, guidelines, and requirements from some licensing organizations that continue to be updated as diagnostics evolve and outcome measurements improve [67] . the current focus on inpatients fits well with existing hospital surveillance programs and the ability to identify multiply drug-resistant organisms.inpatient stewardship is driven in part by modern microbiology, which is often not available or impractical in the outpatient setting. outpatient stewardship is also critical, but more difficult to implement. according to the cdc and american college of physicians, up to 50% of antibiotic courses prescribed in the outpatient setting are inappropriate and completely unnecessary. this equates to more than $3 billion in direct costs. additionally, billions of indirect costs include: (1) antibiotic-resistant illnesses, (2) antibiotic adverse events, and (3) secondary infections with clostridium difficile diarrhea [1] .a major obstacle to effective outpatient antibiotic stewardship and appropriate antibiotic prescribing is the difficulty in accurately defining the microbial cause of respiratory infections, especially distinguishing viral from bacterial etiology. this diagnosis is even more challenging when rapid tests identify bacterial pathogens present in the carrier state. additionally, attempts to differentiate bacterial from viral infections using only the history and physical findings are inaccurate about one-half of the time [64] . patients may also have symptoms mimicking an infectious process, which is actually caused by hypersensitivity, especially rhinovirus and coronavirus acting directly as allergens, eliciting an ige elevated response. this may lead to low-grade fevers and exacerbation of reactive airway disease in predisposed patients with a history of underlying allergies, atopy, asthma, or copd [68, 69] . lastly, patient expectations of therapy present another challenge to overcome in the outpatient setting. in 1 study, up to 50% of parents had a previsit expectation of receiving an antibiotic [70] . when patients expect or demand antibiotics, they are more likely to receive them even though patients' satisfaction may not be affected by prescribing of antibiotics [53] .one approach to improve appropriate outpatient antibiotic use is to supplement the history and physical examination with point-of-care tests for selected biomarkers. biomarkers such as crp, pct, and mxa respond differently to the host immune response and can help distinguish viral from a bacterial infection, including noninfectious causes of symptoms. at low levels, crp and pct are sensitive but not specific to bacterial infection, while at high levels, both crp and pct become more specific to bacterial infection. although pct and crp are not specific enough to differentiate a viral from bacterial infection, these biomarkers in combination with mxa substantially improve the differential diagnostic accuracy [7, 9, 24] . the combined interpretation of mxa with either crp or pct dramatically improves both sensitivity and specificity for differentiating a viral from bacterial infection [7, 8] .a rapid point-of-care test that measures both crp and mxa is available in europe and canada, but not currently in the united states. utilization results of the febridx test in outpatient clinical practice are impressively encouraging, including diagnostic accuracy and positive impact on appropriate antibiotic prescribing [9] . the 97% npv reduces the clinician's fear of missing a serious bacterial infection and supports watchful waiting, while the ability to demonstrate tangible results at the office visit can relieve patient pressures for antibiotic prescriptions [9] . a recent survey estimates that 85% of us primary care clinicians currently use a rapid strep test and 60% use a rapid flu test, oftentimes in the same patient [71] . a rapid point-ofcare test utilizing detection of both mxa and crp without any required ancillary reader equipment would likely reduce the need for rapid strep and flu testing and provide direct cost savings while reducing indirect costs related to the cost of unnecessary antibiotics themselves, adverse events, and potential resistance.in summary, it is critically important that antibiotic stewardship rapidly move into the outpatient setting. diagnostic algorithms based solely on history and physical are historically inaccurate for many common outpatient syndromes. incorporating point-of-care testing with a combination of biomarkers such as crp and mxa can be extremely useful as an important adjunct to traditional methods. further studies should be directed toward the delineation of biomarker utility in the outpatient setting.the coronavirus (covid-19) is perhaps the greatest challenge of mankind in the twenty-first century. the development of the disease, its transmission, and the increased mortality in a number of countries, make it imperative to develop treatment, but also to protect health care and society from the transmission of the disease. therefore, remote control of the disease, including diagnosis, early quarantine, and follow-up, is essential. artificial intelligence can contribute to the above perspectives. recent studies claim to achieve precise results regarding the automatic detection of the disease from thoracic x-ray scans [1] [2] [3] . although the research is limited due to the absence of large scale image data, the first results are encouraging and necessitate further investigation and research.although the diagnosis is increasingly becoming a rapid process, the financial issues arising from the cost of diagnostic tests concern both states and patients, especially in countries with private health systems, or restricted access health systems due to prohibitive prices.during the first months of 2020, there has been an increase in publicly available patient data, including x-ray images. possible patterns and knowledge mined from the x-ray scans may constitute a possible pipeline for the diagnosis of covid-19.τhe development of deep learning applications enables the researchers to perform a rapid and deep analysis on the x-ray scans. deep learning is a combination of machine learning methods mainly focused on the automatic feature extraction and classification from images, while its applications are broadly met in medical image detection, segmentation, and classification tasks. machine learning and deep learning have become established disciplines in applying artificial intelligence to mine, analyze, and recognize patterns from data. reclaiming the advances of those fields to the benefit of clinical decision making and computer-aided systems is increasingly becoming nontrivial, as new data emerge [4] .deep learning for pattern recogtition in images is a learning method, wherein deep convolutional neural networks (cnn) are utilized for automatic mass feature extraction, achieved by the process called convolution [5] . each layer involves a transformation of the data into a higher and more abstract level. higher layers (i.e., deep layers) of portrayal enhance parts of the information that are significant for segregation and smother unimportant attributes. due to the unlimited parameters mined during this process, several methods have been proposed to achieve dimensionality reduction, such as pooling [5] .motivated by the recent and relative research, in this study, we focus on circumventing two vital issues arisen in the detection of covid-19 from x-ray scans. the first issue is related to the methodology of the experimental setups. in essence, the researches have demonstrated that the detection of covid-19 is achievable, but this conclusion derives from an analysis based on incomplete data. τhe models proposed are powerful in classifying images between only three classes (viral and bacterial pneumonia, covid-19, normal). this, unfortunately, does not demonstrate the existence of a clear fingerprint of the coronavirus in x-ray images, firstly, due to the insignificant database size and, secondly, due to the fact that the fingerprints of other pulmonary diseases have not been compared. the second issue is related to the flaws of deep learning and is often referred to as the issue of interpretability [6] . in short, the algorithm is not transparent, thereby a radiologist cannot supervise and know which factors or indices were utilized by the model to reach to a decision.to further evaluate the methodology of deep learning, we perform an experiment utilizing six of the most common pulmonary diseases, including that of covid-19. in this way, the capabilities of the method in distinguishing between the various diseases is evaluated. besides, the dataset of the particular experiment is significant, including approximately 450 cases of covid-19. to contribute to the latter referred issue (i.e., the interpretability), we perform three different experiments altering the mining methods to inspect the variance of the extracted features.specifically, the state-of-the-art cnn called mobile net (v2) is employed to extract features from the images in three different ways, as follows: (a) training from scratch, (b) feature extraction via transfer learning (or of-the-selffeatures), and (c) hybrid feature extraction via fine-tuning. those methods are explained in sect. 2.2.due to the absence of a complete x-ray dataset containing not only common pneumonia or other diseases, but also cases of diagnosed covid-19, the final dataset of this experiment is a combination of x-rays corresponding to common pulmonary diseases recorded during the last years and confirmed covid-19 cases recorded from january 2020 to march 2020.the results of the present research further enhance the research to date. in particular, it is highlighted that with the strategy of training from scratch, the cnn succeeds in mining significant image features, discovered solely in the particular x-ray images. based on these characteristics (features), 88% accuracy in classification of the relative diseases and ~ 99% accuracy in diagnosis of covid is achieved. this may prove that these features are biomarkers and need further analysis, as they may be gene or other signatures.for the creation of the dataset, the research focused on obtaining x-rays corresponding to confirmed cases infected by the virus sars-cov-2. through extensive research, a collection of 455 well-visualized, confirmed pathological x-ray images was created. the final collection includes selected x-rays from a repository created by dr. cohen [7] , and publically available medical image repositories, such as the radiological society of north america (rsna), radiopaedia, and the italian society of medical and interventional radiology (sirm). the latter association released a publically available covid-19 dataset [8] , which was also incorporated.to train and evaluate the classification method in more complex conditions, a collection of conventional bacterial and viral pneumonia x-ray scans was added to the dataset. this collection is available on the internet by kermany et al. [9] .a selection of 910 related x-ray images, which were randomly selected, was incorporated into the dataset.it is impossible to investigate the performance of any classification method in detecting the covid-19 disease unless other pulmonary diseases are incorporated. for this reason, the final dataset includes selected x-ray scans corresponding to other pulmonary abnormalities.the national institutes of health (nih) x-ray dataset was exploited, which is referred to as nih dataset for the particular experiment, and comprises 112.120 frontal-view x-ray images of 30.805 unique patients with the text-mined fourteen disease image labels [10] .those images are extracted from the clinical pacs database at the national institutes of health clinical center in america. the corresponding diseases were mined from the associated radiological reports using natural language processing. the labels contain fourteen common thoracic pathologies include atelectasis, consolidation, infiltration, pneumothorax, edema, emphysema, fibrosis, effusion, pneumonia, pleural thickening, cardiomegaly, nodule, mass and hernia. this dataset is significantly more representative of the real patient population distributions and realistic clinical diagnosis challenges, than any previous chest x-ray datasets. the dataset comes with annotated metadata info, consisting of several risk associated factors.a significant limitation of this dataset is the labeling policy, which may raise some concerns. more specifically, the medical reports were analyzed by an automatic text-mining model, which assigned the corresponding labels according to its text-mining procedure. however, as the authors claim, "there would be some erroneous labels, but the natural language processing (nlp) labeling accuracy is estimated to be > 90%" [10] .for the particular experiment, the following disease cases were selected: (a) pulmonary edema, (b) pleural effusion, (c) chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, (d) pulmonary fibrosis. the selection was based on the significance and frequency of those diseases. analytically, 293 images representing the pulmonary edema, 311 images representing the pleural effusion, 315 images representing the chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), and 280 images representing the pulmonary fibrosis were randomly chosen from the collection.the x-ray images were rescaled to a size of 200 × 200. for the images of different pixel ratios and to avoid distortion, black background of 200 × 200 pixels was added to achieve a complete transformation. low contrast images or images containing parts of the whole thoracic x-ray scan were excluded.during the training process, slight augmentations were applied to the images. data augmentation is mandatory to generate the necessary diversity aiding to the generalization capabilities of the cnns [11] . specifically, the images are randomly rotated by a maximum of 10° and randomly shifted horizontally or vertically by a maximum of 20 pixels towards any direction. in this way, the cnn learns to be robust to position and orientation variance.the present collection of data faces some limitations, which have to be mentioned. firstly, a relatively small sample of covid-19-infected cases is incorporated. besides, this sample may derive from patient cases with severe symptoms, the analysis of which was mandatory. cases with slight symptoms are missing from the current public collections, which is due to the policy of protecting people (and society) who have mild symptoms of the disease, and are immediately quarantined without further examination.secondly, the pneumonia incidence samples are older recorded samples and do not represent pneumonia images from patients with suspected coronavirus symptoms, while the clinical conditions are missing.thirdly, further data related to demographic characteristics and other potential predisposing or risk factors are not available, and this impedes a holistic approach and examination beyond the medical image.there are currently major techniques that successfully employ cnns to medical image classification, by extracting features, as follows: (a) training the cnn from scratch, (b) employing a pre-trained cnn, which is called transfer learning [12] , and (c) a hybrid method, which also a transfer learning method, while it adopts the former strategies by tuning the trainability of specific layers of the cnn; this method is called fine-tuning [13] .the first strategy may be adopted either by developing a novel cnn architecture, or by employing the architecture of a successful cnn. in this study, we employ a state-of-the-art cnn architecture, to follow each of the strategies.the second and the third strategy are means of transfer learning. transfer learning is a machine learning method wherein a model developed for a specific task is reused for another task. there are two categories to perform the transfer learning, i.e. the of-the-self feature extraction and fine-tuning. the off-the-self strategy is an approach utilizing the weights of the convolutional layers, which are defined from the source task (the initial training of another domain) without re-training the network [14] . extracting such features is usually fast and this approach requires only the addition of a classifier to perform the classification of those features with respect to their significance in the particular task.the fine-tuning strategy involves utilizing a network initialized with pre-trained weights and partially re-training it on the target task. in the context of deep learning, fine-tuning a deep network is a common strategy to learn both taskspecific deep features, and retain the methodology to extract global features met in every image, such as shapes. usually, the fine-tuning strategy allows more trainable weights at the top of the network (i.e., the final steps), due to the fact that those convolutional layers extract more abstract and high-level information, compared to the first layers wherein local features are learned. in the particular experiment, we gradually allow more layers to be trainable, by defining six experimental cases, referred to as fine-tuning (e.g., 11), where the number in the parenthesis corresponds to the number of trainable convolutional blocks.for the classification task, the state-of-the-art cnn called mobile net [15] was employed. mobile net has been recently utilized for the same classification task by apostolopoulos [3] . in their work, the authors demonstrated the superiority of mobile net in reducing the false negatives for the detection of covid-19, compared to other famous cnns. besides, this cnn introduces a fewer number of parameters compared to other cnns, which makes it appropriate for swift training. the mobilenet [15] model is based on depthwise separable convolutions [16] , which is a form of convolutions transforming a conventional convolution into a depthwise convolution [16] and a 1 × 1 convolution, which is commonly known pointwise convolution [16] . this procedure reduces the number of parameters drastically.to the top of the mobile net v2, a global average pooling [17] layer was added, which drastically reduces the issue of overfitting [18] . the extracted image features are inserted into a neural network of 2500 nodes to distinguish between the irrelevant and the significant ones. to further aid to the overfitting reduction, the weights of each feature are normalized utilizing a batch normalization layer [19] , while we independently zero out the 50% of the outputs of neurons at random, via a dropout layer [20] . an overview of the method is illustrated in fig. 1 .the intention of the particular study is not only to achieve a high classification accuracy, but to achieve this by training the cnn from scratch. this strategy is preferable to transfer learning to evaluate the significance of the features extracted from the precise images, while it is not depending on features already learned by the pre-trained model, the initial training of which, was performed utilizing non-medical images.based on the results, the extracted features may be evaluated to conclude that they may constitute real image biomarkers related to various diseases. we performed a set of three different experiments employing the same cnn (mobile net v2), but altering the learning strategy. the following strategies are evaluated: (a) transfer learning with of-the-self features, (b) transfer learning with fine-tuning, and (c) training from scratch, which, in this experiment, is a latent form of the transfer learning, since we only borrow the architecture of the mobile net and not the learned parameters. the experiments were performed utilizing a single gpu setup (nvidia geforce rtx 2060 super) using the keras library [21] and tensorflow [22] as backend.the training and evaluation procedure was performed with ten fold-cross-validation. during this procedure, the dataset is randomly split to ten folds, nine of which are utilized for training the model, and the remaining fold is hidden and used to test the performance and the confidence of the predictions after the training. this process is repeated in a way that every fold is utilized as the test set. this increases the computational cost but enhances the significance of the result. the final accuracy is obtained by calculating the mean accuracy derived from each testing fold.the metrics, based upon which the evaluation of the performance is made, are the overall 7-class accuracy, and the accuracy corresponding to the 2-class classification (covid-19 vs. non-covid- 19) .besides, to focus on the performance of covid-19 detection, the following values are recorded: (a) correctly predicted covid-19 cases (true positives), (b) correctly predicted non-covid-19 cases (true negatives), (c) incorrectly predicted covid-19 cases (false positives), and (d) incorrectly predicted non-covid-19 cases (false negatives). based on those values, the sensitivity and specificity of the test are calculated by the following equations:for the particular experiments and given that there is a class imbalance issue, the most reliable metric is that of the 7-class accuracy, while given that this accuracy is high, the second most vital metric is that of specificity. this is due to the importance of correctly identifying the actual non-covid-19 cases (true negatives). in this section, the results for the different experiment setups are presented. based on those results, the optimal strategy is selected, and assumptions are made regarding its effectiveness.in table 1 , the accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of the first strategy are given. the reader should recall that the 2-class accuracy refers to the case where the labels are "covid-19" and "non-covid-19". besides, the sensitivity and the specificity refer to the 2-class measurement.due to the class imbalance, the metric of specificity was approaching 100% and was not mentioned in table 1 , as it is not a meaningful measurement when reaching those values. the same issue is valid for the 2-class accuracy but was mentioned in table 1 for comparisons. the confusion matrix for each class is presented in table 2 .the confusion matrix corresponding to the covid-19 class vs. all the classes is presented in table 3 .based on the results, it is confirmed that the particular strategy is not effective in extracting useful features to distinguish possible underlying information from the x-rays related to the covid-19 disease. besides, a bias towards the non-covid-19 cases is observed in table 3 , which makes the strategy not appropriate for the particular task.in table 4 , the accuracy, the sensitivity, and the specificity of the second strategy are given. the reader should recall that several adjustments for fine-tuning are tested in the particular section, which are discussed in sect. 2.2. the number defining each experimental case, refers to the number of blocks made trainable during the experiment, e.g., "fine-tuning 3" corresponds to 3 trainable blocks starting from the top of the cnn. the reader should also recall that the values for the accuracy are the mean values of the accuracies obtained at each fold from the tenfoldcross-validation procedure. as it is observed in table 4 , the strategy of fine-tuning obtains different results. this is explained by the fact that we gradually allow more layers to be trainable, thus approaching close to the strategy of training from scratch, which obtains the best results, as it is presented in sect. 3.3. hence, the confusion matrixes are not provided due to insignificance and limitations of space.in table 5 , the accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of the specific strategy are presented.in table 5 , it is observed that training from scratch outperforms the other strategies in terms of every metric, obtaining a remarkable 2-class accuracy of 99.18% and a high 7-class accuracy of 86.66%. the reader should recall that 2-class accuracy refers to the effectiveness of distinguishing the covid-19 cases from every other case, including both abnormal and normal cases. in table 6 , the confusion matrix for the 7-class task is presented.several outcomes are to be highlighted in table 6 . firstly, out of 455 covid-19 cases, 443 cases were correctly identified, while only 2 cases were mistakenly classified as normal. secondly, out of the 1341 normal cases, only 1 case was mistakenly identified. for the rest of the pulmonary abnormalities, there is a diversity, which may derive from the fact that the different pathogens embody seals that are difficult to distinguish from the x-rays and confuse the cnn.the confusion matrix corresponding to the covid-19 class vs. all the classes is presented in table 7 .the classification obtains an excellent trade-off between the corresponding true positives, false positives, true negatives, and false negatives.the particular research focuses on discovering possible image biomarkers from x-ray images. these biomarkers may be significantly related to the covid-19 disease.while deep learning extracts a massive amount of high-dimensional features from images, it is possible that some of those features behave as actual image biomarkers. the reader may be confused by the difference between a feature and an image biomarker. therefore, we briefly describe the difference between them. a feature is a specific characteristic of an image, either well-defined in the covid19  21  0  1  1  0  1  0  edema  270  254  210  199  155  171  136  effusion  4  5  24  4  6  0  1  emphys  15  16  34  49  31  4  7  fibrosis  46  17  35  50  78  3  18  pneumonia  91  1  3  4  2  712  287  normal  8  0  4  8  8  19 892 literature or yet to be defined as to its importance. with deep learning, it is possible to extract millions of related features. the extracted features' importance to the specific task is questionable. the majority of those features may be irrelevant to the desired outcome, or the desired subject of study and are rejected by the automatic classification performed after the convolutional layers of a cnn. the biomarkers are quantitative markers of confirmed significance and are not limited to the image features [23] . generally, the ability of deep learning for image biomarker extraction is questionable due to the issue of the interpretability. this study suggests that it may be possible to discover new reliable biomarkers from x-ray images due to the fact that a high classification accuracy was achieved. since the cnns and the neural networks lay on the evaluation of millions of parameters to classify the significant features, some of those features may actually be image biomarkers leading to a reliable result. this horizon in to be investigated in future research, possibly exploring other approaches, such as radiomics [24] .οne factor that underpins the conclusion mentioned above, is the comparison between the various image feature mining strategies. in particular, it is demonstrated that those strategies do not mine the same features. this can be easily interpreted, since with strategies of transfer learning with of-the-self-features and transfer learning with fine-tuning, the ability of the cnn to extract significant features depends on factors related to the initial training. the initial training was mandatory to be performed on images of a completely different nature due to the absence of large-scale data. however, despite the fact that the latter strategies have excellent performances in other medical image classification tasks [12, 25] , in the particular experiment, they were underperforming. this may suggest that with the training from scratch, essential features related to the pulmonary abnormalities have been mined, which may constitute relevant biomarkers.in future studies, some issues of the present study can be circumvented. a more in-depth analysis, in particular, requires much more patient data, particularly those suffering from covid-19.a more promising approach for future studies would concentrate on identifying patients infected by covid-19, but showing mild symptoms, although those symptoms may not be visualized correctly on x-rays, or may not be visualized at all.it is of vital importance to establish models capable of distinguishing between a more significant numbers of pulmonary diseases, possibly including that of sars. also, despite the fact that the appropriate treatment is not determined solely from an x-ray image [26] , an initial screening of the cases would be useful, not in the type of treatment, but in the timely application of quarantine measures in the positive samples, until a complete examination and specific treatment or follow-up procedure are followed.the contribution of this work is twofold. firstly, low-cost, rapid, and automatic detection of the covid-19 disease was achieved, utilizing a significantly large sample of several pulmonary infections. it was demonstrated that the various infections may be distinguished by a computer-aided diagnostic system, utilizing deep features extracted by deep learning methods. this strategy may be beneficial for medical-decision assisting tools to provide a second opinion in challenging cases. it could be also applied to achieve an intact first assessment of the likelihood of disease in patients with either suspected or no symptoms. besides, the predicted classes  covid19  443  1  4  4  7  3  1  edema  1  232  36  34  11  0  0  effusion  2  31  161  58  37  0  0  emphys  3  12  54  156  40  0  0  fibrosis  3  17  56  63  184  0  0  pneumonia  1  0  0  0  1  907  0  normal  2  0  0  0  0  0  1340   table 7 confusion matrix for the 2-class classification employing the strategy of training mobile net v2 from scratch actual classnon-covid-19predicted covid-19 443 20 predicted non-covid- 19 12 advantage of automatic detection of covid-19 from either medical image lies in the reduction of exposure of nursing and medical staff to the outbreak. secondly, the study suggests that future research should be conducted to investigate the possible behavior of the extracted features as biomarkers, since there is sufficient evidence, based on the particular results. the three training strategies were employed to evaluate the significance of the extracted features of each strategy. the strategy of allowing the deep cnn to learn new characteristics and features from the specific images resulted in an excellent performance over the other approaches, wherein features are extracted based on mined knowledge from non-medical images, or images unrelated to pulmonary diseases. this underlines the uniqueness of the extracted features and marks them as possible biomarkers.author contributions ai and as conceived the idea. the experiments were conducted by ai. the manuscript preparation was performed by ai, tm, and as. all authors commented on previous versions of the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.the study received no external funding.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) emerged in wuhan (china) in december 2019 and was declared pandemic by the world health organization (who) in march 2020.it has been hypothesized that cd4-and cd8-positive cells play a crucial role in defence against coronavirus, together with activated b cells producing specific antibodies and proinflammatory cytokines.elevated serum concentrations of proinflammatory cytokines and oxidative stress mediators participate in lung injury, facilitating acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) in severe patients. host susceptibility and virus-induced direct cytopathic effects against type i and ii pneumocytes mediate lung damage.krebs von den lungen-6 (kl-6) is a high molecular weight glycoprotein, elevated in serum of patients with interstitial lung diseases (ilds), such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and hypersensitivity pneumonitis. it is mainly produced by damaged or regenerating alveolar type ii pneumocytes. 1 this mucin protein is recognized as a prognostic bioindicator of ilds, predicting response to antifibrotic therapies. [2] [3] [4] it has also been proposed as a prognostic marker of ards: high kl-6 concentrations have been demonstrated in ventilated patients and showed a correlation with risk of mortality. 5 kl-6 serum levels in ards may reflect the alveolar epithelial cell damage induced by mechanical ventilatory support. 5 high peripheral levels of this protein have also been reported in legionella, pneumocystis jivorecii infections, 6,7 and measles-associated pneumonia, 8 as well as in viral pneumonia. 9 this preliminary study analyzed serum concentrations of kl-6 for the first time in a population of hospitalized coronavirus disease (covid-19) patients to verify its potential as a prognostic biomarker of severity. years, six males) were also enrolled. they had no history of concomitant pathologies and were not on any medication. they had normal lung function test parameters and normal chest x-ray.all patients gave their written informed consent to the study.the study was approved by our local ethics committee (biobanca-miu-2010).serum samples were obtained from all patients at hospital admission before any biological treatment or infusion of high-dose intravenous steroids or invasive ventilation. serum concentrations of kl-6 (skl-6)were measured by kl-6 reagent assay (fujirebio europe, uk), as previously reported. 2, 4, 10 the principle of the assay is agglutination of sialylated carbohydrate antigen in samples with kl-6 monoclonal antibody by antigen-antibody reaction. the change in absorbance was measured to determine kl-6 concentrations, which were expressed in u/ml. the data did not show a normal distribution. one-way analysis of variance nonparametric test (kruskal-wallis test) and dunn test were used for multiple comparisons. the mann-whitney test was used to compare pairs of variables. the χ 2 test was used for categorical variables as appropriate. immunological data were also compared between the severe and nonsevere groups, assessing areas under the receiver operating characteristic (roc) curves (auc). 55-100; p = .0425; figure 1a ) and the best cut-off value was 119 cells/µl (71% sensitivity and 92% specificity). in this study, kl-6 was analyzed for the first time in a population of patients with covid-19. serum concentrations of kl-6 were only elevated in severe patients admitted to the icu and requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation for diffuse interstitial pneumonia, and not in mild-moderate patients with less severe respiratory impairment.patients with mild-moderate covid interstitial pneumonia showed serum concentrations of kl-6 similar to those of healthy controls.although these results are preliminary (this was a monocentric study with a limited number of patients), they are of interest because kl-6 emerged as a potential prognostic biomarker readily detected in serum of covid-19 patients and helpful for phenotyping patients according to disease severity.this mucin protein has been widely studied in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and patients with ards but limited data have so far been available on its prognostic potential in infective pneumonia. 1, 5, 9 no data have hitherto been available on its pattern in coronavirus-induced interstitial pneumonia. our interest was aroused by the observation that severe cases (n = 12) nonsevere cases (n = 10) p-value this study was generated within the european reference network for rare respiratory diseases (ern-lung). the study was performed at siena university.respiratory infection is a common reason among children for seeking care [1]. the majority of respiratory infections in children are caused by viruses [2]. nevertheless, viral and bacterial infections are hard to distinguish clinically, causing many children with viral infections or self-limiting bacterial infections to receive unnecessary antibiotic treatment, which contributes to the development and spread of antibiotic resistance [3,4]. there is a need for new biomarkers that better distinguish viral infections from antibiotic-requiring bacterial infections in children presenting with clinical community-acquired pneumonia (cap) and that assist health care workers in decision making and improving the rational use of antibiotics [5].c-reactive protein (crp), procalcitonin (pct), and white blood cell (wbc) count are the most commonly used inflammatory markers in clinical practice for the management of children with suspected cap [6,7]. there is increasing evidence that pct is superior to crp as a screening test for serious bacterial infection given the favorable kinetics, including a more rapid response to inflammation [8]. however, neither of the biomarkers have been proven to be reliable in differentiating between mild or moderate bacterial and viral cap [9,10]. a wbc count of 15,000/μl has been suggested as a cutoff to differentiate between viral and bacterial etiologies. however, critically ill patients with neutropenia will not have an increased wbc count, and certain viruses such as influenza and adenovirus can elicit a strong immune response with a high wbc count greater than 15,000/μl [11]. neither is a complete blood count reliable in differentiating between bacterial and viral cap in children [6]. to date, most biomarkers used in clinical practice have been selected for their ability to identify serious bacterial infections, and there is a need for novel biomarkers that can reliably detect viral infections [12].myxovirus resistance protein a (mxa) is an intracellular protein that is upregulated upon activation of the antiviral defense system. increased blood mxa has been reported to be specific for viral infection [13-15]. there is a commercially available rapid diagnostic test, febridx, that qualitatively detects mxa and crp at cutoffs of 40 ng/ml and 20 mg/ml, respectively. the test has been reported to have 85% (29/34) sensitivity and 93.4% (183/196) specificity to rule out a bacterial infection in patients (adults and children) with febrile respiratory infection [16]. however, no studies have focused on mxa in children with cap. it was previously shown that virus-positive asymptomatic children had lower mxa levels as compared with virus-positive symptomatic children with respiratory symptoms [14]. as current viral real-time polymerase chain reaction (pcr) testing of upper respiratory specimens (ie, the routine method for diagnosing respiratory tract infections) is complicated by frequent asymptomatic detection, mxa has the potential to facilitate the interpretation of viral pcr positivity in terms of clinical relevance in children with cap [17].defining etiology in childhood cap is complex [18]. until recently, our conception of cap etiology has largely relied on early lung-aspirate studies from the 1970s to 1980s [19]. vaccination against streptococcus pneumoniae and haemophilus influenzae type b, the 2 major causative agents in childhood cap, has been introduced in most parts of the world during the last two decades, coinciding with a global decrease in childhood cap mortality [20]. this has also contributed to a shift in the etiology of cap [21,22]. other important factors include a globally improved socioeconomic and nutritional status, a sharp decrease in the incidence of measles, and the emergence of hiv [5]. recently, new cap etiology studies, including the large-scale pneumonia etiology research for child health (perch) study, have been conducted, mostly with a low-income country focus [21-24]. these have pointed toward an underestimation of viral and mixed viral-bacterial etiologies, which is likely explained by the aforementioned shift in etiology but also by the recent advances in viral diagnostics [25]. moreover, bordetella pertussis and bordetella parapertussis, the causative agents of whooping cough, have been associated with cap [21,26]. these bacteria are highly contagious and can cause severe disease, particularly in infants [27]. recent studies have reported an increasing incidence of b pertussis, and there have been several deaths in previously healthy infants associated with whooping cough in sweden over the last 10 years [28,29]. consequently, there is a need for new updated studies on cap etiology in various settings.current treatment options with antivirals for respiratory viruses are limited. however, there are several new antivirals that are being developed [30], and furthermore, there is a value in diagnosing viral infections to predict the clinical course and infectivity and to give confidence to withhold the prescription of antibiotics. real-time pcr is a sensitive molecular-based method that is currently considered gold standard for the detection of respiratory viruses in children with respiratory tract infection [25]. nevertheless, as pcr usually has to be run in central laboratories and requires complex instrumentation, the turnaround time can be long and the test results are rarely used for decision making regarding treatment at the point of care. there are currently several new antigen-based point-of-care tests for respiratory infections on the market. one is the multianalyte point-of-care antigen detection test system (maripoc) respi, arcdia international oy ltd, that uses a 2-photon excitation assay technique to detect 10 different respiratory viruses (influenza a/b, respiratory syncytial virus [rsv], adenovirus, bocavirus, coronavirus, human metapneumovirus [hmpv], and parainfluenza virus [piv] 1-3) [31]. the advantage of the test is that it gives a preliminary result of strongly positive samples already after 20 min and a final result (including negative results) within 2 hours, which potentially allows for immediate treatment considerations. in children, the maripoc respi’s sensitivity for rsv and influenza virus has been reported to be as high as 90% as compared with pcr, but the sensitivity for less common respiratory viruses, such as hmpv and piv, and the newly included coronavirus and bocavirus has been insufficiently investigated [32,33].recombinase polymerase amplification (rpa) is a nucleic acid amplification technique that does not require thermal cycling. an rpa-based point-of-care test could combine the advantage of high sensitivity with short turnaround time. an rpa-based test using a paper-based vertical flow microarray technique is currently being developed by our partners at the science for life laboratory (scilifelab) [34-37]. as the test reaction is carried out at room temperature, it is an interesting method for resource-limited settings where the need for new diagnostic tests is particularly high [38,39].studies on the long-term outcomes of radiologically confirmed bacterial cap have indicated that the disease is associated with later development of asthma and decreased lung function [40,41]. however, most of these studies have followed children who were born more than two decades ago, and the risk might therefore not generalize to a modern setting, given the reported shift in etiology of pediatric cap [42]. hence, there is a need for new studies of long-term complications from pediatric cap, such as the development of asthma and the risk for future respiratory infections.in summary, there is a need for (1) assessing the diagnostic accuracy of mxa as a biomarker for viral childhood cap; (2) new studies on clinical cap etiology in children; (3) evaluating the antigen-based point-of-care test maripoc; (4) evaluating a novel rpa-based point-of-care test developed at scilifelab; and (v) assessing long-term complications from cap, including the risk of developing asthma and the risk for future respiratory infections.the overarching aim of the trial of respiratory infections in children for enhanced diagnostics (trend) study is to improve the differential diagnosis of bacterial and viral etiologies in children aged below 5 years with clinical cap. the specific objectives of the study are as follows:the trend study is a hospital-based, prospective observational study of children with clinical cap and asymptomatic controls. the study will take place at sachs’ children and youth hospital, stockholm, which has one of the largest pediatric emergency departments in sweden with over 30,000 visits each year. the study is planned to be conducted from november 2017 to december 2019. the study is registered at clinicaltrials.gov (id: nct03233516) july 28, 2017.children aged 1 to 59 months with clinical cap (both severe and nonsevere) according to the world health organization (who) criteria are enrolled as cases (figure 1). the inclusion criteria (all inclusion criteria to be met to be eligible for participation in the study) are as follows: age 1 to 59 months, reported or observed breathing troubles/coughing, observed age-adjusted tachypnea (≥50 breaths/min in children aged 1-12 months, ≥40/min in children aged >1 year) or chest indrawing, and written informed consent. the exclusion criteria are as follows: previously included as a case in the study or hospitalized during the previous 14 days. inhalation with a rapid-acting bronchodilator (≥1 dose in children aged <2 years and ≥3 doses in children aged 2-4 years) will be administered to children with wheezing and chest indrawing to improve the specificity of the who clinical cap criteria, as suggested by the perch study team [43]. resolved chest indrawing after bronchodilator challenge will be recorded but not considered as an exclusion criterion to be able to exclude these patients in a subanalysis as well as to analyze these patients separately.children aged 1 to 59 months treated for a minor orthopedic (elective, eg, hand surgery, or acute) or minor surgical disease, for example, minor trauma (excluding appendicitis, major burns, major trauma, etc) are enrolled as controls. no formal matching will be performed, but age and season will be considered in the analyses. the exclusion criteria are symptoms of respiratory disease 7 days before enrollment, previous inclusion as a control in the study, or hospitalized during the previous 14 days. the guardians of the controls will be contacted by email/telephone 1 to 2 weeks after enrollment to collect information regarding the potential respiratory symptoms developed after discharge. cases and controls will be included in the emergency unit, and additional controls will also be included in the hand surgery unit of the hospital.capillary blood samples and nasopharyngeal aspirates and swabs will be collected from all study subjects. for the mxa analysis, 20 µl of blood will be collected using a heparinized plastic end-to-end capillary and then immediately diluted in a prefilled tube containing an in-house buffer [14]. the nasopharyngeal swabs for the maripoc respi analyses will be diluted in 1.3 ml of a commercial buffer, as advised by the manufacturer arcdia international oy ltd. the nasopharyngeal aspirates for the pcr analyses will be collected in a standardized manner, as has previously been published, but mixed with 1.3 ml of saline to mirror the protocol for the maripoc respi [17]. all samples will be taken within 24 hours from arrival at the emergency unit, and the time of blood and nasopharynx sampling will be recorded. it will also be noted if antibiotics have been given before sampling. samples that are not analyzed at the point of care will be stored at −80°c and shipped on dry ice to minimize degradation of the analytes of interest. all samples collected in the study will be stored according to the swedish act: biobanks in medical care (sfs 2002:297).real-time pcr analysis based on the taqman technique will be performed in batches on the nasopharyngeal aspirates at sahlgrenska university laboratory, gothenburg, using previously described methods [44]. the pcr detects the following respiratory agents: influenza a/b, rsv a/b, adenovirus, bocavirus, coronavirus (hku1, nl63, oc43, and 229e), hmpv, piv 1-3, rhinovirus, enterovirus, s pneumoniae, h influenzae,  b pertussis, and mycoplasma pneumoniae.maripoc respi will be performed on the nasopharyngeal swabs directly at the emergency room at sachs’ children and youth hospital at the time of enrollment [32]. the test detects the following respiratory agents: influenza a/b, rsv, adenovirus, bocavirus, coronavirus, hmpv, piv 1-3, and s pneumoniae.analyses of mxa will be performed in batches at the institute of biomedicine, university of turku, finland, using an in-house enzyme immunoassay, as previously described [14].crp will be analyzed using the alere afinion as100 analyzer commercial point-of-care kit at the emergency room at sachs’ children and youth hospital. if multiple crp tests are performed, the highest value less than 48 hours from arrival at the emergency unit will be recorded [45]. a small amount of blood will be stored to allow future analysis of, for example, pct if deemed necessary.information regarding the study subjects (initials, year and month of birth, sex, date of inclusion, and postal code), number of siblings, days of illness, current symptoms (fever, coughing, runny nose, wheezing, whooping, shortness of breath, hoarseness, sore throat, ear secretion, inability to feed, lethargy, vomiting, and diarrhea), vaccinations, antibiotic treatment, medication, underlying diseases, heredity for asthma, previous hospitalization, recent (last 3 months) trips abroad (if yes, where and for how long), allergies, smoking in the family, recent contact with unwell individuals, breastfeeding, preschool, origin of parents, and socioeconomic status will be collected through a standardized questionnaire based on previous studies [46,47].clinical parameters (respiratory rate, consciousness according to the avpu scale—alert, verbal stimuli, pain stimuli, unresponsive—pulse, peripheral oxygen saturation, weight, body temperature, vomiting, head nodding, central cyanosis, stridor, chest indrawing, nasal flaring, grunting, pedal edema, skin turgor, capillary refill, cool peripheries, and pulmonary auscultatory findings—decreased breath sounds, crackles/crepitations, bronchial breath sounds, and wheezing) and antipyretic medication prescribed within less than 4 hours will be registered by the study doctor responsible for patient screening/enrollment. to avoid overloading the case report form, information about symptoms and danger signs that are rare in a swedish context (eg, jaundice, bulging fontanelle, rash, gallop rhythm, weak peripheral pulses, and tender liver mass) will be retrospectively collected from the medical records if deemed necessary. some clinical parameters are routinely recorded multiple times at the emergency unit. in these cases, the most extreme value (highest pulse/respiratory rate/body temperature and lowest peripheral oxygen saturation) during the visit at the emergency unit enrollment will be recorded. information regarding admission; length of hospital stay; routine clinical examination; radiological, microbiological, and biochemical analyses (eg, bacterial cultures and blood gas tests); treatment; discharge diagnosis; and complications (parapneumonic effusion and sepsis) will be retrospectively collected from the medical records.personal identification numbers of all the study subjects will be linked to the national health and population registers to collect information regarding deaths, previous immunization, and discharge diagnoses according to the international statistical classification of diseases and related health problems 10 (icd-10) as well as anatomic therapeutic chemical classification system codes for prescribed drugs.the algorithm for classifying etiology in the trend study is based on the current literature and will classify children into viral, bacterial, atypical bacterial, mixed viral-bacterial, and undetermined infections based on clinical, microbiological, radiographic, and biochemical findings (figure 2). a second, stricter algorithm only considering microbiologically confirmed diagnoses will be used in a complementary subanalysis (figure 3).long-term complications (asthma and number of hospital-requiring respiratory infections) will be assessed by linking to the national patient register. asthma will be classified according to the icd-10 diagnosis and/or prescriptions of asthma medication in the swedish prescribed drug register using a previously validated algorithm [48].a total of 300 cases and 120 controls are estimated to be included in the trend study. for the sample size calculation, we focused on the assessment of mxa levels in cases with viral cap as compared with cases with bacterial cap/controls (study i). overall, 2 power calculations were made, 1 for viral cap versus bacterial cap and 1 for viral cap versus controls. the following assumptions were made: (1) a difference in mxa level of 500 µg/l between the groups was considered clinically relevant. (2) a standard deviation of 1000 and 300 was assumed in cases with viral cap and bacterial cap/controls, respectively, based on previous studies on mxa [13,14]. using an alpha level of .05 (2 sided) at an 80% power, with an additional 20% to account for nonparametric testing and multivariate analyses, 42 children in each group (viral cap, bacterial cap, and controls) would be needed. to ensure that enough of the included cases would fulfill the study definitions for viral and bacterial cap, the proportion of children with viral and bacterial cap (trend definition) was calculated in our previous study that assessed swedish children with x-ray–verified cap [47]. by doing this, the prevalence of viral and bacterial cap was estimated at 45% and 14%, respectively. hence, 300 cases and 42 controls would be needed to ensure sufficient collection of cases with viral and bacterial cap, respectively. we also would like to compare viral cap cases with controls testing positive for 1 or more viruses by pcr. in our previous study, 35.4% of asymptomatic children tested positive for 1 or more viruses. hence, to include a sufficient number of virus-positive controls, we aim at including 300 cases and 120 controls in the trend study.a clinically relevant difference in mxa levels will be compared between cases with viral and bacterial clinical cap as well as between cases with viral clinical cap and controls using appropriate statistical methods according to the number and distribution of data points. sensitivity and specificity for different respiratory viruses with maripoc respi and the novel rpa-based test will be calculated as compared with real-time pcr. the difference in asthma prevalence and the difference in the number of hospital-requiring respiratory infections between cases and controls as well as between cases and the general child population will be assessed after 3, 7, and (if deemed necessary) 10 years. data will be presented with 95% ci, and a p value of <.05 will be considered significant.the study will be conducted in accordance with the latest version of the declaration of helsinki and the fundamental principles of respect for the individual’s (article 8) right to self-determination and to make informed decisions (articles 20, 21, and 22) regarding participation in research, both initially and during the course of the research.we estimate that the benefit of knowing more about viral respiratory infections with the aim of improving diagnostics of cap overweighs the discomfort for the individual study participant in terms of extra sampling. for all the participating children, a minimal, reduced amount of blood will be collected, and accordingly, the analysis of pct and crp will not routinely be performed in control children for the following reasons: (1) data on these biomarkers in the controls are not necessary for the study objectives; (2) to get a sufficient amount of blood for running these analyses, it would require a larger lancet and/or additional punctures; and (3) these children would likely not have been subject to capillary puncture, were they not enrolled in the study. results from point-of-care tests will be provided to guardians and treating physicians. other test results will not be provided as they will be analyzed in batches and thus not influence management. written informed consents will be collected from the guardian(s) by the study nurse/physician before sampling. to ensure confidentiality for the participants, samples will be given a study id and results will only be presented at a group level. data of personal identities will be stored in a password-protected data file at sachs’ children and youth hospital and will only be available to the study researchers. good clinical practice and good laboratory practice will be followed. the study was approved by the regional ethical review board in stockholm (ref 2017/958-31).the study was approved by the regional ethical review board in stockholm in june 2017 (ref 2017/958-31). a pilot study was performed from june to august 2017 to evaluate the study protocol from a logistical and methodological point of view. overall, 6 out of 9 invited cases and 1 out of 3 invited controls were included. valuable information was retrieved during the pilot study, which has led to alterations and improvements in the recruitment process, the questionnaire, and other study documents as well in the logistics and handling process of the samples. enrollment of study subjects started in november 2017. results are expected by the end of 2019.the trend study aims to improve the differential diagnosis of bacterial and viral etiology in children aged below 5 years with clinical cap presenting at an emergency unit in a tertiary pediatric hospital in sweden. this is the first study of children with clinical cap that evaluates the diagnostic accuracy of mxa as a biomarker for viral cap. previous studies on mxa have shown promising results on the role of mxa as a biomarker for viral infection but have been smaller in size [14] or have included more heterogeneous groups of study subjects [13,15,16]. the trend study aims to add further information on the role of mxa as a marker to improve the interpretation of viral pcr positivity and to differentiate between viral and bacterial infections with a specific focus on children with cap. further aims are to validate the findings from recent pediatric cap etiology studies, including the epic and perch studies, as well as to assess the long-term complications of pediatric cap [21-24].one major weakness in the studies of diagnostic biomarkers in pediatric infectious diseases is the lack of a reliable gold standard for the microbiological diagnosis [5,49]. the gold standard for assigning bacterial etiology has traditionally been the detection of bacteria in cultures from normally sterile sites (lung, blood, and pleura). however, as sampling from the lung/pleura is infeasible in most cases and blood cultures have limited sensitivity, this approach is of little use in clinical studies of cap [5]. previous studies assessing the performance of diagnostic tests in terms of distinguishing bacterial infections from viral infections have used either an independent expert panel or a laboratory-/radiological-based approach to classify disease etiology [12-15]. both approaches have their advantages and limitations. using a strict microbiologically confirmed diagnosis as the reference has the advantage of high specificity, but the generalizability of the findings is hampered as the majority of children in clinical practice will not have a clear microbiologically confirmed diagnosis. in addition, for a diagnostic test to be useful, it is more important to distinguish between etiologically less clear cases of respiratory infections rather than to identify the school book examples of bacterial and viral infections. in the trend study, we chose a more pragmatic approach favoring generalizability for microbiological accuracy. however, given that doctors in expert panels rely on microbiological and biochemical findings, we reasoned that it still would be more stringent to create an algorithm for the classification of etiology. in the trend study, a diagnostic algorithm has been created a priori to serve as the reference based on the current evidence for the classification of cap etiology. detection of rsv, hmpv, influenza virus, and piv has, in previous case-control studies, been highly associated with cap. furthermore, these viruses appear to be rarely detected in asymptomatic individuals, and hence, detection will be considered to be a definitive indicator of etiology [21,22,47,50,51]. for other respiratory viruses as well as for the atypical bacteria m pneumoniae, the clinical significance of pcr positivity is less clear owing to frequent detections in asymptomatic children [17,52-55]. for that reason, pcr positivity will not be considered enough for establishing etiology. virkki et al reported that a crp level of more than 80 in children aged less than or equal to 2 years and more than 120 in children aged 2 to 5 years was specific (>85%) for bacterial etiology, whereas a crp level of less than 20 was specific for viral etiology (78%) [56]. these cutoffs will be used to aid in the definition of probable bacterial and viral infections in less clear cases. hence, detection of viruses other than influenza, rsv, hmpv, and piv will be considered as viral infections only if the crp value is less than 20. given that adenovirus has been associated with high crp, this rule will not be applicable for adenovirus [11]. however, adenovirus detections will not be considered in the strict algorithm, as asymptomatic detection of the virus is common [17]. finally, given that crp levels depend on the disease duration and to avoid false-negative test results (ie, low but rising crp values), an additional criterion of reported fever duration of more than 24 hours will be applied in the trend study when considering crp levels [45]. as discussed above, there is no optimal reference standard for the classification of cap etiology, neither clinically nor in research. however, we believe that much is to be gained if we use an algorithm instead of an expert panel. the decisions taken by expert panels differ between different studies, over time, and between different settings. when using an algorithm, this can be controlled for. we look forward to comments and inputs on our algorithm so that together we can develop it further.the who criteria for clinical cap lack specificity and will result in the inclusion of a significant proportion of children who will not have true cap, including children with bronchiolitis and asthma [57]. to improve the specificity of the who criteria for clinical cap, a rapid-acting bronchodilator will be administered to children with wheezing and chest indrawing, as suggested by the perch study team [43]. other clinical parameters from the perch study will also be included and used for further subanalyses [43].conducting research in the pediatric emergency department is difficult [58]. high patient flows and long waiting times create a stressful environment for all personnel categories. motivating nurses/doctors to spend the extra time and effort it takes to recruit patients is, therefore, challenging. continuous education/information about the research project, interpersonnel teamwork (nurse and doctor), and incentives are all key success factors. recruitment of healthy controls in this age group is an obvious challenge as the sampling (blood and nasopharyngeal sampling) causes discomfort to the child. therefore, attempts have been made to include patients who will undergo elective hand surgery (and thereby be sedated during the sampling). certain clinical parameters can be deceptive if not recorded correctly, which is a potential source of bias. in children where peripheral oxygen saturation and heart rate are measured continuously, data will still only be recorded at certain time points when the children are at rest.transcriptomic studies have shown promise in differentiation between different infectious agents but currently require advanced instrumentation with a long turnaround time and are hence more suitable for an intensive care unit setting than for routine testing at pediatric emergency units [59]. however, given the complexity of the host immune response elicited by respiratory pathogens, it is possible that a single biomarker will not be sufficient to accurately differentiate between viral and bacterial cap. however, mxa could be valuable in a rapid combination test of biomarkers and selected microbiological testing if it proves to be specific for viral cap. such commercial combination point-of-care tests of inflammatory biomarkers are already being developed and some, such as febridx and memed bv, have shown promise [15,60].improved near-patient differential diagnosis is a prerequisite for rational antibiotic use and decreasing unnecessary antibiotic treatment. furthermore, easier identification of the pathogens causing acute respiratory infections makes it easier to advise guardians to care for their sick children and for better disease surveillance in the society. hence, the findings from the trend project can be an important step toward the improved care of children with clinical cap. at this stage, the methods are developed and evaluated in a swedish context but might have wider implications, for example, to resource-limited settings where the need for similar tests is even higher than in a high-income context such as sweden.the term "proteome" was first coined in late 1994 by marc wilkins at the siena two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2de) meeting and defines the entire protein complement in a given cell, tissue, or organism [1] . in its wider sense, proteomics research also assesses protein activities, modifications and localization, and interactions of proteins in complexes. it relies heavily on technology since it needs to identify proteins and protein complexes in biological samples comprehensively and quantitatively with both high sensitivity and fidelity. proteomics is a promising approach for the study of viruses. it allows a better understanding of disease processes and the development of new biomarkers for diagnosis and early detection of disease, and accelerates drug development. areas of proteomics that are particularly promising include the determination of altered protein expression, not only at the whole-cell or tissue level, but also in subcellular structures and biological fluids; the development of novel biomarkers for diagnosis and early detection of disease; and the identification of new targets for therapeutics and the potential for accelerating drug development through more effective strategies to evaluate therapeutic effect and toxicity.there is a growing interest in applying proteomics to the study of infectious disease. a complicating factor in therapy for infectious disease is the development of resistance to commonly used drugs, which heightens the need for developing effective new therapies. the availability of the complete sequences of a number of viruses has provided a framework for identifying proteins encoded in these genomes using mass spectrometry (ms) . applying proteomics to the study of viruses allows the characterization of subviral proteomes (e.g., secreted proteins, surface proteins, and immunogenic proteins), the comparative analysis of different stains or physiological states, the identification of proteins related to pathogenicity and host-pathogen interactions, and the evaluation of mechanisms of action of antiviral therapies.viral infections cause significant morbidity and disease including cancer, immunosuppression, and death. often infections are not diagnosed until symptoms appear and, in several cases, this may be years or decades after the initial infection. the ability to diagnose infection or cancer before the appearance of symptoms would be of critical importance for effective treatment. proteomic analysis of serum has been proposed as a means of diagnosing infectious disease and/or the early diagnosis of cancer. there have been some recent exciting findings in the proteomics of the host or pathogen, and the use of standard mass spectrometric technologies has enabled many physicians and scientists to examine more closely the pathological and biological questions that can only be answered using proteomic approaches. 14 showed increased expression. many of the induced proteins were involved in energy metabolism, organization of cytoskeletal structures, protein synthesis, or cell viability [11] . therefore, the effect of drugs that activate silenced tumor suppressor genes and their proteomic profile following treatment is of considerable interest.finally, an important herpesvirus to consider is hsv. hsv types 1 and 2 are ubiquitous viruses that cause infections in human populations throughout the world. the clinical manifestations of hsv infections are varied, ranging from asymptomatic to life-threatening illness in neonates and immunocompromised hosts [12, 13] . hsv-1 infection induces severe alterations of the host translational apparatus, including the phosphorylation of a few ribosomal proteins and the progressive association of several nonribosomal proteins to ribosomes [14] [15] [16] . using a proteomics approach, it was shown that vp19c, vp26, and icp27 associated with ribosomal proteins [17] . specifically, immediate early icp27 protein associated with the cellular translation initiation factor poly a binding protein (pabp), eukaryotic initiation factor 3 (eif3), and eukaryotic initiation factor 4g (eif4g) in infected cells, resulting in the stimulation of translation of certain viral mrnas and inhibiting host mrna translation [18] . another study has shown that approximately 50 cellular and viral proteins associate with the hsv-1 icp8 single-stranded dnabinding protein, some of which belong to dna repair and chromatin family members [19] , implying that hsv-1 infection results in control of host cellular dna replication/repair and gene expression machineries.proteomic analyses of rna viruses with regard to diagnosis and novel biomarker detection are also of considerable interest in the medical community. for instance, sars is a new infectious disease that first emerged in the guangdong province, china, in november 2002 [20] . a novel coronavirus was later identified in patients with sars. the detection of the virus in these patients, its absence in healthy controls or other patients with atypical pneumonia, and the reproduction of a similar disease in a relevant animal model indicated that this coronavirus was the causative agent of sars (sars-cov) [21] . interestingly, the full genome sequence was determined within weeks of the identification of the virus, but the proteome and biomarkers associated with sars are slowly forthcoming. in a recent study using a mass spectrometric decision tree classification algorithm, kang et al. identified four biomarkers determined in the training set that could precisely detect 36 of 37 (sensitivity, 97.3%) acute sars and 987 of 993 (specificity, 99.4%) non-sars samples [22] . a reasonably complete proteomic analysis was also performed on four patients with sars at different times of infection, and a total of 38 differential spots were selected for protein identification. most of the proteins identified were acute phase proteins, and their presence represented the consequence of a serial cascade of inflammatory reactions initiated by sars-cov infection. of significance was the level of plasma peroxiredoxin ii in patients with sars, which was significantly higher in sars patients and could be secreted by t cells [23] . finally, while pursuing new enzyme targets, another study identified 14 putative orfs, 12 of which were predicted to be expressed from a nested set of eight subgenomic mrnas. distant homologs of cellular rna processing enzymes were identified in group 2 coronaviruses, with four of them being conserved in sars-cov. these newly recognized viral enzymes put the mechanism of coronavirus rna synthesis in a completely new perspective, which has opened the door for new drug targets for the treatment of sars [24] .the proteomes of three other rna viruses including hcv, hbv, and hiv-1 have also been studied. hepatitis c often progresses to chronic infection in the majority of patients and is an emerging cause of viral hepatitis. clinically, the infection is generally asymptomatic, but may present with a wide variety of symptoms. cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma (hcc), cryoglobulinemia, autoantibodies, and glomerulonephritis have been strongly associated with hcv infection [25] . when analyzing proteins that interacted with the hcv protein ns5a, choi et al. found that the cytoplasmic heat shock protein 27 (hsp27) bound to ns5a was concentrated in the er [26] , where drugs for hcv treatment would have easy access (as opposed to drugs delivered into the nucleus). chronic infection with hbv is associated with the majority of hcc. using woodchucks as a model system, hcc induced dramatically higher levels of serum-associated core alpha-1,6-linked fucose, as compared with woodchucks without hcc. the coupling of this model system with 2d gel electrophoresis has permitted the identification of several glycoproteins with altered glycosylation as correlated to cancer prognosis. one such glycoprotein, the golgi protein 73 (gp73), was found to be elevated and hyperfucosylated in animals with hcc [27] . finally, in an effort to identify useful biomarkers for hbv-or hcv-associated hcc, 60 proteins were identified which exhibited significant changes in expression between nontumorous and tumorous tissues. among these, 14 proteins were commonly changed in all three of the hcc types, but 46 proteins showed a tendency toward viral marker specificity, suggesting that the pathogenic mechanisms of hepatocarcinogenesis may be different according to the viral etiology of hbv or hcv [28] .diagnosis and treatment strategies for hcv have become extremely important as one-third of hiv-infected individuals in europe and the usa are coinfected with hcv [29] . therefore, defining biomarkers in coinfections after highly active antiretroviral therapy (haart) is currently the focus of many laboratories. hiv accelerates hcv liver disease especially with the progression of hiv-associated immunodeficiency. with the introduction of pegylated interferon in combination with ribavirin, greatly improved treatment options for patients coinfected with hiv and hcv have become available and have led to sustained virological response rates of up to 40% [30] . furthermore, recent cohort analyses have shown that immune reconstitution induced by haart can improve the course of hepatitis c infection leading to a decline in liver-related mortality. however, patients with hcv coinfection are at increased risk of hepatotoxicity from haart [29] . owing to the high rates of hiv and hcv coinfections worldwide, new improved biomarkers and treatment strategies and guidelines for the management of coinfection remain a major goal. biomarkers could include protein fingerprints of hiv-1-infected human monocyte-derived macrophages (mdms) after viral infection, as well as hcv-infected liver cells. recently, 58 proteins have already been identified to be up-or down-regulated after hiv-1 infection [31] .the overall awareness of the importance of proteins and peptides in physiology and pathophysiology has increased dramatically over the last few years. with progress in the analysis of whole genomes, the knowledge base in gene sequence and expression data, useful for protein and peptide analysis, has increased considerably. therefore, the medical need for relevant biomarkers is enormous. this is particularly true for many viral infections and various types of cancer, where there is a lack of useful and adequate diagnostic markers with high specificity and sensitivity.however, proteomic and peptide-based techniques have evolved in recent years to simplify the search for biomarkers. peptide-based technologies provide new opportunities for the detection of low-molecular-weight protein biomarkers (peptides) by ms. improvements in peptide-based research are based on separation of peptides and/or proteins by their physicochemical properties in combination with mass spectrometric detection and identification using sophisticated bioinformatics tools for data analysis. therefore, peptide-based technologies offer an opportunity to discover novel biomarkers for diagnosis and management of disease including prognosis, treatment decision, and monitoring response to therapy.there are a number of critical viral infections that have dominated the research and biomarker landscape. many of these findings rely on somewhat simple or "off the shelf" technologies that are fairly straightforward to use. perhaps the simplest of these technologies is the surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization (seldi) technology. in a study for sars detection, kang et al. developed a mass spectrometric decision tree classification algorithm using seldi-tof ms. serum samples were grouped into acute sars and non-sars and healthy control cohorts. diluted samples were applied to wcx-2 proteinchip arrays (ciphergen), and the bound proteins were assessed on a proteinchip reader (model pbs ii). the results clearly indicated an impressive accuracy for discriminatory classifiers [22] . another similar study indicated that nine serum markers significantly increased and three significantly decreased in sars patients as compared to controls [32] .another proteinchip assay used to study hiv-1 infection showed a unique mdm protein fingerprint during hiv-associated dementia (had) and haart. seven unique protein peaks between 3.0 and 20.0 kda were found in the had mdm samples, all of which were abrogated after haart [33] . a very similar study using specific proteins produced from monocytes from had patients showed a total of 177 protein peaks from 2 to 80 kda in 31 mdm lysates. select protein peaks, at 5028 and 4320 da, separated hiv-1-infected from hiv-1seronegative subjects with 100% sensitivity and 80% specificity [34] .however, most viral proteomics studies to date have utilized either 2de and maldi-tof ms or lc/ms/ms. the hiv virion is composed of a lipid bilayer that surrounds the viral capsid (fig. 1a) . in a clever study, fuchigami et al. [35] studied the hiv-1(lav-1) particles, which were collected by ultracentrifugation, treated with subtilisin, and then purified by sepharose cl-4b column chromatography to remove microvesicles. the lysate of the purified hiv-1 particles was subjected to 2de and stained, and the stained spots were excised and digested with trypsin. the resulting peptide fragments were characterized by maldi-tof ms. twenty-five proteins were identified as proteins inside the virion, and the acidlabile formyl group of an amino terminal proline residue of hiv-1(lav-1) p24(gag) was determined by maldi-tof ms before and after weak-acid treatments (0.6 n hydrochloric acid) and confirmed by postsource decay (psd) of the n-formylated n-terminal tryptic peptide (n-formylated pro(1)-arg (18)). interestingly, formylation plays a critical role in the formation of the hiv-1 core for conferring hiv-1 infectivity [35] .more recently, the use of liquid chromatography and tandem ms (lc/ms/ms) has also eased purification and recovery methods. for instance, varnum and colleagues utilized gel-free two-dimensional capillary lc/ms/ms and fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance ms to identify and determine the relative abundances of viral and cellular proteins in purified hcmv virions and dense bodies. analysis of the proteins from purified hcmv virion preparations has indicated that the particle contains significantly more viral proteins than previously known. they identified more than 71 hcmv-encoded proteins and 70 host cellular proteins in hcmv virions, which included cellular structural proteins, enzymes, and chaperones [6] . another study using lc/ms/ms for the adenovirus type 5 proteome found a total of 11 protein species from 154 peptides, at a sensitivity of 10 copies per virus and a detection limit of 70 fmol for two proteins [36] .two new methods have been used recently to decipher viral proteomes. a method for proteolytic stable isotope labeling was recently used to provide quantitative and concurrent comparisons between individual proteins from two different proteome pools or their subfractions. using this technique two 18 o atoms were incorporated universally into the carboxyl termini of all tryptic peptides during the proteolytic cleavage of proteins in the first pool. proteins in the second pool were analogously cleaved with the carboxyl termini of the resulting peptides containing two 16 o atoms (i.e., no labeling). the method was used to compare two virus strains, adenovirus types 2 and 5. this shotgun approach for proteomic studies with quantitative capability may be a very powerful tool for comparative proteomic studies of very complex protein mixtures [37] . finally, the isotope-coded affinity tag (icat) procedure has also yielded some very interesting results for a rather complex viral infection setting. for instance, proteins from human liver carcinoma cells, representing transformed liver cells, and cultured primary human fetal hepatocytes (hfh) were extracted and processed for icat chromatography.proteins from hepatitis c virus-infected cells and corresponding control cells were labeled with light and heavy cleavable icat reagents, respectively. after the labeled samples were combined, trypsinized, and subjected to cation-exchange and avidin-affinity chromatographies, the resulting cysteine-containing peptides were analyzed by microcapillary lc/ms/ms. using sequest and other bioinformatics software a total of ϳ1500 proteins or related protein groups were identified in three subdatasets from uninfected and infected cells [38] . collectively, these results further emphasize the new targets for biomarkers and drug development for hcv infection. the described new technologies have collectively added to our arsenal of possible biomarkers when diagnosing various viral infections. however, many of these markers still need to be validated using more rigorous sample methods, biological and biochemical tests, and more sophisticated bioinformatics tools. bioinformatics tools that have been valuable for viral diagnosis and fast retrieval of dna or protein sequences include the orfer program (http://www.proteinstrukturfabrik.de/orfer), 2d proteome database (http://proteome.btc.nus.edu.sg/hccm), the poxvirus proteomics database (http://contact14.ics.uci.edu/virus/vaccinia.php), and virgen (http://bioinfo.ernet.in/virgen/virgen.html).in this chapter, we will explore the importance of proteomics in studying virus-host interactions in several viral systems including hcmv, kshv, ebv, hsv, hiv-1, htlv-1, and hcv. we will also describe the methods that have been employed to study viral disease progression using several techniques including 2de, lc-ms/ms, seldi, and protein microarrays.viral proteomics has included the analysis of viral particles to determine all proteins-viral and cellular-that compose the infectious virus, the examination of cellular proteins associated with a single viral protein in the hopes of determining all the functions of that viral protein, or the determination of cellular proteins induced or altered during a particular disease state. identification of viral proteins requires that the viral genome has been fully sequenced and potential orfs have been identified. presently, over 1200 different viral genomes have been sequenced, annotated, and deposited in public sequence databases (genbank, embl, and ddbj) [39] . additionally, the national center for biotechnology information (ncbi) has established a viral genomes project to provide standards for viral genomic research [39] . this resource will further the research of virus proteomics. the viral proteome of several herpesviruses, hepatitis c virus, human 318 a. pumfery et al., and the hiv have been analyzed and will be reviewed here.viral particles of hcmv and kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus/human herpesvirus 8 (kshv/hhv-8) have recently been examined. during the herpesviral replicative cycle, different viral particles are formed. for hcmv, this includes mature, infectious virions, noninfectious enveloped particles, and dense bodies [6] . similarly for kshv, only a portion of the produced virus particles is infectious [40] . therefore, analysis of infectious virions requires their separation from the noninfectious and immature forms. density ultacentrifugation gradients are typically used to separate the various forms. each fraction can be analyzed by electron microscopy to determine the level of purity [6, 41] or by assaying for viral dna and an envelope glycoprotein [40] .the herpesviruses are large enveloped dna viruses (fig. 1b) . the viral particle consists of a lipid envelope, in which are embedded viral glycoproteins important for infection of target cells. the envelope surrounds an amorphous proteinaceous structure called the tegument [42] . the tegument is often composed of viral proteins critical for the initiation of viral gene expression, for example the vp16 protein of hsv [43] , as well as other viral and cellular proteins whose functions are unknown. the tegument surrounds the viral capsid, which is composed of a major capsid protein, one or more minor capsid proteins, and viral dna. identification of tegument and capsid proteins can be differentiated from the envelope glycoproteins by their differential sensitivity to trypsin and detergents. the tegument and capsid proteins are resistant to trypsin digestion in the absence of detergents. the envelope glycoproteins, however, are sensitive to trypsin digestion whether or not detergents are present. however, only the surface-exposed portions of glycoproteins are sensitive to trypsin in the absence of detergents.following gradient purification of virions, lc/ ms/ ms was used to identify the components of the hcmv virion [6] . the results were verified by coupling highaccuracy mass measurements with lc and ft-icr (fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance) ms. fifty-nine proteins were identified including 12 proteins encoded by known hcmv orfs not previously known to reside in virions. the classes of proteins identified included capsid proteins, tegument proteins, glycoproteins, and 12 proteins involved in dna replication and transcription. additionally, 12 more viral polypeptides were identified that had not been previously characterized [6] .using the intensities in the ft-icr spectra, the relative quantities of the virion proteins were determined, indicating that 50% of the virion was composed of tegument proteins, 30% were capsid proteins, 13% were envelope proteins, while 7% were undefined proteins. these undefined proteins are likely to be cellular proteins that are incorporated into the virion. host cellular proteins were detected by comparison with peptides predicted from a human-fasta database. there were 71 cellular proteins identified to be associated with the hcmv virion. they included cytoskeletal proteins, proteins involved in translation control, and several signal transduction proteins [6] . the identification of cellular proteins involved in translation and signal transduction as components of the hcmv virion suggests that these proteins may have a function in the initiation of viral gene expression or inducing an environment that is suitable for hcmv infection.kshv has only been fully sequenced in the last 10 years [44] , and therefore not much is known about the composition of the virus particle. nealon et al. [41] used sds-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (page) and western blotting to identify the major capsid and scaffolding proteins as components of isolated virions. they then used ion trap ms to identify three additional components of the virion as orfs 62, 26, and 65. this study, however, was limited and unable to identify all components of the infectious virus. zhu et al. used a more comprehensive approach to identify virion components. extracellular virions were purified by double gradient centrifugation. sds-page revealed 30-40 protein bands whose identity was determined by in-gel trypsin digestion, followed by lc and ms. both peptide masses and peptide sequences were produced by tandem ms (ms/ms) and used to determine protein identity. the isolated proteins included five capsid proteins, eight glycoproteins, six tegument proteins, and five other kshv orfs. twenty cellular proteins were also identified and, as seen with hcmv, these included cytoskeletal proteins, signal transduction proteins, as well as heat shock proteins [45] . similar results were seen in the study by bechtel et al. [40] . however, fewer proteins were identified in this study as a single 7.5% sds-page gel was used to separate virion proteins. zhu et al. [45] used three sds-page gel-a 4-12% gel, a 3-8% gel to separate proteins larger than 50 kda, and a 12% gel to separate proteins smaller than 50 kda. these studies underscore the need for good separation methods to be able to identify all proteins in a virus particle.the epstein-barr virus (ebv) is a b-cell lymphotropic herpesvirus that induces a usually asymptomatic infection and is carried by more than 90% of adults. however, ebv is the causative agent for burkitt's lymphoma and nasopharyngeal carcinoma and is involved in a number of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (aids)-associated lymphomas. ebv can induce immortalization of b cells in vitro to generate lymphoblastoid cell lines (lcls), a model for the carcinogenic potential of ebv. lcls are latently infected with ebv; they maintain the virus as an extrachromosomal episome, and have limited viral gene expression. the latently expressed proteins are the six ebv nuclear antigens (ebnas 1, 2, 3a, 3b, 3c, and -lp) and three latent membrane proteins (lmps 1, 2a, and 2b). of the latently expressed proteins, ebna2 and lmp are required for transformation induced by ebv [46] . characterizations of cellular proteins associated with ebna2 or proteins differentially expressed in the early stages of the transformation process will be described in the following text. results of these studies may lead to a better understanding of ebv-mediated transformation and the identification of cellular targets for therapy.a proteome database of lcls, before and after transformation, has been developed to identify the cellular mechanisms of virus-induced immortalization [9, 47] . 2de was used to first separate proteins based on their relative charge (pi) and then based on their molecular weight. differentially expressed proteins were digested and subjected to electrospray ionization ms. proteins were identified based on their peptide mass fingerprint and amino acid sequences of peptides determined by edman degradation. there were 32 differentially expressed proteins and 20 were assigned to known proteins. the expression of several proteins involved in proliferation or nucleotide metabolism was increased in the immortalized cells, which may result in the growth stimulation seen in immortalized cells. a database of 2d gel images as well as the identity of the differentially expressed proteins has been made available to the public at www.proteome.jp/2d/. the availability of these images and the identification of the differentially expressed proteins may prove useful to others in their analysis of ebv-infected cells.ebna2 is required for transformation of lcls by ebv [48, 49] and induces the expression of c-myc [50] . c-myc is an oncogene which drives cell proliferation; however, the proliferation program induced by c-myc is different than that observed by the expression of ebna2 [51] , suggesting that other cellular proteins and events are induced by ebna2 to mediate transformation. furthermore, there is limited information on the cellular targets of ebna2. to identify the ebna2induced changes as c-myc dependent and c-myc independent, ebna2 and c-mycconditionally expressing cell lines were used and the proteome of each cell line was compared [10] . proteins were separated by 2d sds-page and identified by maldi-tof ms. in ebna2 expressing cells, there were 20 differentially expressed proteins; 12 were induced and 8 were repressed. of the proteins that were induced following ebna2 expression, several were involved in nucleotide metabolism, protein synthesis, or the control of apoptosis. many of these proteins were also induced in c-myc expressing cells, though six proteins were found to be ebna2 specific. two ebna2-specific proteins were induced (bid and ige-hrf) and four were repressed (annexin iv, ␥-actin, gmf␥, and af103803). furthermore, analysis of the activation kinetics demonstrated that expression of ebna2 preceded that of c-myc, which was then followed by the expression of nm23-h1 (a nucleotide diphosphate kinase that may suppress metastasis [52] ), indicating that c-myc was a direct target of ebna2 [10] .herpes simplex virus (hsv) has been the most extensively studied of the human herpesviruses owing to its ability to easily infect cells in vitro to produce infectious virus. as with all herpesviruses, hsv encodes a number of proteins for efficient viral gene expression, viral dna replication, and the shutoff of cellular gene transcription and translation [53] . these virally expressed proteins do not function in isolation but associate with a variety of cellular and viral proteins. furthermore, many have exhibited multiple different functions. in an effort to understand the biology of hsv and the function of its proteins, a proteomics approach has been used to study a critical viral transactivator (icp27), the alteration of the cellular translation machinery, and components of the viral replication complex, which will be reviewed here.the icp27 protein is expressed early in infection and is essential for viral replication and expression of certain early genes and virtually all late genes. it is a multifunctional protein that may function with the virion host shutoff (vhs) protein of hsv to repress cellular protein synthesis. this repression serves to direct cellular resources to the synthesis of viral proteins. using immunoprecipitation of icp27 from hsv-infected cells followed by sds-page and ms, several translation initiation factors were identified, including pabp, eif3, and eif4g [18] . the interaction of icp27 with translation initiation factors may recruit these factors to viral mrna to facilitate translation of viral mrnas and also to sequester these factors away from the translation of cellular mrnas.hsv infection also induces ribosomal changes and it has been hypothesized that these changes may contribute to hsv-mediated translational control of host and viral gene expression [17] . to identify the changes in ribosomes following hsv infection, ribosomes were purified by ultracentrifugation, the proteins were separated by 2d sds-page, and their identities were determined by maldi-tof ms. seven additional protein spots were found associated with ribosomes following hsv infection, including several viral proteins: vp19c and vp26components of the viral capsid, and us11-a tegument protein. three of the seven spots were phosphorylated forms of us11. one nonribosomal protein, pabp, was also found associated with ribosomes. the association of pabp with ribosomes increased following hsv infection [17] . interestingly, pabp was also found associated with icp27 in the previous study [18] . although greco et al. [17] did not find icp27 associated with ribosomes, this is likely due to the different separation procedures used. greco et al. [17] used 2de and focused solely on basic proteins with a pi greater than 8.6 while fontaine-rodriguez et al. [18] separated isolated proteins based on molecular weight. together, these results suggest that icp27 likely associates with ribosomes in infected cells. herpesvirus dna replication occurs in intranuclear structures called replication compartments [54, 55] . hsv encodes seven proteins that participate in viral dna replication; however, it is not known what cellular proteins are involved in this process. to identify cellular proteins in hsv replication compartments, icp8, the hsv single-stranded dna-binding protein, was immunoprecipitated from infected cells and coprecipitating proteins were separated by sds-page and identified by ion trap ms [19] . greater than 50 viral and cellular proteins were identified as copurifying with icp8. the cellular proteins included those that participate in dna replication/repair/recombination, chromatin remodeling, rna binding/splicing, and transcription factors. several of these proteins require dna binding to associate with icp8, including several chromatin-remodeling proteins. the roles of a number of interacting cellular proteins are presently unclear and further studies are needed to determine their exact roles in viral dna replication.hiv encodes a critical transcriptional activator, tat, which directs a cellular transcription factor, ptefb, to the hiv ltr to mediate transcription elongation [56, 57] . however, it has been shown that the viral genome is bound by nucleosomes that inhibit viral gene expression [58, 59] . to determine if tat interacts with additional cellular proteins to further assist viral gene expression, we used tat peptides linked to biotin to pull down all tat-associated proteins [60] . additionally, acetylated and unmodified peptides were also used because acetylation of tat has been attributed to alternative functions of tat [61, 62] . we found that many more cellular proteins bound to the unmodified tat, including proteins involved in modification of chromatin structure (chd2 and p/caf) and additional transcription factors (tif1-a trim family member-and scl-a bhlh transcription factor) [60] . these results indicate that tat influences viral gene expression at various levels and suggests that targeting these specific interactions may be a viable form of treatment of hiv infection and aids.hiv infects several cell types during the course of infection and progression to aids. in hiv-infected patients, the virus establishes a persistent infection in cells of the monocyte/macrophage lineage. monocytes and macrophages are the first line of defense in the immune system: they phagocytose and kill a range of microorganisms. however, little is know about how hiv persists in these cells. to understand how hiv may persist in these cells, carlson et al. [31] used a "proteinchip" and seldi to identify unique protein signatures in hiv-infected monocytes obtained from different donors. infection of monocytes isolated from humans was used to mimic the virus-host interactions that would occur in an infected individual. the proteinchips used in the study were used to partially purify samples. one is a weak cation exchange, and the second is a reverse-phase hydrophobic interaction chip. charged proteins will bind to the cation ion-exchange chip while hydrophobic, i.e., membrane-associated, proteins will bind to the reverse-phase chip. proteins bound to the chip were then analyzed by ms. each peak represents a protein of a particular mass; however, the nature of the protein in a peak after seldi ms is unknown. a different, separation technology and ms are needed to determine protein identities. to determine the identities of proteins up-or down-regulated following hiv infection of monocytes, total protein extracts were subjected to trypsin digestion, lc, and tandem ms to determine sequences of tryptic peptides. sequences were then analyzed against a protein bank to determine the identities of the proteins and given a score [31] . the problem with this type of study is that there is no quantitative assessment of the increase or decrease in the protein levels or changes in posttranslational modifications (ptm) following infection.had affects almost one-third of adults infected with hiv [63] . the exact cause of dementia is not known. there is significant neuronal loss but neurons are not infected with hiv [64] . it has been hypothesized that hiv-infected astrocytes are critical in the development of hiv dementia, and that tat is a contributor to this disease. extracellular tat released from astrocytes induces cell death in neurons, though tat protects astrocytes from cell death [65] . to understand this dichotomy, proteins differentially expressed in tat-expressing astrocytes were identified [66] . total protein extracts of tat-expressing and control cells were separated by 2d gel electrophoresis and identified by maldi ms. interestingly, seven proteins were found to be repressed in tat astrocytes, including rho gdp dissociation inhibitor and protein phosphatase 2a (pp2a) inhibitor. many of these proteins have been shown to be involved in the biology of hiv and interact with tat [66] . three proteins identified by a slot blot technique were found to be induced, and included hsp70, heme oxygenase, and inducible nitric oxide synthase (inos) [66] . previously published data have demonstrated a correlation between inos and the severity of had [67, 68] ; however, the role of the other differentially expressed proteins in astrocyte survival and hiv dementia will require further study.the human t-cell leukemia virus type 1 (htlv-1) causes adult t-cell leukemia (atl) and htlv-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (ham/ tsp) [69] . htlv-1 encodes a transactivator, tax, that is critical for virus replication and plays a central role in the development of atl and ham/tsp [69] . tax does not bind to dna directly but functions by interacting with a variety of cellular proteins [69] . many protein-protein interactions of tax have been determined by mutational analysis including creb [70] [71] [72] and nf-b [70, 72] . to identify all the cellular proteins that interact with tax, wu et al. used chromatography, 2d gel electrophoresis, and mass spectrometric analysis of an htlv-1-infected cell line (c81) [73] . as tax functions in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus [70, 74] , tax-interacting proteins were identified from both cellular compartments. some of the cytoplasmic proteins included small gtpases and components of the cytoskeleton while some of the more interesting nuclear proteins included components of the swi/snf chromatin remodeling complex [73] . the interaction of tax with many of the identified cellular proteins may be involved in the ability of tax to dysregulate cellular functions leading to t-cell transformation and leukemia.hepatocellular carcinoma (hcc) causes approximately one million deaths a year [75] . two viruses are the main causes of hcc: hbv and hcv [76] [77] [78] . although hbv is the most important cause of hcc, accounting for 80% of hcc cases, an effective vaccine is available [79] . hcv, however, is a major cause of the increasing incidence of hcc in developed countries [80] and no effective vaccine is available. hcc progresses after decades of chronic infection and often is at an advanced stage once it presents clinically [81] . as such, good noninvasive diagnostic markers are needed. this will be discussed further in section 3. the focus of this section will be on the identification of cellular proteins that are induced following hcv infection or cellular proteins that interact with hcv proteins.an extensive study by wirth et al. [82] analyzed normal liver tissue and hepatoma-derived cell lines by 2d gel electrophoresis and n-terminal sequencing and identified a number of proteins that were differentially expressed between normal tissue and hepatoma cell lines. similar studies have been performed by others as well [83, 84] . however, these studies have used cell lines that have been in culture that may not accurately reflect all the changes seen in hcc. comparison of liver tumor tissue with normal tissue would be ideal; however, tissue heterogeneity is an issue and could confound the results [85] . until only very recently [86, 87] , an infectious cell culture model for hcv has not been available. this new model system will allow for the identification of cellular proteins that are induced following hcv infection and further the development of a treatment for hcv.the hcv genome encodes a large polyprotein that is cleaved to generate 9-10 proteins, including the core and envelope proteins e1 and e2, and the nonstructural proteins ns2, ns3, ns4a, ns4b, ns5a, and ns5b [88] . ns5a has been proposed to act as a cofactor in hcv replication [89] , as a transcription activator [90] , or as an anti-apoptotic factor [91] . to identify the cellular proteins that interacted with ns5a, choi et al. [26] coimmunoprecipitated ns5a-interacting proteins using antisera against ns5a, separated them via 2d gel electrophoresis, and determined their identity by ms. one cellular protein was found to interact specifically with ns5a, the heat shock protein (hsp) 27, also known as srp27. further analysis indicated that hsp27 interacted with the c-terminal domain of ns5a and both proteins were shown to colocalize around the nucleus. the hsps are induced following cellular stress to protect cells from apoptosis [92] ; yet, overexpression of hsp27 did not protect cells from hcv core-induced apoptosis. as hsp27 expression could not be reduced by sirna, the role of hsp27 in hcv rna replication could not be determined. however, due to the multifunctional nature of ns5a, it is surprising that only one protein was found to interact with ns5a. because an antibody to ns5a was used to coimmunoprecipitate cellular proteins, the antibody used in the study may be interfering with the binding of other cellular proteins. this problem may be overcome by using different antibodies to ns5a or by using a tagged ns5a and affinity chromatography.proteomic analysis has provided a unique tool for the identification of diagnostic biomarkers, evaluation of disease progression, and drug development [93, 94] . it is also an important approach for clinical diagnostics. in fact, early diagnosis of disease could be possible through the use of unique protein profiles, consisting of a panel of biomarkers that serves as a surrogate marker of disease. novel diagnostic tests may be generated through proteomic discoveries, and many more proteins can be identified as potential drug targets. these biomarkers are likely to serve multiple purposes, including the assessment of drug efficacy and drug toxicity, and diagnosis. we will review the various methodologies used for viral diagnostics and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each technique.the classical proteomics platforms include 2de and ms [85] . 2de is employed to separate proteins in a mixture in the first dimension by their isoelectric points and then in the second dimension by molecular mass. the resulting gel can be stained with a variety of protein dyes to reveal a pattern of spots. in the first dimension, isoelectric focusing (ief) is performed by using ipg strips which are based on the use of bifunctional immobiline reagents, a series of 10 chemically well-defined acrylamide derivatives that copolymerize with the acrylamide matrix, to generate extremely stable ph gradients forming a series of buffers with different pk values between 1 and 13. subsequently, linear or nonlinear wide (ipg 3-12), medium (ipg 4-7), narrow (ipg 4.5-5.5), and ultra-narrow (ipg 4.9-5.3) ph range ipgs can be cast [95] . we suggest the reader to refer to the review by gorg et al. for more details about ipg strip rehydration, sample application, and ipg strip equilibration [96] . the second dimension consists of using sds-page to separate proteins according to their molecular weight. however, the analysis of low-molecular-weight (ͻ15 kda) and high-molecular-weight (ͼ150 kda) proteins is challenging since there is no standard 2de system that effectively allows separation of proteins over the entire range between 5 and 500 kda. a common approach is to combine several gels optimized for different molecular weight ranges instead of using a single standard 2de system. current methods for the diagnosis of hcc rely on serological markers such as ␣-fetoprotein (afp) [97] and certain liver enzymes as well as des gamma carboxyprothrombin (dcp) [98] . this type of diagnosis lacks the sensitivity to detect hcc at an early stage when therapy can be more effective. to find markers of disease progression, 2de was employed to resolve and compare proteins present in serum obtained from individuals infected with hbv or hcv and with varying risks for the development of hcc [99, 100] . in several studies, proteins expressed at different levels among diseased individuals as compared to those of healthy ones were identified as markers for disease progression as well as proteins with different n-glycosylation patterns [99] [100] [101] . in another study, 2d-ms was also employed to analyze altered plasma proteins due to sars-cov infection. thirtyeight different plasma proteins from sars patients were identified, most of which were associated with acute phase proteins [23] .one advantage of 2d gels is their resolution since they can resolve as many as 2000 proteins simultaneously and proteins can be detected at greater than 1 ng in one spot [96] . 2de is currently the only technique that can be routinely applied for parallel quantitative expression profiling of large sets of complex protein mixtures such as whole cell lysates. in addition, 2de produces a map of intact proteins, which reflects changes in protein expression level, different isoforms, or ptm. in fact, a great advantage of this methodology is its capability to study proteins that have undergone some form of ptm (such as phosphorylation, glycosylation, or limited proteolysis) that can be detected visually on the 2de gels as they appear as distinct spot trains in the horizontal and/or vertical axis of the 2de gel. this is in contrast with other methods, including lc-based methods, which perform analysis on peptides, where molecular weight and pi information is lost, and stable isotope labeling is required for quantitative analysis [96] .although 2d gel electrophoresis is a standard technology, it suffers from several problems that may limit its utility. these include issues with reproducibility, as well as the inability to separate hydrophobic proteins, which are poorly soluble. although the use of ipg strips increases the reproducibility of 2de, various problems with 2d separation remain such as streaking, poor focusing, and the variable occurrence of gaps [85] . although 2de allows for high resolution of individual spots, a single spot may not correspond to a single protein, since proteins can comigrate as a single spot on a 2d gel [102] . furthermore, 2de requires milligram quantities of protein, reflecting the low sensitivity of this method. to further enhance the utility of 2de-ms, enrichment of samples for low-abundance proteins by improved methods is required. enrichment can include prefractionation of samples, as well as more sensitive detection and quantitation methods, or the use of alternative methods including laser capture microdissection [103] for heterogeneous tissues. in most of the studies mentioned previously, the resolution problem was overcome by narrowing the ph range allowing for greater focusing. however, the reduced ph range in ief can lead to the elimination of a large number of proteins that may be informative. comparing hundreds of protein spots across gel images taken from a large number of different samples is extremely time-consuming, even with specialized software. for this reason, although 2d electrophoresis is a promising tool, it is not very practical for clinical application. the challenge is to develop this technique into a system capable of automation, high throughput, and high sensitivity.multidimensional lc/ms/ms involves solution proteolysis of a complex mixture of proteins, which are then fractionated by high-performance liquid chromatography (hplc). peptides are then analyzed by tandem ms consisting of two phases. in the first phase, peptides in each chromatographic fraction are electrosprayed and ionized producing a mass spectrum characteristic of the molecular weight of each peptide in the sample. in the second phase, the first mass analyzer of the instrument is used to select a single (m ϩ h) ϩ ion from the mixture and to transmit it to a collision chamber, where the peptide undergoes collisions with argon atoms and suffers fragmentation. the resulting fragment ions are then transferred to a second analyzer, which separates them according to mass [104] . the end result is a mass spectrum containing ions characteristic of the sequence of amino acids in the selected peptide. when mixtures are extremely complex, online reverse-phase lc is used to concentrate and separate the peptides before sequencing by ms [105] . an online capillary lc/ms/ms system consists of conventional hplc pumps, transfer tubing, a precolumn flow splitter, a liquid junction, a reverse-phase microcapillary column, and a tandem mass spectrometer [106] .two studies have used lc/ms/ms to identify differential protein expression in hiv-or hcv-infected cells. in the first study, traditional hplc (ion exchange and reverse-phase columns) coupled to an ultrasensitive ion trap ms was employed to 328 a. pumfery et al. identify proteins that were unique to mdm and to identify proteins present in hiv-1-infected mdm lysates by microsequencing [31] . the second study used normal hepatocytes and immortalized human hepatocytes that can be induced to express the entire hcv orf. the two different cell types were labeled with an isotopically light ( 12 c for stimulated) or heavy ( 13 c, for control cells) reagent called isotope-coded affinity tag (icat); the two differentially labeled samples were then combined and digested with trypsin. digested peptides were separated by strong cation-exchange chromatography, affinity purified with an avidin cartridge, and subjected to lc-esi-ms/ms. this study led to the identification of 2159 unique proteins that could be used as markers for disease progression.some of the advantages include automation in sample application, ability to switch columns, and sensitivity, as this method is able to identify proteins at very low levels [107] . in addition, this method has been extensively used for the determination of drugs and hormone levels in human serum [108] [109] [110] [111] , making it a promising tool for the detection of disease prognosis markers.2de-based proteome analysis provides information about protein abundance at the gel level by comparing staining intensities. however, when peptide mixtures are analyzed directly by lc/ms/ms techniques, the original quantitative information is lost. for this reason, one of the drawbacks of using lc/ms/ms is the dependence on incorporating stable isotope labeling for quantitative proteome analysis involving the addition of a chemically identical form of the analyte(s) containing stable heavy isotopes (e.g., 2 h, 13 c, 15 n, etc.) to the sample.seldi-tof is a proteomic technology that aims at the quantitative analysis of protein mixtures. this technique relies on the use of trapping surfaces that allow differential capture of proteins based on intrinsic properties of the proteins themselves to identify proteins from crude samples without the need for an initial separation step. a small amount of sample can be directly applied to a biochip coated with specific chemical matrices (hydrophobic, cationic, or anionic) or specific biochemical materials, including dna fragments or purified proteins. bound proteins can then be analyzed by ms to obtain either the protein fingerprints or the amino acid sequence when interfaced with a tandem ms.the seldi proteinchip approach has been employed to study the protein profiles of cells infected with viruses, including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), hiv-1, and chronic hepatitis b virus infection (chb) [31] . sars is a viral respiratory illness caused by sars-cov. sars was recognized as a global threat in march 2003, after first appearing in southern china in november 2002 (http://www.cdc.gov; [20] ). current serological methods used for laboratory diagnosis of sars fail to guarantee early diagnosis since most are based on the detection of antibodies that are produced 17-20 days after the onset of symptoms. elisa-based antigen detection tests offer high specificity and reproducibility, but they lack sensitivity. on the contrary, pcr-based methods, including reverse transcription-pcr, lack sensitivity and specificity [112] . for this reason, there is a need to develop a diagnostic methodology that can detect sars before the onset of the symptoms to allow for specific prevention and treatment measures for sars. according to recent studies, seldi-tof seems to be a promising approach to study the protein profile unique for sars. sera from acute sars patients or from healthy donors were examined to identify serum marker that could distinguish sars from non-sars patients. in this study, analysis of spectra accurately classified 36 of 37 (97.3%) sars specimens and accurately classified 987 of 993 (99.4%) of the controls as non-sars. in addition, the classification algorithm successfully distinguished acute sars from other type of infections with very high precision [22] . the same approach was also employed for the discovery of diagnostic proteomic signatures in the sera of patients with chb having liver fibrosis and cirrhosis. results show that 30 serum proteomic features formed a unique fingerprint for fibrosis that correlated with the different stages of fibrosis from minimal fibrosis to cirrhosis [66] .in another study that evaluated the protein fingerprints of hiv-1-infected mdm, cell lysates were directly applied on two types of protein chips: weak cation exchange and reverse-phase hydrophobic interaction. after washing to remove the unbound proteins, bound proteins were ionized and their molecular mass/charge ratio was determined using tof analysis. analysis of the obtained profiles showed distinct patterns between uninfected and infected mdm [33] .the seldi proteinchip approach allows for high-throughput protein analysis of crude protein mixtures without the need for a separation step. it is sensitive since it takes advantage of the analytical capacity of ms combined with novel surface chemistry. it can provide a phenotypic fingerprint of complex mixtures. sample requirements are dramatically reduced, and because this approach employs ms 330 a. pumfery et al. for its readout, attomolar to femtomolar concentrations of proteins can be detected. additionally, reproducibility is greater than that of other techniques such as 2d gels; proteins at extreme pis can be identified, a condition that is problematic under normal 2d gel electrophoresis conditions; and finally there is a greater sensitivity and accuracy for low-molecular-weight proteins (ͻ25 kda) using seldi, especially below 10 kda, which is particularly troublesome for 2d gels.this method needs a very robust algorithm to ensure specificity of the profile, in that it can distinguish the pattern between disease and healthy individuals with high accuracy, taking into account variations in profiles between healthy individuals as well as persons with a variety of different infections at different time periods in their course of illness. two additional drawbacks of this approach are the following: (i) the identity of the proteins cannot be discovered and (ii) as the absolute intensity of the peaks is measured in relationship to the most abundant peaks, peaks in low abundance will be masked by the more abundant ones. in addition, this method employs the direct analysis of tissues or biological fluids by maldi. the main drawbacks of this approach are the preferential detection of proteins with a lower molecular mass and the difficulty in determining the identity of proteins owing to ptm obscuring the correspondence of measured and predicted masses.a protein microarray relies on high-throughput amplification of each predicted orf by using gene-specific primers, followed by in vivo homologous recombination into a t7 expression vector. the proteins are expressed in an escherichia colibased cell-free in vitro transcription/translation system. the protein products from the unpurified reactions are printed directly onto nitrocellulose microarrays without further purification [113] .this approach was used to determine the complete antigen-specific humoral immune-response profile from infected humans and animals. the vaccinia virus proteome containing 185 individual viral proteins was printed on a chip after cloning and expression. the chips were then used to determine the antibody profile in serum from vaccinia-virus-immunized humans, primates, and mice [113] .once it has been developed and produced, a protein microarray can be a very rapid method (3 days for most of the genes) to comprehensively scan the humoral immune response of vaccinated or infected individuals.the generation of a complete proteome is technically challenging. one problem is the amplification of long genes. furthermore, expression of some proteins in heterologous systems is not efficient. this technique also does not take into account ptm of viral proteins that are expressed in bacteria. lastly, expression in e. coli might lead to folding problems of the protein.proteomic analysis of cellular protein samples began with the development of page [114] and later with the development of two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2d-page) [115] . these techniques allowed for the separation of proteins based on size (page) or charge and size (2d-page). these methods, however, did not allow for direct identification of these protein bands. indirect methods such as western blotting with specific antibodies were required for identification-a slow and laborious process. however, by combining a variety of mass spectrometric methods with page, identification of a larger number of proteins has become possible. these methods have proven invaluable in furthering various avenues of viral research. proteomic analysis of viruses has included identification of proteins in virus particles, characterization of virus-host protein-protein interactions, and analysis of serum proteins for biomarkers of disease.one aspect of viral proteomics has been the characterization of virus particles and virally infected cells. characterization of purified virions has led to the identification of viral proteins that were not originally identified with the virion as well as the identification of cellular proteins associated with the purified virus. for example, analysis of hcmv viral particles identified 12 additional orfs not previously known to reside in virions as well as the identification of 71 cellular proteins [6] . the importance of these cellular and viral proteins in viral replication or pathogenesis awaits further analysis. additionally, 12 unique polypeptides were identified that did not correspond to previously identified orfs [6] , illustrating the fact that despite intensive sequence analysis, sequence characteristics of viral promoters and orfs are still not entirely understood. analysis of virally infected cells has also led to the characterization of events leading to ebv-induced transformation [9, 10, 47] , identification of cellular proteins induced in hiv-infected 332 a. pumfery et al. macrophages [31] , and identification of cellular proteins that may be involved in aids-associated dementia [66] .the characterization of virus-host protein-protein interactions has been intensely studied. originally most studies have relied on the analysis of the interaction of two proteins or used the yeast two-hybrid system to identify new protein partners of a protein of interest. these studies, however, are quite labor intensive. furthermore, the yeast two-hybrid system is susceptible to false-positive identifications, cannot be used to identify multiprotein complexes, and typically does not take into account possible ptm that may influence protein binding. proteomic analysis, however, can be used to identify multiprotein complexes and, when used in the analysis of infected cells, will take into account any ptm that occur in infected cells. proteomic analysis of infected cells has resulted in the identification of cellular proteins that may mediate hsv ic27-induced repression of cellular protein synthesis [18] , and the identification of over 50 cellular and viral proteins in hsv dna replication [19] . furthermore, analysis of the hiv tat and htlv tax proteomes identified members of chromatin remodeling complexes as components of these viral transactivator multiprotein complexes [60, 73] . many of these studies will allow for further understanding of virus transcription, replication, and transformation. additionally, these studies may lead to the identification of unique drug targets. for example, the p-tefb complex has been shown to be critical for hiv gene expression [56, 60, 116] and hiv-infected cells are uniquely sensitive to the transcription suppressing effects of the p-tefb inhibitor flavopiridol [116] [117] [118] .a number of viruses are the causative agents of cancer, including ebv, hepatitis b virus, and hepatitis c virus (hcv). hcv is a major cause of the increasing incidence of liver cancer in developed countries [80] , though events leading to transformation are not well understood. until recently [86, 87] , an infectious cell culture model of hcv has not been available. the lack of a cell culture model has prevented the systematic analysis of changes induced by hcv infection. alternative approaches to studying hcv transformation have been the comparison of liver tissue and hepatoma-derived cell lines [82] [83] [84] and analysis of a single virus (ns5a)-host (hsp27) protein-protein interaction [26] . further analysis of additional hcv proteins and infected cells will provide additional insights into the nature of this virus and its ability to cause cancer.one aspect of viral proteomics that is of interest to physicians is the analysis of serum for protein biomarkers of disease. studies have been performed on patients infected with sars-cov, hiv, hcv, hbv, and hiv-1 using a variety of approaches. some of the methods that have been used are 2d-page followed by ms, lc/ms/ms, seldi proteinchips, and protein microarrays. these methods have their advantages and disadvantages. 2d gel electrophoresis allows for resolution of greater than 1000 protein species, can be used for quantitative analysis of expression, and reflects changes in ptm and the identification of isoforms. however, several issues with 2d gel electrophoresis are its lack of reproducibility, the difficulty in detecting hydrophobic proteins, low sensitivity, and the inability to use a high-throughput method to analyze a large number of samples. lc-ms has the advantages of solubilization of the majority of proteins, automation, ability to switch columns, and sensitivity; however, the ability to quantify changes in protein levels is lost with lc-ms.the seldi proteinchip is unique in that it allows for differential separation of complex protein mixtures based on chemical characteristics such as hydrophobicity or charge, resulting in a decrease in the complexity of the sample analyzed. however, seldi is considered a soft-ionization method and the results obtained are patterns of protein peaks and not the identification of peptide masses. to ensure the specificity of peak profile for a particular disease state, a robust algorithm is needed. lastly, protein microarrays have been developed to determine the immune response to a viral infection. the method requires the expression and printing of all orfs of a pathogen and cross-linking them to a solid support. protein microarrays would allow for the rapid diagnosis of a particular viral infection. however, expression of a complete proteome is a challenging task. as the proteins are expressed in bacteria, potentially important ptm are lost and proteins may not be properly folded.serum is a complex mixture of proteins that is dominated by two proteinsalbumin and immunoglobulin (ig) [119] . the abundance of these proteins means that analysis of serum for potential biomarkers of disease requires either very sensitive methods or separation of albumin and ig from serum. several albumin and/or ig depletion methods have been developed to resolve this issue. pieper et al. [120] developed a series of chromatographic columns to separate immunoglobulins based on their affinity for proteins a and g as well as columns containing antibodies with specificities for individual proteins such as albumin, fibrinogen, and transferrin. the columns were successful in depleting serum samples of their respective proteins, and use of several columns significantly decreased the complexity of the sample analyzed [120] . additionally, a mixed-bed column was developed that allowed the simultaneous separation of several proteins, which would allow for automated processing of samples. a similar approach has been developed by bio-rad (affi-gel blue) to deplete samples of albumin, enhancing the detection of other proteins in the sample [121] . affi-gel blue has affinity for hydrophobic, aromatic, or sterically active binding sites of protein. although this product has high affinity for albumin, it may bind other proteins as well, limiting its usefulness. lastly, baussant et al. [122] developed a peptide-based approach to deplete albumin. their approach was based on the fact that although protein g has affinity for the fc region of igg, it can also bind albumin less specifically. baussant et al. modified a peptide of protein g to have a much higher affinity for albumin, which significantly and specifically depleted the serum of albumin; however, other hydrophobic proteins, i.e., apolipoproteins, were also captured [122] .despite their relatively small size, viruses are fairly complex and encode between a dozen and more than 200 proteins. many of these proteins are posttranslationally modified and interact with other viral and host proteins to function.identifying the proteins that are encoded by viruses and the proteins with which they interact will greatly further the understanding of viral replication and pathogenesis and proteomic approaches will greatly facilitate these studies. lastly, the ability to diagnose cancer or viral infections at early stages will allow for early treatment and reduce the morbidity and mortality associated with these diseases. proteomic analysis of biological markers in serum should allow for the early noninvasive diagnosis of cancer. although good reliable methods are available for the analysis of the serum proteome, the abundance of a few proteins, i.e., albumin and ig, and the low abundance of many other proteins will require methods for separating out the high-abundance proteins and instruments and methods with enough sensitivity to identify proteins at low concentration.it is becoming increasingly clear that the field of proteomics may require better and more robust separation methods, sensitive instrumentation, and unbiased bioinformatic tools. 2de has historically provided a rapid means for separating thousands of proteins from cell and tissue samples in one run. although this is a powerful research tool and has been enthusiastically applied in many fields of biomedical research, accurate analysis and interpretation of the data have provided many challenges. several analysis steps are needed to convert the large amount of noisy data obtained with 2de into reliable and interpretable biological information. the goals of such analysis steps include accurate protein detection and quantification, consistent comparative visualization methods, as well as the identification of differentially expressed proteins between samples run on different gels. to achieve these goals, systematic errors such as geometric distortions between the gels must be corrected by using computer-assisted methods. a wide range of computer software has been developed, but no general consensus exists as a standard for 2de data analysis protocols.in search for new diagnostic and therapeutic targets, 2de has been used to study differential expression of peptides and proteins in various disease entities. however, 2de usually requires large amounts of starting material, is timeconsuming, and reveals only a fraction of the proteins present in a given sample. more recently, the proteinchip technology coupled with bioinformatics has gained considerable attention. this technique uses seldi-tof/ms to screen protein sources for putative disease biomarkers in a spectrum from 2 to 20 kda. several studies have provided evidence that proteinchip technology is capable of detecting early-stage cancer by its unique cancer-specific proteomic fingerprints, with sensitivities and specificities reaching far beyond well-established serumbased tumor markers [123] . however, as in most rapid diagnosis tests, seldi technology can still not detect the nature of the amino acid biomarkers or their ptm in a consistent and reproducible manner. clearly other technologies such as the lc/ms/ms and the lc-fticr are far more sensitive and better in defining the composition of these biomarkers.finally, very recently, much effort has gone into the concept of "lab-on-a-chip." these chips involve micron-sized channels embedded in glass or silicon chips. attempts have been made to carry out two-dimensional gel-based experiments on chips. microchips that are able to carry out microfluidic experiments are being developed (e.g., nanogen inc., diagnoswiss, caliper technologies), which are faster and more accurate than the conventional gel technology. if such technologies were made 2de compatible then it would offer immense research potential. especially promising are advancements in detecting low-abundance proteins and ptm.in this chapter, we have discussed the latest new proteomics findings that relate to some of the most important viral infections known to humans. these included hcmv, hsv, ebv, kshv, hiv, htlv, hbv, hcv, and sars infections. in many instances we have seen a mere description of the viral or the infected host cell proteome; however, most of the data to date are descriptive in nature and very few studies have correlated phenotype of the infection to the pathology or drug treatment. although in some cases investigators have found new enzyme targets as markers (i.e., sars-cov), no serious attempts have been made to functionally identify their significance in the pathology of the virus. this is mainly because the field of viral proteomics is at its early stages of development and much confirmatory information would be required from animal or human model studies, which are currently either in progress or will need to be developed in near future. therefore, a new field of functional viral proteomics is developing in both industrial and academic settings to address issues related to functional biomarkers, drug-resistance viruses, and host/pathogen relations that pertain to disease prognosis, treatment decision, and monitoring response to therapy.another challenging consideration is the mixed infections seen in aids patients who not only may have varying hiv-1 clade infections (more than seven clades, and close to 1500 genetically distinct hiv-1 genotypes) but also are coinfected with other viruses such as hcv or kshv. the complication of identifying biomarkers in these patients, or in some instances animal models, has never been properly addressed in the current literature, nor is there enough awareness between various compartments of patient bench to bedside practices. therefore, a better flow of information using solid epidemiological data followed by better diagnostics for the viral etiology would allow a meaningful identification of the proteome biomarkers seen in these patients. these multiple biomarkers would serve as invaluable tools for multiple drug treatments and better control of mixed infections.finally, the issue of frontend purification for the collected test material is perhaps the most important aspect of sample preparation. currently there are various methods that utilize standard separation techniques to remove most abundant proteins prior to ms, i.e., removal of some 20 high-abundance proteins and better visualization of low-abundance proteins (sigma-aldrich kits). however, in most cases the removal of these proteins may in fact compromise the detection of biomarkers or their partners, since in many instances, viral infection leads to overexpression of the most abundant proteins such as the actins, keratins, tubulins, cyclophilins, vimentin, and hsps among others. therefore, future attempts at the identification of biomarkers would have to define not only the most high-and lowabundance proteins but also their partners and possible modifications.the inflammatory chemokine interferon-gamma inducible protein of 10 kda (ip-10), also known as c-x-c motif chemokine ligand 10 (cxcl10), is a biomarker associated with obesity, insulin resistance, atherosclerosis, paraneoplastic neurologic disorders, and infections [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] . this ligand of chemokine c-x-c motif receptor 3 (cxcr3) found on t lymphocytes (th1), natural killer (nk) cells and eosinophils is encoded by the cxcl10 gene on chromosome 4 at band q21, and is secreted by monocytes, endothelial cells, adipose tissue, and fibroblasts [4, [7] [8] [9] [10] . ip-10 plays a role in angiogenesis inhibition, cell chemotaxis, regulation of cell growth and proliferation, and apoptosis [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] . infections associated with ip-10 include those caused by parasites, viruses, bacteria and fungi [3] . ip-10 production is associated with both protection from and facilitation of infection. recent reports have indicated increased levels of ip-10 occur with acute respiratory infections (aris) and suggest a biomarker role for ip-10 [16] [17] [18] [19] .the present study investigated serum concentrations of ip-10 in otherwise healthy patients who developed aris in order to further ascertain a link between ari and ip-10 concentrations. the development of a biomarker for virally-mediated aris could potentially lead to a methodology to point to infection etiology and severity in order to formulate a treatment plan. based on previous studies, the hypothesis is that serum ip-10 concentrations correlate with ari severity and durations in otherwise healthy individuals. also, we considered that the detection of virus in nasal specimens would be associated with ip-10 concentration obtained early in the ari course. this could potentially be helpful, as there are few if any clinically useful markers of mild to moderate severity acute respiratory infection.data come from a randomized controlled trial measuring the effects of mindfulness meditation or exercise on the incidence and severity of ari (clinical trials id: nct01654289). study participants were community-recruited adults ages 30-69, who were generally healthy and who reported getting at least one cold per year. three cohorts of 99, 105, and 104 healthy individuals who gave written informed consent over three seasons were enrolled in august and september and were followed until may. the trial is ongoing, and the investigators are still blinded. ip-10 concentrations used in this analysis were measured at study entry before randomization of intervention occurred and within the first 72 h following onset of ari. it is still unknown if or how the meditation or exercise interventions could influence ip-10 measurements. the study protocol was approved by the university of wisconsin-madison institutional review board for human subjects research.each participant had blood drawn at study entry. when a participant reported ari symptoms equaling 2 or greater on the jackson scale, samples were collected within the first 72 h of onset of symptoms. blood samples were collected using standard venipuncture techniques, and the serum was frozen at −80 • c. ip-10 concentrations were measured in picograms per milliliter (pg/ml) using elisa, according to manufacturer's protocol (r and d systems, minneapolis, mn). the assay range is 7.8-500 pg/ml, and samples with concentrations greater than the highest standard were diluted as directed by the manufacturer's protocol and remeasured. at the time that the participant contacted the study coordinators to report an ari, the participant performed a nasal self-swab. a nasal lavage was done at the time of the blood draw. multiplex pcr was used to detect and identify respiratory viruses in nasal swab and wash samples. over 100 rhinovirus serotypes, as well as serotypes of influenza, parainfluenza, coronavirus, respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, enterovirus, and metapneumovirus can be identified. overall sensitivity is estimated at 94%, with 99% specificity [20] . viruses detected in either nasal swab or lavage were considered positive. viruses were grouped by type for analysis: adenovirus and bocavirus, coronaviruses, enterovirus and rhinovirus, influenza viruses, paramyxoviruses (metapneumovirus, parainfluenza viruses, and respiratory syncytial viruses).after providing written informed consent, participants were contacted every week using a web-based surveillance system to prompt self-reported ari episodes. the jackson criteria were used to define the beginning of an ari episode; three criteria had to be met: (1) answer "yes" to either "do you think you have a cold?" or "do you think you are coming down with a cold?;" (2) report at least one of four cold symptoms: nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, sneezing, or sore throat; and (3) score at least two points on the jackson scale. the jackson score is calculated by summing scores for eight symptoms: sneezing, headache, malaise, chilliness, nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, sore throat and cough. each symptom is rated 0, 1, 2, or 3; from absent to severe [21] . data about symptom severity and quality of life impact were collected daily using the validated wisconsin upper respiratory symptom survey (wurss-24) until the ari episode resolved [22, 23] . the daily severity score is calculated by adding the wurss items for that day. to calculate area under the curve (wurss auc) for ari global severity, the sum of wurss totals across all daily time points of the illness episode was used, and trapezoidal approximation was then applied [24, 25] . wurss can be divided into three categories of symptoms: nasal, throat, and quality of life (qol) symptoms [25, 26] .to assess the relationship between the ari illness outcomes and ip-10, spearman correlations were computed. fisher's z transformation was used to compute 95% confident intervals (ci) around the correlations. wilcoxon scores were computed and used in the kruskal-wallis test to compare continuous variables by groupings (e.g. ari global severity between participants with corresponding ip-10 measurements versus those without ip-10 measurements at time of ari). generalized linear regression modeling techniques were used to assess the relationship between ari outcomes and ip-10 after adjusting for baseline covariates (age, sex, and body mass index (bmi)); repeated measures modeling was used to account for the correlation between observations within a participant for those who had more than one ari. generalized linear regression modeling techniques with repeated measures correlations were also used to compute lsmeans comparisons between the viral infection categories using the tukey adjustment for multiple comparisons. ari global severity, ari duration, and ip-10 are highly skewed measurements; we transformed these measurements on the log base10 scale before running the regression models. observed measurements for these data are presented as medians and interquartile ranges (iqr). for the change from baseline models with log base 10 transformed outcome variables, change was calculated as log10(ari at later time point/ari at baseline). the beta can be interpreted as a percentage change in the outcome (e.g. ari global severity) for every unit increase in the predictor variable (e.g. ip-10). all statistical analyses were run using sas 9.3.of the 308 individuals enrolled in the study, 181 participants experienced 284 ari episodes. we were unable to measure ip-10 levels during 59 of the ari episodes due to challenges getting samples within 72 h of onset of symptoms, as required by protocol (fig. 1 ). thus, we were able to collect serum samples for ip-10 concentration during 225 ari episodes that occurred in 157 individuals ( table 1) . characteristics of these 225 ari episodes with corresponding ip-10 collection can be also be found in table 1 . there were no statistically significant differences in ari global severity or ari duration between the ari episodes where ip-10 was collected as compared to the ari episodes where ip-10 was not collected. in addition, we were unable to collect ip-10 on the same day as the wurss symptom scores for five aris (n = 220 for same day symptom level analyses).serum ip-10 at baseline correlates with age (rho = 0.31 [95% confidence interval (95% ci): 0.16-0.44]; p < 0.0001) and bmi (rho = 0.37 [95% ci: 0.22-0.49]; p < 0.0001). while men had lower ip-10 than women at baseline (median = 138 (iqr: 109-183) vs median = 154 (123-199), respectively), these differences were not statistically significant (p = 0.27).serum ip-10 correlated with ari severity, duration, and symptoms (fig. 2 ). an ari induced an increase in ip-10 over baseline almost 80% of the time with serum ip-10 increasing from baseline (median: 152 pg/ml [iqr: 119-192]) to ari (median: 295 pg/ml [iqr: 172-433]; p < 0.0001). while baseline ip-10 did not correlate with ari outcomes, both ari ip-10 and change in ip-10 correlated with all of the ari outcomes (table 2) . ari ip-10 correlates significantly with ari global severity (rho = 0.28 [95% ci: 0.15-0.39]; p < 0.001) and duration (rho = 0.14 [95% ci: 0.01-0.27]; p = 0.03) (fig. 2) . after adjusting for age, sex, and bmi, for every unit increase in log-based 10 ip-10, there was an increase in log 10 ari global severity of 0.50 (95% ci: 0.28-0.72) ( table 3 ). this implies that an ip-10 concentration of 100 pg/ml predicted a 50 unit (95% ci: 44-67 units) increase in ari global severity. for every 10% increase in ip-10 from baseline, there was a 1.8% increase in ari global severity (95% ci: 0.9-2.7%).ip-10 with ari correlates with the ari severity on day of serum collection in the expected positive direction both for the daily severity score (rho = 0. 34 table 2 ). these relationships remain after adjusting for age, gender, and bmi (table 3) .finally, serum ip-10 concentrations are higher in individuals with an ari in which a viral pathogen was detected a as modeled using log-based 10 transformation. b all models include the following covariates: age, gender, and bmi at baseline. c observed on the day of the ip-10 blood draw. this paper presents some evidence that ip-10 concentration early during the ari may serve as a useful predictor of ari outcome, including severity and duration in healthy adults. the concentration of ip-10 appears to correlate with symptom severity and hence could serve as a useful marker or predictor of ari illness severity. ip-10 correlates with symptoms on the day that it is measured, and appears to predict subsequent severity and duration. it appears to correlate with all three groups of symptoms used to measure ari severity as expected from a potential biomarker in serum [25, 26] .in the context of a clinical study, such as the one reported here, participants also have baseline ip-10 concentrations measured at study entry, a time when they are not sick. we show that the change in ip-10 concentration at ari over baseline also correlates with ari severity and duration. this finding confirms that the ip-10 concentrations increase with ari illness. for example, ip-10 could potentially be helpful with risk-stratification, with refining the differential diagnosis, or even possibly with clinical decision-making, such as whether to initiate antiviral treatment. future work would be needed to formally test these possibilities.serum ip-10 correlates with detection of virus in nasal specimens obtained within the first 72 h of symptoms. parallel correlations exist in that influenza and paramyxovirus infections are associated with higher ip-10 concentrations and greater ari severity, as measured by wurss auc, compared to infections caused by coronaviruses, enteroviruses, and rhinoviruses. our results are consistent with the findings from another laboratory that found higher ip-10 concentrations in bronchoalveolar lavage samples in which a virus was identified [17] . however, the patients in that study were much sicker as all were hospitalized and underwent bronchoscopy for diagnosis of their lower respiratory tract infection.few serum biomarkers of ari have been identified. in fact, for all-cause community-acquired ari illness, no reliable predictor of severity or duration exists [27] . our group previously found a positive correlation between interleukin-8 concentrations in nasal wash and severity and duration of ari nasal symptoms, including runny nose, plugged nose, and sneezing [25] . in contrast, serum procalcitonin is not a useful marker for ari [28] . other research groups have reported that nasal ip-10 is correlated with ari, primarily among people with underlying illness [29] [30] [31] . aris caused by parainfluenza virus in adults with severe multiple disabilities had an almost 9 fold increase in the serum concentration of ip-10 during the acute phase of the infection [16] . additionally, in other populations with underlying illnesses, such as asthma or copd, ip-10 concentrations measured in serum [16, [32] [33] [34] or nasal [31] samples or ip-10 gene expression [19, 35] again correlated with acute respiratory infections leading to exacerbations. although ip-10 concentrations are higher in smokers with copd but not in smokers generally [36] , the number of smokers in our cohort is small and hence unlikely to influence ip-10 concentrations. however, we also analyzed change in ip-10 with ari and got the same results. although the correlations are relatively modest, our study results show that serum ip-10 is a potentially useful marker for ari severity and trends with ari duration in this healthy population.although ip-10 is elevated with influenza infections compared to controls, ip-10 has not been shown to be useful for identifying severe influenza infections [37] . although large increases in ip-10 concentrations were observed with parainfluenza infections, no correlations with clinical severity of infection were apparent [16] . in contrast, we found that ip-10 concentrations correlate with ari symptoms on the day measured early in the course of the infection, as well as with severity and duration of ari in a cohort of healthy individuals.the ari episodes in these healthy individuals were mild to moderate in severity. these were community-recruited femalepredominated participants who are primarily white, well-educated and agreed to be monitored for a cold-and-flu season. the vast majority of illness episodes were not severe enough to prompt clinical evaluation. a sample collected from people presenting to clinic would likely demonstrate somewhat higher severity and biomarker values, which might influence the relationships reported here [38, 39] . the nasal specimens in which no virus was detected are certainly not always without viral or infectious cause. there are several reasons why we did not identify virus in someone sick with what appears to be an ari: (1) we did not test for the virus causing the infection; (2) the symptoms are associated with an allergic response or other inflammatory reaction; (3) the infection is of bacterial [40] or fungal etiology; (4) the symptoms are caused by chemical irritation; (5) the symptoms are psychosomatic.our study results provide evidence that ip-10 is a biomarker for ari severity in healthy adults. serum ip-10 concentration correlates with ari severity, as measured by wurss, on the day that it is measured. also, ip-10 concentration measured early in the course of the ari correlates with both the severity and trends with duration of the illness.the inflammatory chemokine interferon-gamma inducible protein of 10 kda (ip-10), also known as c-x-c motif chemokine ligand 10 (cxcl10), is a biomarker associated with obesity, insulin resistance, atherosclerosis, paraneoplastic neurologic disorders, and infections. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] this ligand of chemokine c-x-c motif receptor 3 (cxcr3) found on t lymphocytes (th1), natural killer (nk) cells and eosinophils is encoded by the cxcl10 gene on chromosome 4 at band q21, and is secreted by monocytes, endothelial cells, adipose tissue, and fibroblasts. [4, [7] [8] [9] [10] ip-10 plays a role in angiogenesis inhibition, cell chemotaxis, regulation of cell growth and proliferation, and apoptosis. [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] infections associated with ip-10 include those caused by parasites, viruses, bacteria and fungi. [3] ip-10 production is associated with both protection from and facilitation of infection. recent reports have indicated increased levels of ip-10 occur with acute respiratory infections (aris) and suggest a biomarker role for ip-10. [16] [17] [18] [19] the present study investigated serum concentrations of ip-10 in otherwise healthy patients who developed aris in order to further ascertain a link between ari and ip-10 concentrations. the development of a biomarker for virally-mediated aris could potentially lead to a methodology to point to infection etiology and severity in order to formulate a treatment plan. based on previous studies, the hypothesis is that serum ip-10 concentrations correlate with ari severity and durations in otherwise healthy individuals. also, we considered that the detection of virus in nasal specimens would be associated with ip-10 concentration obtained early in the ari course. this could potentially be helpful, as there are few if any clinically useful markers of mild to moderate severity acute respiratory infection.data come from a randomized controlled trial measuring the effects of mindfulness meditation or exercise on the incidence and severity of ari (clinical trials id: nct01654289). study participants were community-recruited adults ages 30-69, who were generally healthy and who reported getting at least one cold per year. three cohorts of 99, 105, and 104 healthy individuals who gave written informed consent over three seasons were enrolled in august and september and were followed until may. the trial is ongoing, and the investigators are still blinded. ip-10 concentrations used in this analysis were measured at study entry before randomization of intervention occurred and within the first 72 hours following onset of ari. it is still unknown if or how the meditation or exercise interventions could influence ip-10 measurements. the study protocol was approved by the university of wisconsin-madison institutional review board for human subjects research.each participant had blood drawn at study entry. when a participant reported ari symptoms equaling 2 or greater on the jackson scale, samples were collected within the first 72 hours of onset of symptoms. blood samples were collected using standard venipuncture techniques, and the serum was frozen at −80°c. ip-10 concentrations were measured in picograms per milliliter (pg/ml) using elisa, according to manufacturer's protocol (r and d systems, minneapolis, mn). the assay range is 7.8-500 pg/ml, and samples with concentrations greater than the highest standard were diluted as directed by the manufacturer's protocol and remeasured. at the time that the participant contacted the study coordinators to report an ari, the participant performed a nasal self-swab. a nasal lavage was done at the time of the blood draw. multiplex pcr was were used to detect and identify respiratory viruses in nasal swab and wash samples. over 100 rhinovirus serotypes, as well as serotypes of influenza, parainfluenza, coronavirus, respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, enterovirus, and metapneumovirus can be identified. overall sensitivity is estimated at 94%, with 99% specificity. [20] viruses detected in either nasal swab or lavage were considered positive. viruses were grouped by type for analysis: adenovirus and bocavirus, coronaviruses, enterovirus and rhinovirus, influenza viruses, paramyxoviruses (metapneumovirus, parainfluenza viruses, and respiratory syncytial viruses).after providing written informed consent, participants were contacted every week using a web-based surveillance system to prompt self-reported ari episodes. the jackson criteria were used to define the beginning of an ari episode; three criteria had to be met: 1) answer "yes" to either "do you think you have a cold?" or "do you think you are coming down with a cold?;" 2) report at least one of four cold symptoms: nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, sneezing, or sore throat; and 3) score at least two points on the jackson scale. the jackson score is calculated by summing scores for eight symptoms: sneezing, headache, malaise, chilliness, nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, sore throat and cough. each symptom is rated 0, 1, 2, or 3; from absent to severe. [21] data about symptom severity and quality of life impact were collected daily using the validated wisconsin upper respiratory symptom survey (wurss-24) until the ari episode resolved. [22, 23] the daily severity score is calculated by adding the wurss items for that day. to calculate area under the curve (wurss auc) for ari global severity, the sum of wurss totals across all daily time points of the illness episode was used, and trapezoidal approximation was then applied. [24, 25] wurss can be divided into three categories of symptoms: nasal, throat, and quality of life (qol) symptoms. [25, 26] to assess the relationship between the ari illness outcomes and ip-10, spearman correlations were computed. fisher's z transformation was used to compute 95% confident intervals (ci) around the correlations. wilcoxon scores were computed and used in the kruskal-wallis test to compare continuous variables by groupings (e.g. ari global severity between participants with corresponding ip-10 measurements versus those without ip-10 measurements at time of ari). generalized linear regression modeling techniques were used to assess the relationship between ari outcomes and ip-10 after adjusting for baseline covariates (age, sex, and body mass index (bmi)); repeated measures modeling was used to account for the correlation between observations within a participant for those who had more than one ari. generalized linear regression modeling techniques with repeated measures correlations were also used to compute lsmeans comparisons between the viral infection categories using the tukey adjustment for multiple comparisons. ari global severity, ari duration, and ip-10 are highly skewed measurements; we transformed these measurements on the log base10 scale before running the regression models. observed measurements for these data are presented as medians and interquartile ranges (iqr). for the change from baseline models with log base 10 transformed outcome variables, change was calculated as log10(ari at later time point / ari at baseline). the beta can be interpreted as a percentage change in the outcome (e.g. ari global severity) for every unit increase in the predictor variable (e.g. ip-10). all statistical analyses were run using sas 9.3.of the 308 individuals enrolled in the study, 181 participants experienced 284 ari episodes. we were unable to measure ip-10 levels during 59 of the ari episodes due to challenges getting samples within 72 hours of onset of symptoms, as required by protocol ( figure 1 ). thus, we were able to collect serum samples for ip-10 concentration during 225 ari episodes that occurred in 157 individuals ( table 1) . characteristics of these 225 ari episodes with corresponding ip-10 collection can be also be found in table 1 . there were no statistically significant differences in ari global severity or ari duration between the ari episodes where ip-10 was collected as compared to the ari episodes where ip-10 was not collected. in addition, we were unable to collect ip-10 on the same day as the wurss symptom scores for five aris (n=220 for same day symptom level analyses).serum ip-10 at baseline correlates with age (rho=0.31 [95% confidence interval (95% ci): 0.160.44] p<0.0001) and bmi (rho=0.37 [95% ci: 0.22-0.49]; p<0.0001). while men had lower ip-10 than women at baseline (median=138 (iqr:109-183) vs median=154 (123-199), respectively), these differences were not statistically significant (p=0.27).serum ip-10 correlated with ari severity, duration, and symptoms. (figure 2 ) an ari induced an increase in ip-10 over baseline almost 80% of the time with serum ip-10 increasing from baseline (median: 152 pg/ml [iqr:119-192]) to ari (median: 295 pg/ml [iqr:172-433]; p<0.0001). while baseline ip-10 did not correlate with ari outcomes, both ari ip-10 and change in ip-10 correlated with all of the ari outcomes (table 2) . ari ip-10 correlates significantly with ari global severity (rho=0.28 [95% ci: 0.15-0.39]; p<0.001) and duration (rho=0.14 [95% ci: 0.01-0.27]; p=0.03). (figure 2 ) after adjusting for age, sex, and bmi, for every unit increase in log-based 10 ip-10, there was an increase in log 10 ari global severity of 0.50 (95% ci: 0.28-0.72). (table 3 ) this implies that an ip-10 concentration of 100 pg/ml predicted a 50 unit (95% ci: 44-67 units) increase in ari global severity. for every 10% increase in ip-10 from baseline, there was a 1.8% increase in ari global severity (95% ci: 0.9%-2.7%).ip-10 with ari correlates with the ari severity on day of serum collection in the expected positive direction both for the daily severity score (rho=0. 34 table 2 ). these relationships remain after adjusting for age, gender, and bmi (table 3) .finally, serum ip-10 concentrations are higher in individuals with an ari in which a viral pathogen was detected (median=366 pg/ml [iqr:227-486]) compared to those in which no pathogen was identified in nasal specimens (median=163 pg/ml [iqr:127-295]; p<0.0001) ( this paper presents some evidence that ip-10 concentration early during the ari may serve as a useful predictor of ari outcome, including severity and duration in healthy adults. the concentration of ip-10 appears to correlate with symptom severity and hence could serve as a useful marker or predictor of ari illness severity. ip-10 correlates with symptoms on the day that it is measured, and appears to predict subsequent severity and duration. it appears to correlate with all three groups of symptoms used to measure ari severity as expected from a potential biomarker in serum. [25, 26] in the context of a clinical study, such as the one reported here, participants also have baseline ip-10 concentrations measured at study entry, a time when they are not sick. we show that the change in ip-10 concentration at ari over baseline also correlates with ari severity and duration. this finding confirms that the ip-10 concentrations increase with ari illness. for example, ip-10 could potentially be helpful with risk-stratification, with refining the differential diagnosis, or even possibly with clinical decision-making, such as whether to initiate antiviral treatment. future work would be needed to formally test these possibilities.serum ip-10 correlates with detection of virus in nasal specimens obtained within the first 72 hours of symptoms. parallel correlations exist in that influenza and paramyxovirus infections are associated with higher ip-10 concentrations and greater ari severity, as measured by wurss auc, compared to infections caused by coronaviruses, enteroviruses, and rhinoviruses. our results are consistent with the findings from another laboratory that found higher ip-10 concentrations in bronchoalveolar lavage samples in which a virus was identified. [17] however, the patients in that study were much sicker as all were hospitalized and underwent bronchoscopy for diagnosis of their lower respiratory tract infection.few serum biomarkers of ari have been identified. in fact, for all-cause communityacquired ari illness, no reliable predictor of severity or duration exists. [27] our group previously found a positive correlation between interleukin-8 concentrations in nasal wash and severity and duration of ari nasal symptoms, including runny nose, plugged nose, and sneezing. [25] in contrast, serum procalcitonin is not a useful marker for ari. [28] other research groups have reported that nasal ip-10 is correlated with ari, primarily among people with underlying illness. [29] [30] [31] aris caused by parainfluenza virus in adults with severe multiple disabilities had an almost 9 fold increase in the serum concentration of ip-10 during the acute phase of the infection. [16] additionally, in other populations with underlying illnesses, such as asthma or copd, ip-10 concentrations measured in serum [16, [32] [33] [34] or nasal [31] samples or ip-10 gene expression [19, 35] again correlated with acute respiratory infections leading to exacerbations. although ip-10 concentrations are higher in smokers with copd but not in smokers generally, [36] the number of smokers in our cohort is small and hence unlikely to influence ip-10 concentrations. however, we also analyzed change in ip-10 with ari and got the same results. although the correlations are relatively modest, our study results show that serum ip-10 is a potentially useful marker for ari severity and trends with ari duration in this healthy population.although ip-10 is elevated with influenza infections compared to controls, ip-10 has not been shown to be useful for identifying severe influenza infections. [37] although large increases in ip-10 concentrations were observed with parainfluenza infections, no correlations with clinical severity of infection were apparent. [16] in contrast, we found that ip-10 concentrations correlate with ari symptoms on the day measured early in the course of the infection, as well as with severity and duration of ari in a cohort of healthy individuals.the ari episodes in these healthy individuals were mild to moderate in severity. these were community-recruited female-predominated participants who are primarily white, welleducated and agreed to be monitored for a cold-and-flu season. the vast majority of illness episodes were not severe enough to prompt clinical evaluation. a sample collected from people presenting to clinic would likely demonstrate somewhat higher severity and biomarker values, which might influence the relationships reported here. [39] the nasal specimens in which no virus was detected are certainly not always without viral or infectious cause. there are several reasons why we did not identify virus in someone sick with what appears to be an ari: 1) we did not test for the virus causing the infection; 2) the symptoms are associated with an allergic response or other inflammatory reaction; 3) the infection is of bacterial [40] or fungal etiology; 4) the symptoms are caused by chemical irritation; 5) the symptoms are psychosomatic.our study results provide evidence that ip-10 is a biomarker for ari severity in healthy adults. serum ip-10 concentration correlates with ari severity, as measured by wurss, on the day that it is measured. also, ip-10 concentration measured early in the course of the ari correlates with both the severity and trends with duration of the illness.serum ip-10 concentrations from 225 ari episodes correlated with ari severity on the day that it was measured and overall ari severity for the episode.• ip-10 concentrations were higher with an ari in which a viral pathogen was detected compared to no viral pathogen detected. influenza infections induce higher ip-10 concentrations than coronavirus, enterovirus or rhinovirus, and paramyxovirus.• ip-10 may be a biomarker for ari severity and for presence of a viral pathogen. as modeled using log-based 10 transformation. 2all models include the following covariates: age, gender, and bmi at baseline. 3observed on the day of the ip-10 blood draw.acute respiratory infection illness (also known as the common cold, upper respiratory tract infection, or upper respiratory infection) is an acute infection, generally viral in etiology, involving structures of the upper airways [simoes et al., 2006] . the most common causative agent is rhinovirus, but several other respiratory viruses are also known to cause acute respiratory illness [gwaltney, 1985] . acute respiratory infection is a common occurrence, yet detrimental to well-being. moreover, there is currently no cure or effective treatment option available [cohen et al., 1993; carter, 2002] . symptoms of acute respiratory infection illness can be examined three-dimensionally in the following groups: nasal, throat, and quality of life . these unpleasant, and sometimes, severe symptoms cause people to miss work and to utilize healthcare services, which places a notable burden on the individual and society [fendrick et al., 2003; eccles, 2005; fiore et al., 2010; ebell and afonso, 2011] .for many years, it has been known that some inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-8 (il-8), play a role in the pathophysiology of the common cold, as levels are found to increase in individuals sick with viral rhinitis compared to healthy individuals [choi and jacoby, 1992; becker et al., 1993; noah et al., 1995; röseler et al., 1995; gern et al., 1996; johnston et al., 1997; zhu et al., 1997; kaul et al., 2000; parry et al., 2000] . within the immune system, il-8 acts to recruit and activate neutrophils, contributing to inflammation [naclerio et al., 1988; teran et al., 1997; zeilhofer and schorr, 2000; turner, 2001] . however, little work has been done to correlate il-8 concentrations with specific acute respiratory infection symptoms and degree of illness. this paper presents important novel research boasting over 800 common cold cases with biomarkers and detailed records of acute respiratory infection severity making the breadth of our study unique. additionally, not only is the relationship of the biomarkers with overall illness severity examined, but also more than 20 separate symptoms are considered one by one, and in meaningful clusters, in order to hone in on exactly what the relationship is between inflammatory biomarkers and certain cold symptoms. by investigating the relationship between acute respiratory infection illness severity and inflammatory biomarkers, the intent was to determine whether certain symptoms correlate more closely than others with inflammatory biomarkers such as il-8 and nasal neutrophils. an additional aim was to gain insight into the predictability of overall severity and duration of acute respiratory infection episodes based on change in il-8 and neutrophil levels during the first 3 days of illness.in order to answer these questions, data sets from two studies [barrett et al., 2010; were combined to look at a total of 811 acute respiratory infection episodes. in both studies, a nasal lavage was performed within the first 72 hr of the onset of symptoms. in one of the studies, 685 participants returned about 48 hr later to provide a second nasal specimen during their acute respiratory infection. the nasal specimens were used to measure il-8 concentrations and neutrophil counts, and to undergo multiplex polymerase chain reaction (pcr) for the detection and identification of respiratory viruses. throughout the duration of the acute respiratory infection episode participants provided information about their symptoms on a self-report basis using the well-validated wisconsin upper respiratory symptom survey (wurss-21) [barrett et al., 2002; barrett et al., 2005; barrett et al., 2009 ]. the wurss scores were then used to statistically analyze correlations of symptom severity with il-8 and neutrophil levels.il-8 and nasal neutrophils were hypothesized to have a significant positive correlation with overall acute respiratory infection severity, measured by both area under the curve (auc) and wurss total. upon examination of the 21 wurss items, the nasal group symptoms (runny nose, plugged nose and sneezing) were hypothesized to have the most significant correlations with the inflammatory biomarkers examined. finally, it was hypothesized that higher il-8 and nasal neutrophil levels on day 1 of the acute respiratory infection would be associated with lower wurss total on day 3 of the acute respiratory infection, due to the initial vigorous immune response leading to quicker amelioration of symptoms.for the purposes of this research, acute respiratory infection data from two randomized controlled trials were combined. both trials' protocols and main results have been published elsewhere [barrett et al., 2007; barrett et al., 2010; barrett et al., 2011; barrett et al., 2012; obasi et al., 2012; rakel et al., 2013; zgierska et al., 2013; hayney et al., 2014] . both trials from which the data came were approved and monitored by the university of wisconsin health sciences institutional review board and carried out in accordance with the ethical standards of the declaration of helsinki. all participants gave written informed consent.in the pep trial (physician, echinacea, and placebo), which is a shortened version of the trial title "placebo: physician or pill: a randomized controlled trial in a common cold model" [barrett et al., 2007; barrett et al., 2010; barrett et al., 2011] , n = 718 participants gave written informed consent, then were enrolled within the first 36 hr of new-onset common cold symptoms and were followed until their colds resolved. the population consisted of community-recruited 12 to 80 year olds. enrollment and monitoring occurred over a period of about four and a half years from january 2004 until august 2008. daily contact was made by telephone for the duration of participation.in the mepari trial, meditation or exercise for preventing acute respiratory infection: a randomized controlled trial , written informed consent was obtained from n = 154 healthy individuals aged 50 years and older who were recruited from the community. the first cohort (n = 94) was enrolled in september 2009, while the second cohort (n = 60) began in january 2010. participants from both cohorts were followed until exiting in may 2010. during the entire trial, participants were asked to start documenting symptoms anytime they thought they were getting a cold. participants were contacted two times a week by telephone throughout the duration of the study.both trials used the same criteria to define an acute respiratory infection illness episode: 1) answer "yes" to either: "do you think you are coming down with a cold?" or "do you think you have a cold?" 2) exhibit one or more of four cold symptoms -nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, sneezing, sore throat, and 3) score two points or more on the jackson scale [jackson et al., 1962] . the jackson score is calculated by summing eight symptom scores (sneezing, headache, malaise, chilliness, nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, sore throat, and cough), where each is rated 0 = absent, 1 = mild, 2 = moderate, 3 = severe. in the pep trial, illness episode duration began at enrollment and continued through the last time the participant answered "yes" to, "do you think you still have a cold?" to confirm that the illness had ended, the last "yes" answer had to be followed by a "no" answer for two days in a row. monitoring was limited to a maximum of 14 days. in the mepari trial, the beginning of each acute respiratory infection illness episode was determined by the defining criteria described above. the last day of the illness episode was the last day the participant rated illness severity higher than 0 in response to "how sick do you feel today?" on the wurss instrument. in both trials the date and time of self-report questionnaires were recorded in order to assess illness duration.acute respiratory infection severity was assessed using the wisconsin upper respiratory symptom survey (wurss) [barrett et al., 2002; barrett et al., 2005] , which is a well validated illness specific quality of life outcome instrument. items assess symptom severity and functional impairment, with a score of 1 considered to be very mild; 3, mild; 5, moderate; and 7, severe. throughout the length of the illness, the wurss-21 [barrett et al., 2009 ] was self-administered twice daily by each pep participant, and the wurss-24 daily by mepari participants. the wurss-21 contains one item rating overall illness severity (how sick do you feel today?); 10 items rating cold symptoms (runny nose, plugged nose, sneezing, sore throat, scratchy throat, cough, hoarseness, head congestion, chest congestion, feeling tired); nine items rating how much the cold episode has interfered with function and quality of life (think clearly; sleep well; breathe easily; walk, climb stairs, exercise; accomplish daily activities; work outside the home; work inside the home; interact with others; live your personal life); and one item rating daily change (compared to yesterday, i feel that my cold is…). wurss-24 is a derivation of the wurss-44, and includes all wurss-21 items plus three items rating influenza-like symptoms. these three items were not included in this study in order to make the wurss scores between the two trials parallel.illness duration was assessed in hours and minutes according to the times of self-report and then converted to decimalized days. for the pep trial, morning and evening scores for each item of the wurss-21 were first averaged. in both trials, for each day of illness, wurss total was calculated by summing 19 items on the wurss-21, not including the first item assessing overall illness severity or the last item assessing change since the previous day. to calculate area under the curve (auc) for global severity, the sum of wurss totals across all time points of the illness episode was used, and trapezoidal approximation was applied. nasal auc was calculated by using the sum of the wurss scores from only the nasal symptoms (runny nose, plugged nose, sneezing) for the duration of the acute respiratory infection episode. individual symptoms from the wurss were analyzed with respect to the main variables using the wurss score from day 1 of the acute respiratory infection episode, which corresponds to the day the nasal specimens were collected for biomarker analyses.samples were collected at enrollment (day 1) and again on day 3 of participation in the pep trial. in the mepari trial, when a participant reported acute respiratory infection symptoms equaling two or greater on the jackson scale, samples were collected within the first 72 hr of onset of symptoms. nasal specimens were obtained by performing nasal lavage, and were used for analysis of il-8 and neutrophils as indicators of nasal inflammation. nasal lavage specimens were also used for pcr-based viral identification. in both trials, il-8 concentrations were measured in picograms per milliliter (pg/ml) using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay test (elisa), according to manufacturer's protocol. polymorphonuclear leukocytes were counted using a standard hemocytometer in both trials, and expressed as neutrophils per milliliter (pmn/ml). multiplex pcr methods developed and validated at uw-madison were used to detect and identify respiratory viruses in nasal wash samples. with this accurate high-throughput assay, over 100 rhinovirus serotypes, as well as serotypes of influenza, parainfluenza, coronavirus, respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, enterovirus, and metapneumovirus can be identified. overall sensitivity is estimated at 94%, with 99% specificity [lee et al., 2007] .to assess the correlation among the variables, il-8, neutrophils, auc, and acute respiratory infection duration, spearman tests were done using spss version 20. linear regression assessed the relationship between biomarkers and symptoms. pearson correlation coefficients between biomarkers and certain symptoms were reported, and student's t tests were used to test the significance of any specific symptom in the corresponding linear model (table iii) . these tests were done using r version 3.0.2 (the r foundation for statistical computing, http://r-project.org). preliminary analysis showed that the ranges of some variables were very wide and skewed, for example, the il-8 and neutrophil values, which ranged from zero to more than ten thousand. in this case, the box-cox transformation [box and cox, 1964] was used to transform these values in order to make the data more normally distributed, thus improving the validity of measures of association such as the pearson correlation between variables and for other data stabilization procedures.for the results, regarding each model, the summary statistics are listed, including the estimated values for covariates, standard errors, t-statistics and corresponding p-values. the pearson correlation coefficients between certain important variables are also reported to better explain the relationships of symptoms and biomarkers.a total of 811 acute respiratory infection episodes were analyzed making up 7,124 days of acute respiratory infection illness, with a mean global severity score (auc) of 275. of these, 56% tested positive for pcr identifiable respiratory viruses, including adenovirus, bocavirus, coronavirus, enterovirus, influenza virus, metapneumovirus, parainfluenzavirus, rhinovirus, and respiratory syncytial virus. the biomarkers examined showed the mean il-8 was 1,139 pg/ml and mean neutrophils were 68 pmn/ml (table i) .originally called neutrophil activating factor-1 (naf-1), il-8 is a chemokine that recruits and activates neutrophils [marsh and kendall, 1996; zeilhofer and schorr, 2000] . as physiologically expected, il-8 correlated significantly with neutrophils in the positive direction (r = 0.58, p <0.001) [teran et al., 1997; turner et al., 1998 ]. participants who had higher levels of il-8 had consistently more nasal neutrophils (fig. 1 ).significant positive correlation of both il-8 and neutrophils with auc and acute respiratory infection duration was found. participants who had a higher concentration of il-8 had colds that lasted longer and were more severe. similarly, participants who had more nasal neutrophils had longer lasting and more severe colds (table ii) . the correlation between il-8 and global severity of nasal specific symptoms, or nasal auc, for the entire illness episode showed a positive trend (r = 0.0031, p = 0.066). neutrophils also trended positively with nasal auc (r = 0.0035, p = 0.088). on day 1, il-8 significantly correlated with each of the three symptoms from the nasal group of wurss: rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction, and sternutation (sneezing). interestingly, il-8 on day 1 of the illness also correlated with scratchy throat and with how participants responded to a question gauging overall symptom improvement. nasal neutrophils correlated strongly with global severity measured by wurss total, although the correlation was not maintained when nasal symptoms were considered individually, with the exception of runny nose. in addition to correlating with runny nose and global severity, neutrophils also correlated with scratchy throat, thinking clearly, and sleeping well (table iii) .in order to investigate whether the il-8 and neutrophil levels from day 1 of an acute respiratory infection episode can predict characteristics of the illness a couple days later, a time points analysis was performed using biomarkers on day 1 and wurss total on day 3 of the pep trial. it was hypothesized that high levels of il-8 and neutrophils on day 1 would predict low wurss score on day 3. however, the findings were insignificant.the results of this study show there is a significant correlation between nasal il-8 and neutrophils with the severity of rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction, and sternutation during acute respiratory infection illness. these data support the hypothesis that il-8 and neutrophils play a significant role in respiratory infection-related nasal symptoms. looking at the interconnectedness between biomarkers, il-8, a pro-inflammatory cytokine, was found to significantly correlate with neutrophils in the positive direction, which makes sense physiologically as il-8 is a chemoattractant for neutrophils [teran et al., 1997] . several cytokine genes and gene products, including those for il-8, are known to play significant roles in the induction and modulation of inflammation in human nasal epithelium [becker et al., 1993] . a clear correlation of the biomarkers, il-8 and nasal neutrophils, with symptoms of the common cold is shown using this sizeable and diverse set of data.many in vitro studies have found a relationship between viral respiratory infection and il-8 expression and/or concentrations. one study found a 4-to 10-fold increase in il-8 mrna expression after infecting human nasal epithelium with respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) or stimulation with tumor necrosis factor or interleukin-1 [becker et al., 1993] . they determined that il-8 is a major cytokine of human nasal epithelium, constitutively expressed and readily produced upon virus infection. rsv has also been found to increase both il-8 gene expression in human lung epithelial a549 cells [fiedler et al., 1995] , and il-8 release by buffy coat cells, especially in the presence of lung surfactant protein a [hickling et al., 2000] . another study showed that adenovirus-induced raf/mapk activation contributes to il-8 production [bruder and kovesdi, 1997 ]. additionally influenza virus a has been determined to induce interleukin-8 expression in human airway epithelial cells [choi and jacoby, 1992] .cytokine levels have also been examined in naturally acquired viral rhinitis. one group of investigators found elevated il-8 levels in patients with viral rhinitis when compared to control subjects, which suggests that il-8, among other cytokines, play a role in the pathophysiology of the common cold [röseler et al., 1995] . the current findings support and extend the known role of il-8 in acute respiratory infection. in addition to showing il-8 concentrations are high in individuals with acute respiratory infection, the current results show that the il-8 concentration correlates with symptom severity. while the previous study examined specimens from 20 patients with naturally acquired viral rhinitis, this study's sample size is much larger with nasal specimens for over 800 community-acquired acute respiratory infections.the elevation of certain biomarkers, such as il-8, during acute respiratory infection has been most studied in rhinovirus infection. several authors have reported a direct correlation between the severity of symptoms associated with in vitro rhinovirus infection and the concentration of interleukin-8 in nasal secretions. biagioli et al. examined the mechanism of rhinovirus-induced il-8 response and suggested that mediation occurs through production of oxidative species and the subsequent activation of nf-kappab [biagioli et al., 1999] . that study was carried out in vitro. the current study supports that study's findings and is more clinically applicable, as infections were naturally community-acquired and are correlated with symptom severity. global severity, measured by auc, was found to correlate with biomarker concentrations of il-8 and neutrophils. gern and colleagues report il-8 production contributes to acute respiratory infection symptom severity in children with rhinovirus or influenza a infection [gern et al., 2002] . while this study used a different symptom scale, it too found that il-8 correlated with acute respiratory infection severity when all the acute respiratory infection episodes reported in the studied adult population are considered. among these 811 episodes, nine types of viruses were identified. an analysis by viral type was tried, but once divided by virus the number of acute respiratory infection episodes in each group had insufficient power to draw conclusions.a general correlation has been shown between il-8 and overall acute respiratory infection severity. the recent goal, however, was to hone in on the specific symptoms, or groups of symptoms that correlate most closely with il-8 and neutrophils. the results highlight rhinitis related symptoms, and these findings are supported by the literature. one study examined the association between experimental rhinovirus infection and the elaboration of il-8 into nasal secretions, and also looked at rhinovirus-associated common cold symptoms [turner et al., 1998 ]. they found il-8 concentrations were significantly higher in infected symptomatic subjects compared to infected asymptomatic or placebo-infected subjects. more specifically, there was a correlation between severity of nasal obstruction and rhinorrhea with the change in il-8 concentration from baseline to 2-4 days after virus challenge.in addition to correlating with nasal symptoms, il-8 correlated with scratchy throat, and with the item gauging overall symptom improvement. neutrophils correlated with scratchy throat and two quality of life symptoms: thinking clearly and sleeping well. the scratchy throat correlation with il-8 and neutrophils could be explained as a result of postnasal drip triggered by acute respiratory infection. the correlation between neutrophils and sleep quality is an interesting issue. healthy individuals who are sleep deprived are known to have increased neutrophils [boudjeltia et al., 2008; ruiz et al., 2012] . similarly, night shift workers have been found to have increased levels of inflammatory markers, including neutrophils, compared to individuals who work day shift [alireza et al., 2011] . additionally, individuals with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (osas) have a higher percentage of sputum neutrophils compared to normal controls [lacedonia et al., 2011] . all of these examples imply that the poor sleep leads to the neutrophil increase. however, during an acute respiratory infection the neutrophils are likely due to the infection, which leads to poor sleep quality. nasal symptoms due to neutrophil infiltrated non-allergic rhinitis have been shown to have a large effect on sleep quality and quality of life [gelardi et al., 2008] . even though the participants we studied exhibit a different disease state than sleep apnea, it shows an important and consistent relationship between nasal symptoms and sleep quality. likely, the poor sleep quality is due to nasal neutrophils, but our study does not allow us to determine if the poor sleep quality is a result of the nasal neutrophils, or if the nasal neutrophils are a result of the poor sleep quality.previously, no biomarkers have correlated well with acute respiratory infection illness domains or specific symptoms, nor have they been shown to predict outcomes [barrett et al., 2006; barrett et al., 2009] . the current study's results show a strong correlation with the nasal domain of acute respiratory infection illness, namely non-allergic rhinitis, and in fact most strongly with three specific symptoms: rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction, and sternutation. however, a biomarker or panel of biomarkers that correlate well with biological symptoms and quality of life measures remains elusive.an important remaining question concerns the role of cytokines and cells in the clearance of acute respiratory infection virus in humans compared to the mediation of symptoms. il-8 has been shown to be linked to clearance of a porcine respiratory virus [lunney et al., 2010] , and one study suggests that neutrophils do not play an important role in viral clearance during influenza virus infection in mice [wareing et al., 2007] . furthermore, investigators have run human experiments that attempt to determine predictability of acute respiratory infection severity or duration. one group of researchers asked clinicians and patients to predict the severity and duration of acute respiratory infection at an initial visit and had the patient complete the wurss [longmier et al., 2013] . there was no significant association found between participant and clinician predictions of severity or duration with the actual severity and duration of acute respiratory infection. in order to answer a similar question about predictability of cold severity, time-points analysis that looked at il-8 and neutrophil levels on day 1 of the acute respiratory infection episode was performed in relationship to wurss score on day 3 of the acute respiratory infection episode. the analysis gave insignificant results. therefore, while il-8 is indicative of inflammation, it may not be a mediator affecting the chronological course of colds. further research is necessary to determine if the concentration or change in concentration of cytokines throughout an acute respiratory infection episode can predict the overall duration and severity of the illness. for example, specimens from additional time points could be assayed, and a larger array of cytokines could be measured in order to create a better model of the importance of cells and cytokines for the mediation of symptoms and the control of viral replication. this insight could be useful for prevention and treatment options focusing on shortening the length of a cold, and abating symptoms.in conclusion, the following nasal symptoms: rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction and sternutation, have been determined to correlate more closely with the biomarkers il-8 and neutrophils, than other symptoms on the wurss-21 item assessment tool. additionally, both correlate with scratchy throat. finally, within the quality of life group, neutrophils correlated with thinking clearly and sleeping well, while il-8 negatively correlated with how participants responded to a question gauging overall symptom improvement. while it has been known for years that cytokines like il-8 are involved in the disease process of acute respiratory infection illnesses, and while it is not surprising that the symptoms that correlate most closely with il-8 and neutrophils from nasal specimens are nasal symptoms, this relationship has not been well documented in detail, until now. with these findings, knowing more about acute respiratory infection symptomology and its relationship with inflammatory biomarkers opens doors to discovering more effective curative treatment methods and potential medications for the amelioration of unpleasant and burdensome symptoms. acute respiratory infection illness (also known as the common cold, upper respiratory tract infection, or upper respiratory infection) is an acute infection, generally viral in etiology, involving structures of the upper airways [simoes et al., 2006] . the most common causative agent is rhinovirus, but several other respiratory viruses are also known to cause acute respiratory illness [gwaltney, 1985] . acute respiratory infection is a common occurrence, yet detrimental to well-being. moreover, there is currently no cure or effective treatment option available [cohen et al., 1993; carter, 2002] . symptoms of acute respiratory infection illness can be examined threedimensionally in the following groups: nasal, throat, and quality of life . these unpleasant, and sometimes, severe symptoms cause people to miss work and to utilize healthcare services, which places a notable burden on the individual and society [fendrick et al., 2003; eccles, 2005; fiore et al., 2010; ebell and afonso, 2011] .for many years, it has been known that some inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-8 (il-8), play a role in the pathophysiology of the common cold, as levels are found to increase in individuals sick with viral rhinitis compared to healthy individuals [choi and jacoby, 1992; becker et al., 1993; noah et al., 1995; röseler et al., 1995; gern et al., 1996; johnston et al., 1997; zhu et al., 1997; kaul et al., 2000; parry et al., 2000] . within the immune system, il-8 acts to recruit and activate neutrophils, contributing to inflammation [naclerio et al., 1988; teran et al., 1997; zeilhofer and schorr, 2000; turner, 2001] . however, little work has been done to correlate il-8 concentrations with specific acute respiratory infection symptoms and degree of illness. this paper presents important novel research boasting over 800 common cold cases with biomarkers and detailed records of acute respiratory infection severity making the breadth of our study unique. additionally, not only is the relationship of the biomarkers with overall illness severity examined, but also more than 20 separate symptoms are considered one by one, and in meaningful clusters, in order to hone in on exactly what the relationship is between inflammatory biomarkers and certain cold symptoms. by investigating the relationship between acute respiratory infection illness severity and inflammatory biomarkers, the intent was to determine whether certain symptoms correlate more closely than others with inflammatory biomarkers such as il-8 and nasal neutrophils. an additional aim was to gain insight into the predictability of overall severity and duration of acute respiratory infection episodes based on change in il-8 and neutrophil levels during the first 3 days of illness.in order to answer these questions, data sets from two studies [barrett et al., 2010; barrett et al., 2012] were combined to look at a total of 811 acute respiratory infection episodes. in both studies, a nasal lavage was performed within the first 72 hr of the onset of symptoms. in one of the studies, 685 participants returned about 48 hr later to provide a second nasal specimen during their acute respiratory infection. the nasal specimens were used to measure il-8 concentrations and neutrophil counts, and to undergo multiplex polymerase chain reaction (pcr) for the detection and identification of respiratory viruses. throughout the duration of the acute respiratory infection episode participants provided information about their symptoms on a self-report basis using the well-validated wisconsin upper respiratory symptom survey (wurss-21) [barrett et al., 2002; barrett et al., 2005; barrett et al., 2009] . the wurss scores were then used to statistically analyze correlations of symptom severity with il-8 and neutrophil levels.il-8 and nasal neutrophils were hypothesized to have a significant positive correlation with overall acute respiratory infection severity, measured by both area under the curve (auc) and wurss total. upon examination of the 21 wurss items, the nasal group symptoms (runny nose, plugged nose and sneezing) were hypothesized to have the most significant correlations with the inflammatory biomarkers examined. finally, it was hypothesized that higher il-8 and nasal neutrophil levels on day 1 of the acute respiratory infection would be associated with lower wurss total on day 3 of the acute respiratory infection, due to the initial vigorous immune response leading to quicker amelioration of symptoms.for the purposes of this research, acute respiratory infection data from two randomized controlled trials were combined. both trials' protocols and main results have been published elsewhere [barrett et al., 2007; barrett et al., 2010; barrett et al., 2011; barrett et al., 2012; obasi et al., 2012; rakel et al., 2013; zgierska et al., 2013; hayney et al., 2014] . both trials from which the data came were approved and monitored by the university of wisconsin health sciences institutional review board and carried out in accordance with the ethical standards of the declaration of helsinki. all participants gave written informed consent.in the pep trial (physician, echinacea, and placebo), which is a shortened version of the trial title "placebo: physician or pill: a randomized controlled trial in a common cold model" [barrett et al., 2007; barrett et al., 2010; barrett et al., 2011] , n ¼ 718 participants gave written informed consent, then were enrolled within the first 36 hr of new-onset common cold symptoms and were followed until their colds resolved. the population consisted of community-recruited 12 to 80 year olds. enrollment and monitoring occurred over a period of about four and a half years from january 2004 until august 2008. daily contact was made by telephone for the duration of participation.in the mepari trial, meditation or exercise for preventing acute respiratory infection: a randomized controlled trial , written informed consent was obtained from n ¼ 154 healthy individuals aged 50 years and older who were recruited from the community. the first cohort (n ¼ 94) was enrolled in september 2009, while the second cohort (n ¼ 60) began in january 2010. participants from both cohorts were followed until exiting in may 2010. during the entire trial, participants were asked to start documenting symptoms anytime they thought they were getting a cold. participants were contacted two times a week by telephone throughout the duration of the study.both trials used the same criteria to define an acute respiratory infection illness episode: 1) answer "yes" to either: "do you think you are coming down with a cold?" or "do you think you have a cold?" 2) exhibit one or more of four cold symptoms -nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, sneezing, sore throat, and 3) score two points or more on the jackson scale [jackson et al., 1962] . the jackson score is calculated by summing eight symptom scores (sneezing, headache, malaise, chilliness, nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, sore throat, and cough), where each is rated 0 ¼ absent, 1 ¼ mild, 2 ¼ moderate, 3 ¼ severe.in the pep trial, illness episode duration began at enrollment and continued through the last time the participant answered "yes" to, "do you think you still have a cold?" to confirm that the illness had ended, the last "yes" answer had to be followed by a "no" answer for two days in a row. monitoring was limited to a maximum of 14 days. in the mepari trial, the beginning of each acute respiratory infection illness episode was determined by the defining criteria described above. the last day of the illness episode was the last day the participant rated illness severity higher than 0 in response to "how sick do you feel today?" on the wurss instrument. in both trials the date and time of self-report questionnaires were recorded in order to assess illness duration.acute respiratory infection severity was assessed using the wisconsin upper respiratory symptom survey (wurss) [barrett et al., 2002; barrett et al., 2005] , which is a well validated illness specific quality of life outcome instrument. items assess symptom severity and functional impairment, with a score of 1 considered to be very mild; 3, mild; 5, moderate; and 7, severe. throughout the length of the illness, the wurss-21 [barrett et al., 2009 ] was self-administered twice daily by each pep participant, and the wurss-24 daily by mepari participants. the wurss-21 contains one item rating overall illness severity (how sick do you feel today?); 10 items rating cold symptoms (runny nose, plugged nose, sneezing, sore throat, scratchy throat, cough, hoarseness, head congestion, chest congestion, feeling tired); nine items rating how much the cold episode has interfered with function and quality of life (think clearly; sleep well; breathe easily; walk, climb stairs, exercise; accomplish daily activities; work outside the home; work inside the home; interact with others; live your personal life); and one item rating daily change (compared to yesterday, i feel that my cold is…). wurss-24 is a derivation of the wurss-44, and includes all wurss-21 items plus three items rating influenza-like symptoms. these three items were not included in this study in order to make the wurss scores between the two trials parallel.illness duration was assessed in hours and minutes according to the times of self-report and then converted to decimalized days. for the pep trial, morning and evening scores for each item of the wurss-21 were first averaged. in both trials, for each day of illness, wurss total was calculated by summing 19 items on the wurss-21, not including the first item assessing overall illness severity or the last item assessing change since the previous day. to calculate area under the curve (auc) for global severity, the sum of wurss totals across all time points of the illness episode was used, and trapezoidal approximation was applied. nasal auc was calculated by using the sum of the wurss scores from only the nasal symptoms (runny nose, plugged nose, sneezing) for the duration of the acute respiratory infection episode. individual symptoms from the wurss were analyzed with respect to the main variables using the wurss score from day 1 of the acute respiratory infection episode, which corresponds to the day the nasal specimens were collected for biomarker analyses.samples were collected at enrollment (day 1) and again on day 3 of participation in the pep trial. in the mepari trial, when a participant reported acute respiratory infection symptoms equaling two or greater on the jackson scale, samples were collected within the first 72 hr of onset of symptoms. nasal specimens were obtained by performing nasal lavage, and were used for analysis of il-8 and neutrophils as indicators of nasal inflammation. nasal lavage specimens were also used for pcr-based viral identification. in both trials, il-8 concentrations were measured in picograms per milliliter (pg/ml) using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay test (elisa), according to manufacturer's protocol. polymorphonuclear leukocytes were counted using a standard hemocytometer in both trials, and expressed as neutrophils per milliliter (pmn/ml). multiplex pcr methods developed and validated at uw-madison were used to detect and identify respiratory viruses in nasal wash samples. with this accurate high-throughput assay, over 100 rhinovirus serotypes, as well as serotypes of influenza, parainfluenza, coronavirus, respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, enterovirus, and metapneumovirus can be identified. overall sensitivity is estimated at 94%, with 99% specificity [lee et al., 2007] .to assess the correlation among the variables, il-8, neutrophils, auc, and acute respiratory infection duration, spearman tests were done using spss version 20. linear regression assessed the relationship between biomarkers and symptoms. pearson correlation coefficients between biomarkers and certain symptoms were reported, and student's t tests were used to test the significance of any specific symptom in the corresponding linear model (table iii) . these tests were done using r version 3.0.2 (the r foundation for statistical computing, http://r-project.org). preliminary analysis showed that the ranges of some variables were very wide and skewed, for example, the il-8 and neutrophil values, which ranged from zero to more than ten thousand. in this case, the box-cox transformation [box and cox, 1964] was used to transform these values in order to make the data more normally distributed, thus improving the validity of measures of association such as the pearson correlation between variables and for other data stabilization procedures.for the results, regarding each model, the summary statistics are listed, including the estimated values for covariates, standard errors, t-statistics and corresponding p-values. the pearson correlation coefficients between certain important variables are also reported to better explain the relationships of symptoms and biomarkers.a total of 811 acute respiratory infection episodes were analyzed making up 7,124 days of acute respiratory infection illness, with a mean global severity score (auc) of 275. of these, 56% tested positive for pcr identifiable respiratory viruses, including adenovirus, bocavirus, coronavirus, enterovirus, influenza virus, metapneumovirus, parainfluenzavirus, rhinovirus, and respiratory syncytial virus. the biomarkers examined showed the mean il-8 was 1,139 pg/ml and mean neutrophils were 68 pmn/ml (table i) .originally called neutrophil activating factor-1 (naf-1), il-8 is a chemokine that recruits and activates neutrophils [marsh and kendall, 1996; zeilhofer and schorr, 2000] . as physiologically expected, il-8 correlated significantly with neutrophils in the positive direction (r ¼ 0.58, p < 0.001) [teran et al., 1997; turner et al., 1998 ]. participants who had higher levels of il-8 had consistently more nasal neutrophils (fig. 1) .significant positive correlation of both il-8 and neutrophils with auc and acute respiratory infection duration was found. participants who had a higher concentration of il-8 had colds that lasted longer and were more severe. similarly, participants who had more nasal neutrophils had longer lasting and more severe colds (table ii) . the correlation between il-8 and global severity of nasal specific symptoms, or nasal auc, for the entire illness episode showed a positive trend (r ¼ 0.0031, p ¼ 0.066). neutrophils also trended positively with nasal auc (r ¼ 0.0035, p ¼ 0.088). on day 1, il-8 significantly correlated with each of the three symptoms from the nasal group of wurss: rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction, and sternutation (sneezing). interestingly, il-8 on day 1 of the illness also correlated with scratchy throat and with how participants responded to a question gauging overall symptom improvement. nasal neutrophils correlated strongly with global severity measured by wurss total, although the correlation was not maintained when nasal symptoms were considered individually, with the exception of runny nose. in addition to correlating with runny nose and global severity, neutrophils also correlated with scratchy throat, thinking clearly, and sleeping well (table iii) .in order to investigate whether the il-8 and neutrophil levels from day 1 of an acute respiratory infection episode can predict characteristics of the illness a couple days later, a time points analysis was performed using biomarkers on day 1 and wurss total on day 3 of the pep trial. it was hypothesized that high levels of il-8 and neutrophils on day 1 would predict low wurss score on day 3. however, the findings were insignificant.the results of this study show there is a significant correlation between nasal il-8 and neutrophils with the severity of rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction, and sternutation during acute respiratory infection illness. these data support the hypothesis that il-8 and neutrophils play a significant role in respiratory infection-related nasal symptoms. looking at the interconnectedness between biomarkers, il-8, a proinflammatory cytokine, was found to significantly correlate with neutrophils in the positive direction, which makes sense physiologically as il-8 is a chemoattractant for neutrophils [teran et al., 1997] . several cytokine genes and gene products, including those for il-8, are known to play significant roles in the induction and modulation of inflammation in human nasal epithelium [becker et al., 1993] . a clear correlation of the biomarkers, il-8 and nasal neutrophils, with symptoms of the common cold is shown using this sizeable and diverse set of data.many in vitro studies have found a relationship between viral respiratory infection and il-8 expression and/or concentrations. one study found a 4-to 10-fold increase in il-8 mrna expression after infecting human nasal epithelium with respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) or stimulation with tumor necrosis factor or interleukin-1 [becker et al., 1993] . they determined that il-8 is a major cytokine of human nasal epithelium, constitutively expressed and readily produced upon virus infection. rsv has also been found to increase both il-8 gene expression in human lung epithelial a549 cells [fiedler et al., 1995] , and il-8 release by buffy coat cells, especially in the presence of lung surfactant protein a [hickling et al., 2000] . another study showed that adenovirus-induced raf/mapk activation contributes to il-8 production [bruder and kovesdi, 1997] . additionally influenza virus a has been determined to induce interleukin-8 expression in human airway epithelial cells [choi and jacoby, 1992] .cytokine levels have also been examined in naturally acquired viral rhinitis. one group of investigators found elevated il-8 levels in patients with viral rhinitis when compared to control subjects, which suggests that il-8, among other cytokines, play a role in the pathophysiology of the common cold [röseler et al., 1995] . the current findings support and extend the known role of il-8 in acute respiratory infection. in addition to showing il-8 concentrations are high in individuals with acute respiratory infection, the current results show that the il-8 concentration correlates with symptom severity. while the previous study examined specimens from 20 patients with naturally acquired viral rhinitis, this study's sample size is much larger with nasal specimens for over 800 community-acquired acute respiratory infections.the elevation of certain biomarkers, such as il-8, during acute respiratory infection has been most studied in rhinovirus infection. several authors have reported a direct correlation between the severity of symptoms associated with in vitro rhinovirus infection and the concentration of interleukin-8 in nasal secretions. biagioli et al. examined the mechanism of rhinovirus-induced il-8 response and suggested that mediation occurs through production of oxidative species and the subsequent activation of nf-kappab [biagioli et al., 1999] . that study was carried out in vitro. the current study supports that study's findings and is more clinically applicable, as infections were naturally community-acquired and are correlated with symptom severity. global severity, measured by auc, was found to correlate with biomarker concentrations of il-8 and neutrophils. gern and colleagues report il-8 production contributes to acute respiratory infection symptom severity in children with rhinovirus or influenza a infection [gern et al., 2002] . while this study used a different symptom scale, it too found that il-8 correlated with acute respiratory infection severity when all the acute respiratory infection episodes reported in the studied adult population are considered. among these 811 episodes, nine types of viruses were identified. an analysis by viral type was tried, but once divided by virus the number of acute respiratory infection episodes in each group had insufficient power to draw conclusions. a general correlation has been shown between il-8 and overall acute respiratory infection severity. the recent goal, however, was to hone in on the specific symptoms, or groups of symptoms that correlate most closely with il-8 and neutrophils. the results highlight rhinitis related symptoms, and these findings are supported by the literature. one study examined the association between experimental rhinovirus infection and the elaboration of il-8 into nasal secretions, and also looked at rhinovirus-associated common cold symptoms [turner et al., 1998 ]. they found il-8 concentrations were significantly higher in infected symptomatic subjects compared to infected asymptomatic or placebo-infected subjects. more specifically, there was a correlation between severity of nasal obstruction and rhinorrhea with the change in il-8 concentration from baseline to 2-4 days after virus challenge.in addition to correlating with nasal symptoms, il-8 correlated with scratchy throat, and with the item gauging overall symptom improvement. neutrophils correlated with scratchy throat and two quality of life symptoms: thinking clearly and sleeping well. the scratchy throat correlation with il-8 and neutrophils could be explained as a result of postnasal drip triggered by acute respiratory infection. the correlation between neutrophils and sleep quality is an interesting issue. healthy individuals who are sleep deprived are known to have increased neutrophils [boudjeltia et al., 2008; ruiz et al., 2012] . similarly, night shift workers have been found to have increased levels of inflammatory markers, including neutrophils, compared to individuals who work day shift [alireza et al., 2011] . additionally, individuals with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (osas) have a higher percentage of sputum neutrophils compared to normal controls [lacedonia et al., 2011] . all of these examples imply that the poor sleep leads to the neutrophil increase. however, during an acute respiratory infection the neutrophils are likely due to the infection, which leads to poor sleep quality. nasal symptoms due to neutrophil infiltrated non-allergic rhinitis have been shown to have a large effect on sleep quality and quality of life [gelardi et al., 2008] . even though the participants we studied exhibit a different disease state than sleep apnea, it shows an important and consistent relationship between nasal symptoms and sleep quality. likely, the poor sleep quality is due to nasal neutrophils, but our study does not allow us to determine if the poor sleep quality is a result of the nasal neutrophils, or if the nasal neutrophils are a result of the poor sleep quality.previously, no biomarkers have correlated well with acute respiratory infection illness domains or specific symptoms, nor have they been shown to predict outcomes [barrett et al., 2006; barrett et al., 2009] . the current study's results show a strong correlation with the nasal domain of acute respiratory infection illness, namely non-allergic rhinitis, and in fact most strongly with three specific symptoms: rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction, and sternutation. however, a biomarker or panel of biomarkers that correlate well with biological symptoms and quality of life measures remains elusive.an important remaining question concerns the role of cytokines and cells in the clearance of acute respiratory infection virus in humans compared to the mediation of symptoms. il-8 has been shown to be linked to clearance of a porcine respiratory virus [lunney et al., 2010] , and one study suggests that neutrophils do not play an important role in viral clearance during influenza virus infection in mice [wareing et al., 2007] . furthermore, investigators have run human experiments that attempt to determine predictability of acute respiratory infection severity or duration. one group of researchers asked clinicians and patients to predict the severity and duration of acute respiratory infection at an initial visit and had the patient complete the wurss [longmier et al., 2013] . there was no significant association found between participant and clinician predictions of severity or duration with the actual severity and duration of acute respiratory infection.in order to answer a similar question about predictability of cold severity, time-points analysis that looked at il-8 and neutrophil levels on day 1 of the acute respiratory infection episode was performed in relationship to wurss score on day 3 of the acute respiratory infection episode. the analysis gave insignificant results. therefore, while il-8 is indicative of inflammation, it may not be a mediator affecting the chronological course of colds. further research is necessary to determine if the concentration or change in concentration of cytokines throughout an acute respiratory infection episode can predict the overall duration and severity of the illness. for example, specimens from additional time points could be assayed, and a larger array of cytokines could be measured in order to create a better model of the importance of cells and cytokines for the mediation of symptoms and the control of viral replication. this insight could be useful for prevention and treatment options focusing on shortening the length of a cold, and abating symptoms.in conclusion, the following nasal symptoms: rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction and sternutation, have been determined to correlate more closely with the biomarkers il-8 and neutrophils, than other symptoms on the wurss-21 item assessment tool. additionally, both correlate with scratchy throat. finally, within the quality of life group, neutrophils correlated with thinking clearly and sleeping well, while il-8 negatively correlated with how participants responded to a question gauging overall symptom improvement. while it has been known for years that cytokines like il-8 are involved in the disease process of acute respiratory infection illnesses, and while it is not surprising that the symptoms that correlate most closely with il-8 and neutrophils from nasal specimens are nasal symptoms, this relationship has not been well documented in detail, until now. with these findings, knowing more about acute respiratory infection symptomology and its relationship with inflammatory biomarkers opens doors to discovering more effective curative treatment methods and potential medications for the amelioration of unpleasant and burdensome symptoms.liquid biopsy is a minimally invasive technology for the detection of molecular biomarkers in blood and other body fluids (urine, saliva, ascites fluids, pleural effusions, etc.). the term was coined several decades ago, when was discovered, for the first time, the presence of extracellular nucleic acids in humans [1] ; currently, it comprises not only the detection of extracellular/cell-free nucleic acids (nas) with diagnostic significance but also of circulating tumor cells (ctcs) and extracellular vesicles (evs), mainly exosomes (exs). although liquid biopsy cannot provide information related to tissue architecture and pathological microenvironment, it is considered a revolutionary technique that is opening unexpected perspectives in the early diagnosis and, in the therapy monitoring, severe diseases, ranging from cancer [2] , metabolic syndrome [3] , autoimmune disease [4] , neurodegenerative disorders, and atherothrombosis [5] to prenatal screening [6] .the outcomes of graphene-based platforms in sensing applications are strictly correlated to the physicochemical properties of the starting material used for their fabrication [9] . however, a univocal classification of g broad family and their correlation with biosensing properties are challenging. thus, the different synthetic approaches have been adopted for g preparation; the not homogeneous g nature (complexes structures with several oxidation states, varied lateral sizes, different number of layers, and different colloidal stability); the presence of impurities (often metal impurities); the formation of nanocomposites by a combination of g with organic or inorganic compounds have been taken in consideration for graphene-based biosensing applications [10] .g has been obtained by bottom-up or top-down approaches, differing for (i) the number and dimension of layers; (ii) the amount of oxygen functional groups scattered over the carbon surfaces; (iii) chemical features of compounds introduced during the post-synthetic decoration process, etc. [11] [12] [13] [14] .commonly, high-quality mono or multilayer g systems have been obtained by bottom-up approaches, such as epitaxial growth (eg) or chemical vapor deposition (cvd) on metallic substrates. these materials are endowed with ideal features (i.e., large surface area and high homogeneity) to be used as components of electronic devices. however, the high cost of these strategies, together with the requirement to transfer g on more suitable substrates, has limited the graphene's scale-up production [15] .top-down strategies, such as chemical or physical exfoliation of graphite bulk, are regarded as valuable synthetic options to develop g for diagnostic devices [16, 17] . g commonly used in the biosensing field includes graphene oxide (go), reduced graphene (g-red), functionalized graphene (f -g), together with emerging derivatives, such as graphene quantum dot (gqd), n-doped multiple graphene aerogel, graphene field-effect transistor (gfet) etc. the plethora of g is continuously supplied by new derivatives with unique properties, which potentially enable an entirely new generation of technologies beyond the limits of conventional materials [18] [19] [20] .go is obtained by chemical oxidation of graphite and successive exfoliation of graphite oxide via ultrasonication. oxygen functionality groups on go surfaces are widely exploited in the chemical functionalization of go, especially by esterification/amidation reactions at the carboxylic groups [21] [22] [23] . processability and water stability due to ionizable groups on go surfaces are the main advantages in the use of go; whereas the structural defects on the sp 2 network and the lacking electrical conductivity are the main limits for go applications as an electronic device [24] .g-red is obtained from go nanosheets by different techniques, including the solvothermal process or chemical reduction with hydrazine [25, 26] . a partial restoring of the sp 2 network, which results in an improved electrical conductivity and mechanical strength of g-red, compared to go, has been obtained by the reduction process. nowadays, g-red stable colloidal systems are obtained by using biocompatible reducing agents, such as gallic acid, starch, vitamin c, etc., allowing to reduce the cost and the environmental impact [27] .gqds are fluorescent carbon nanosystems, generally arising from g or go, composed of less than ten graphene layers with a later dimension less than 10 nm. gqds do not possess only the intrinsic properties of graphene but also new properties due to edge effects and significant quantum confinement [28] . a wide variety of gqds is obtained by bottom-up or top-down approaches. in the first case, the adopted strategies are characterized by a good size control and by the possibility to tune the gqds properties on the basis of substrate nature. however, they suffer from some drawbacks, i.e., the employment of toxic solvent, high temperature, and substrate concentrations. top-down approaches give a large scale production of gqds due to the early synthetic steps and the use of cheap carbon starting materials [29] .gqds have shown lower toxicity and higher photostability compared to other semiconducting quantum dots, and several applications, ranging from catalyst to nanomedicine, have been proposed. in particular, electrochemical, optical, and photoelectrochemical biosensors based on gqds, characterized by a high sensing selectivity, have been developed [30] .an emerging class of 3d carbon materials (aerogel, foam, hydrogel, etc.) have been recently proposed for water decontamination and as conversion/storage energy devices [31] . template-assisted methods, based on cvd strategy or graphene/go layers assembling processes, such as self-assembly of g-red sheets reduced via the solvothermal or hydrothermal method, have provided 3d graphene-based materials, characterized by the intrinsic properties of g together with new interesting physicochemical properties, such as high porosity, low density, unique electrochemical performance [32] . n-doping strategies have been widely adopted to tune the electrochemical properties of g derivatives. n-doped g has shown high performance like photocatalytic systems for the reduction of co 2 and the degradation of organic contaminants under visible light [33] .the replacement of the traditional semiconductors-based electronic devices with a single layer graphene-based material has been proposed and used for the fabrication of gfet, proposed as sensors in physical, chemical, and biological application fields [34] .considering the temporal and spatial heterogeneity and its evolution, the tumor needs to be monitored at distinct times of the disease for an efficient treatment. therefore, there is an urgent need to search for minimally invasive approaches in order to detect and monitor the disease progression throughout the treatment. indeed, surgical tissue biopsies are invasive procedures, often difficult to perform on organs that lie deep within the body, and their use is limited as they can give false-negative results due to sampling. therefore, it is necessary to identify ideal biomarkers that can be used for the early diagnosis, detection of recurrence, and monitoring of metastasis for cancer. a liquid biopsy might be a promising approach because it deals with the communication in tumor microenvironment. according to several research studies, the liquid biopsy is defined as the capture and the analysis of tumor-related biomarkers in a fluid sample. the biomarkers are represented by circulant tumor cells (ctcs), circulant tumor nucleic acids (ctnas), proteins, and/or tumor-derived extracellular vesicles (evs), which have been shed from tumor masses (figure 1 ) into the bloodstream, saliva, urine, cerebrospinal fluid (csf), among other peripheral fluids of patients. the liquid biopsy provides a more comprehensive snapshot of intra-tumor clonal heterogeneity compared to single-site tissue biopsies and, in addition, can allow repeated blood sampling, thereby providing an insight into the evolutionary dynamics of cancer. for these reasons, liquid biopsy should be extensively studied due to its minimal invasiveness and can be used for the early diagnosis and monitoring of metastasis in cancer patients [35] . the main approaches to liquid biopsies have embraced the detection of ctcs [36, 37] , the capture of exosomes (exs) that are secreted by tumor mass [38] , and the analysis of ctdna or mirna in body fluid samples [39] since the first studies. indeed, due to the rapid turnover of cancer cells and the constant release of tumor-derived nucleic acids, vesicles, and viable ctcs into the circulation, the ability to detect and characterize has enabled surgeons to analyze the evolution of the tumor at distinct times and, most importantly, in a non-invasive manner. literature data have demonstrated that levels of these biomarkers increase in patients with several malignant types of tumors, such as breast, ovarian cancer, stomach, colorectal, prostate, lung, and others. however, most studies have been done in patients with late-stage cancer, mainly due to the considerably higher concentrations of the above-mentioned biomarkers in their blood. based on these promising findings, data from wroclawski and collaborators demonstrated that serum dna levels were significantly increased in patients with colorectal cancer of stage iv and fluctuated during chemotherapy [40] . lung cancer patients, if compared to the control patients, have demonstrated significant differences in ctdna levels since stage i [41] . the fluctuations of ctdna were proposed by diehl et al. as a biomarker to monitor the course of therapy in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (mcrc) undergoing surgery or chemotherapy treatments [42] . the level of ctdna has been quantified by beaming (beads, emulsions, amplification, and magnetics) and compared to carcinoembryonic antigen marker (cea), routinely used in the management of the disease in subjects with crc [42] . numerous gastrointestinal diseases can also lead to an increase in ctdna, even if considered malignant or benign. should be extensively studied due to its minimal invasiveness and can be used for the early diagnosis and monitoring of metastasis in cancer patients [35] . the main approaches to liquid biopsies have embraced the detection of ctcs [36, 37] , the capture of exosomes (exs) that are secreted by tumor mass [38] , and the analysis of ctdna or mirna in body fluid samples [39] since the first studies. indeed, due to the rapid turnover of cancer cells and the constant release of tumor-derived nucleic acids, vesicles, and viable ctcs into the circulation, the ability to detect and characterize has enabled surgeons to analyze the evolution of the tumor at distinct times and, most importantly, in a non-invasive manner. literature data have demonstrated that levels of these biomarkers increase in patients with several malignant types of tumors, such as breast, ovarian cancer, stomach, colorectal, prostate, lung, and others. however, most studies have been done in patients with late-stage cancer, mainly due to the considerably higher concentrations of the above-mentioned biomarkers in their blood. based on these promising findings, data from wroclawski and collaborators demonstrated that serum dna levels were significantly increased in patients with colorectal cancer of stage iv and fluctuated during chemotherapy [40] . lung cancer patients, if compared to the control patients, have demonstrated significant differences in ctdna levels since stage i [41] . the fluctuations of ctdna were proposed by diehl et al. as a biomarker to monitor the course of therapy in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (mcrc) undergoing surgery or chemotherapy treatments [42] . the level of ctdna has been quantified by beaming (beads, emulsions, amplification, and magnetics) and compared to carcinoembryonic antigen marker (cea), routinely used in the management of the disease in subjects with crc [42] . numerous gastrointestinal diseases can also lead to an increase in ctdna, even if considered malignant or benign. the diagnosis of ovarian cancer (oc) is mainly based on levels of biomarker ca-125 in blood and imaging. recent data have shown that evs possess advantages in terms of abundance, stability, and accessibility, compared with ctcs and ctdna. furthermore, the contents of evs are tumor-specific and reveal a high correlation with tumor staging and prognosis [43] . additionally, due to tumor heterogeneity, a panel of biomarkers will be more useful and reliable, instead of a single marker, for oc early diagnosis and screening high-risk individuals [44, 45] .ctcs are a population of rare cancer cells detached from the primary tumor and shed into the bloodstream, becoming the main responsible for metastases in different organs. they are emerging the diagnosis of ovarian cancer (oc) is mainly based on levels of biomarker ca-125 in blood and imaging. recent data have shown that evs possess advantages in terms of abundance, stability, and accessibility, compared with ctcs and ctdna. furthermore, the contents of evs are tumor-specific and reveal a high correlation with tumor staging and prognosis [43] . additionally, due to tumor heterogeneity, a panel of biomarkers will be more useful and reliable, instead of a single marker, for oc early diagnosis and screening high-risk individuals [44, 45] .ctcs are a population of rare cancer cells detached from the primary tumor and shed into the bloodstream, becoming the main responsible for metastases in different organs. they are emerging as potential biomarkers and non-invasive alternative to tissue biopsy for the early detection, diagnosis, and prognosis of cancer, to improve the clinical settings of patients [46] . since ctcs are extremely rare cells in the blood vessels (usually less than 10/ml of blood), their isolation from billions of red blood cells and millions of white blood cells and their accurate identification remain a challenge. their heterogeneity (variety of surface protein expressions, sizes, and physical features), depending on the type and stage of cancer, makes laborious their isolation, requiring extremely sensitive and specific recognition methods [47] . in general, ctc detection includes four steps, such as capture, enrichment, detection, and the final release. the capture step is based on specific interactions between ctcs and materials (physical or antibody/antigen interaction). the enrichment step refers to ctcs isolation from the blood. the ctcs detection is generally carried out by fluorescence, surface-enhanced raman scattering (sers), or electrical impedance measurements. finally, the enriched ctcs are released for further phenotype identification and molecular analyses [48] . to date, several technologies have been refined for ctcs detection, enrichment, and isolation, based on chemical or physical methods, such as capture by magnetic nanoparticles (nps) [49] , mechanical separation by size difference [50] , microfluidic approaches [51, 52] , and immune-recognition methods [47] .among the antibody-dependent isolation procedure based on specific biomarkers recognition, immunomagnetic technologies are often performed using anti-epcam antibody-functionalized magnetic nps to specifically target epcam (epithelial cell adhesion molecule) expressing cells. the epithelial cell adhesion molecule (epcam) is a transmembrane glycoprotein that mediates cell-cell adhesion in epithelial tissues. since it has oncogenic potential, it has been extensively used for ctc capturing. to date, the only fda approved ctc detection system is the cellsearch ® assay, although the high-cost fabrication limits its use. the kit is based on immunomagnetic separation, to target a specific antigen by using anti-epcam antibodies coupled to magnetic beads. the subsequent separation of the antigen-antibody complex can be achieved via exposure to a magnetic field [53] .the development of reliable, cost-effective, and sensitive ctc detection and isolation technologies plays a pivotal role in the early diagnosis and treatment of cancer. nanomaterials offer excellent advantages to improve the sensitivity in biomolecule detection due to their high surface area to volume ratio and similar size with respect to biomolecules [54] . many classes of nanomaterials have been incorporated into ctc research for highly sensitive and selective cell capture, i.e., magnetic and gold nanoparticles, carbon nanotubes, dendrimers, quantum dots, and graphene oxide (go) [55] . specifically, recent progresses in nanoscience have allowed designing nanoarchitectures based on multifunctional g platforms for the isolation and identification of ctcs, representing technological advancements in liquid biopsy [56] . in fact, the ease surface chemical modifications, together with its unique optical properties, make go an attractive material for biomolecule detection [56] , and the most commonly used strategies to isolate ctcs are based on traditional immunomagnetic separation, electrochemical technology, and microfluidic tools [47] . because of the diamagnetic feature of all untreated biological materials, magnetic cell separation using bio-conjugated magnetic materials can be fruitfully applied to separate ctcs from whole blood, in a highly specific way, via targeted binding and subsequent separation using a bar magnet, avoiding light scattering and autofluorescence background from blood cells.the combination of graphene oxide quantum dots (goqds) and magnetic nanoplatforms into a single nanoarchitecture functionalized with anti-gpc3 (glypican 3) antibody has been proposed for the accurate identification and selective capture of liver cancer tumor ctcs [57] . an electrochemical sensing strategy based on aptamer-functionalized and gold nanoparticles array-decorated magnetic graphene nanosheet (aunps-fe 3 o 4 -gs) has been reported for monitoring and capturing ctcs in human whole blood. the sensor takes advantage of the combination of two effects: the efficient recognition and capture of the target ctcs assured by selected aptamers and the signal amplification guaranteed by the functionalization of the gold nanoparticles (aunps) with electroactive species (6-ferrocenyl-1-hexanethiol or thionine) [58] .several go-based microfluidic devices have been proposed to enrich ctcs, based on their distinct biochemical properties toward other human blood components. most of these devices focus on immunoaffinity-based technologies, which exploit specific antibodies widely expressed in cancer cells to isolate ctcs with high purity and sensitivity.a microfluidic go-based chip with accurate surface capture design has been reported for isolating ctcs from metastatic breast cancer patients, with high sensitivity and reproducibility. the use of go as the base material for antibody conjugation enables the chip to detect ctcs from only 1 ml of blood, with high yield and reproducibility due to the high-density antibody presentation [59] .a microfluidic device exploiting immunocapture based on a tunable thermal-sensitive polymer-go chip has been proposed for highly efficient capture and subsequent release of ctcs from breast and pancreatic cancer patients. the microfluidic device is coated with a composite film of functionalized go dispersed in a thermoresponsive polymer matrix. the combination of a biocompatible go, properly functionalized for immunocapture, with a thermosensitive polymer, has provided temperature-dependent modulation of capture/release, allowing the effective cell release for post-capture analysis. this device has overcome the common drawback of most immunoaffinity-based technologies reliant on antibodies attached to the capture surface, hindering the release of viable cells [60] . electrochemical technology is also applicable to ctc recovery. a graphene-based electrochemical sensing platform, based on functionalized graphene-modified glassy carbon electrodes (gces), has been designed to be incubated with mammalian cells (i.e., different cancerous, multidrug-resistant cancerous, and metastatic human breast cells, as well as artificial ctc samples). the interactions with cell surface components, responsible for conjugating the target cells on the electrode surface, have been transduced to an ultrasensitive electrochemical response. the chemical diversity offered by the graphene probes has allowed discerning different cell surface/cell type, serving as a sensor array featuring selective receptors. the advantage of such an array-based sensing approach relies on the possibility to make an overall signature of ctcs, providing a fingerprint that allows for the classification and identification of cells [61] . a porous graphene-oxide (pgo) has been used to decorate light addressable-potentiometric-sensor (laps) surface, followed by the aptamer as1411 anchoring (apta-pgo-laps), and is investigated as a light addressable potentiometric sensor. the ctc sensing interface has exploited the integration of electronic sensors with the robust and specific ctc's bioprobe (aptamer). specifically, the aptamer probe as1411 has owned high binding affinity and specificity to the overexpressed nucleolin on the ctcs' membrane [62] .a sensor, for clinical sample's ctc detection, based on aptamer as1411 functionalized graphene field-effect transistor (gfet) by using tetra (4-aminophenyl) porphyrin-mediated reduced go as the channel material, has been recently proposed. the aptamer sensing strategy has been applied to isolate ctcs of human lung cancer cell line a549, breast cancer mdamb-231, and cervical cancer hela, with good sensitivity [63] .a versatile super-sandwich cytosensor, based on go-modified 3d microchip and au-enwrapped silica nanocomposites (si/aunps), fabricated by photolithography, has been developed as ctc-sensitive quantitative detection system. the sensor integrates two functional components: (1) an anti-epcam coating on go for recognizing/capturing epcam-expressing cells, and (2) horseradish peroxidase (hpr) and anti-ca15-3 (ab2) loaded in si/aunps to improve the selectivity of target cells and amplify the electrochemical detection signal. the performance was assessed on mcf7 breast cancer cells, showing high sensitivity with a wide range of 10 1 to 10 7 cells ml −1 and a detection limit of 10 cells ml −1 [64] . a ctc isolation platform based on go functionalized polyester fabric sheets bearing anti-epcam antibodies has been proposed as a low-cost, easy-to-fit, and disposable platform, assuring high sensitivity. capture efficiency of 75-80% was obtained for cells with high epcam expressions [65] .a 3d hierarchical nanostructured graphene cell-captured foam with an anti-epcam coating (rgo/zno/anti-epcam foam) has been proposed for recognizing/capturing epcam-expressing cancer cells, showing some advantages compared to microfluidic-based devices, such as easy fabrication, increased cell-substrate contact frequency in all directions, microporosity, which allows normal red blood cells to travel through, but selectively captures ctcs, due to the anti-epcam coating. the performance of this 3d foam was investigated using epcam-positive cancer cell lines (mcf7, breast cancer cells), resulting in a cell-capture yield reaching up to 58% after an incubation time of 30 min [66] .for more comprehensive ctc enrichment, special attention must be focused on the choice of antibodies. by combining different antibodies in a single nanodevice, higher capture efficiency can be achieved than that obtained by single biomarker recognition. reduced graphene oxide (rgo) films functionalized with anti-epcam and anti-prostate specific membrane antigen (anti-psma) antibodies have been recently fabricated by spray coating rgo solution onto a smooth glass slide. the antibody-modified rgo films exhibited a high efficiency (60%) of ctc capture from the blood of prostate cancer patients with prostate-specific antigen (psa) levels of 4-10 ng ml −1 [67] .exs are a subgroup of cell-derived nano-sized (30-100 nm) extracellular vesicles (evs) that have been recently recognized as new mediators for many cellular processes and potential biomarkers for non-invasive disease diagnosis and for monitoring treatment response, especially in cancer therapy. mounting evidences have demonstrated the ex implication in several diseases, including viral pathogenesis [68] , neurodegenerative diseases [69] , and cancer growth and progression [70] . in particular, the release of exs has been found to increase significantly in most neoplastic cells and occurs continuously at all stages of tumor development. growing evidence has shown that the tumor-derived exs carry characteristic proteins and rnas in various cancer types, and the expression levels of these molecules are closely correlated with tumor progression [71] . besides, the surface protein expression can provide invaluable information associated with the physiological states of the parental cells, that is why exs are emerging as a novel disease diagnosis tool. although exs share several protein markers on their membrane, some of them are cell-specific and reflect the conditions of the secreting cell, meaning that there is a large heterogeneity among these biological markers in a single sample of withdrawn blood; this makes their isolation rather difficult. up to date, most of the microfluidic devices are still not compatible with clinical analysis due to scalability, standardization, and validation. further, several approaches are time-consuming, require extensive pre-treatment steps, and do not recover enough samples for genomic or proteomic analysis. thus, there is a need for isolation techniques that selectively isolate exs in a cost-effective and rapid manner [2] . nevertheless, the performance of common isolation methods is significantly affected by contamination from other membrane-derived subcellular structures with high similarity in physical properties, resulting in very poor recovery yields. numerous ex isolation techniques have been established so far, including ultracentrifugation, polymer-based precipitation, filtration, and affinity pull-down. currently, the most common method for ex purification is the ultracentrifugation, which includes several centrifugation steps. polymer-based precipitation relies on the formation of a polymer network to entangle all lipid components in the sample and to reduce their solubility for rapid removal under a low centrifugal force [72] [73] [74] . membrane filtration has also been applied for size-based isolation of exs, but exs are prone to adhere to the filtration membranes, causing sample loss. moreover, the additional force applied to pass the analyzed liquid through the membranes could potentially deform or damage the exs [74] . affinity pull-down is superior in selective separation of exs using specific antibodies, but it requires large amounts of sample volumes.the development of "bio-sensors" able to recognize exs, without purification steps, from biological samples with very high accuracy and sensitivity, has recently spread among the scientific community. generally, they combine the specificity of immunoaffinity-based systems with functionalized nanomaterials. fang et al. [71] designed a hybrid platform that integrated two nanomaterials with different surface properties: the hydrophilic macroporous graphene foam (gf) and the amphiphilic periodic mesoporous organosilica (pmo). the high specific surface area of gf, after modification with the antibody against the ex protein marker, cd63 (specific exosome marker), allowed highly specific isolation of exs from complex biological samples with high recovery. after lysis with methanol, the amphiphilic pmo was employed to rapidly recover the ex proteins, including the highly hydrophobic membrane proteins. peptides obtained by protein digestion were analyzed by lc-ms/ms analysis (liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry). zhang et al. reported a microfluidic platform based on the graphene oxide/polydopamine (go/pda) system [75] . go induced spontaneous polymerization of a 3d pda surface coating, which was demonstrated to improve the efficiency of ex immuno-capture, suppressing the effects of non-specific adsorption. the platform was prepared by a layer-by-layer coating method (figure 2) , and the on-chip-captured exs were detected by fluorescence analyses after the treatment with a mixture of biotinylated antibodies (cd63, cd81, and epcam). streptavidin-conjugated β-galactosidase (sβg) was used as a reporter enzyme. the platform performance was proved in both molecular profiling and the quantitative exs detection of purified samples from a colon cancer cell line or directly in plasma samples from ovarian cancer patients. surface-enhanced raman scattering (sers) spectroscopy is a promising analytic tool for exs' ultra-detection. sers' biomedical applications include two general methodologies, called label-free detection and indirect approaches based on the use of a raman reporter (rar) linked to nobel nps, commonly known as sers tags or sers-labeled nps [76] . a sers tag consists of four main components: (1) silver or gold nps, which act as plasmonic enhancer; (2) raman reporter (rar) acting as fingerprint label; (3) a protective layer or coating shell that stabilizes the nps, allowing the biomolecules grafting; (4) recognition moieties. noble metal nps inducing an enhanced electric field when lspr (localized surface plasmon resonance) is excited by selected laser light sources [16] might be considered the sers tag core. the rar, an organic compound with a typical spectral fingerprint (i.e., benzenthiol, 4-mercaptobenzoic acid, etc.), ideally should cover the nps to provide a stable, intense, and reliable raman signal. the coating component of sers-tag, although not essential, can improve the colloid stability and provide several advantages: (a) prevent the rar leaching; (b) avoid contaminations; (c) reduce the intensity variations due to np-np interactions. several protective coatings have been proposed, including biomolecules (i.e., bovine serum albumin), polymers (i.e., peg), inorganic shell (i.e., sio 2 ), liposomes [76] , and graphene [77] . in the last case, g acts as both a protective shell and rar. specific peptides, antibodies, or proteins are grafted in the external layer of the sers-tag as recognition ligands of biomarkers [76] . [75] . go induced spontaneous polymerization of a 3d pda surface coating, which was demonstrated to improve the efficiency of ex immuno-capture, suppressing the effects of non-specific adsorption. the platform was prepared by a layer-by-layer coating method (figure 2) , and the on-chip-captured exs were detected by fluorescence analyses after the treatment with a mixture of biotinylated antibodies (cd63, cd81, and epcam). streptavidin-conjugated β-galactosidase (sβg) was used as a reporter enzyme. the platform performance was proved in both molecular profiling and the quantitative exs detection of purified samples from a colon cancer cell line or directly in plasma samples from ovarian cancer patients. surface-enhanced raman scattering (sers) spectroscopy is a promising analytic tool for exs' ultra-detection. sers' biomedical applications include two general methodologies, called label-free detection and indirect approaches based on the use of a raman reporter (rar) linked to nobel nps, commonly known as sers tags or sers-labeled nps [76] . a sers tag consists of four main components: (1) silver or gold nps, which act as plasmonic enhancer; (2) raman reporter (rar) acting as fingerprint label; (3) a protective layer or coating shell that stabilizes the nps, allowing the biomolecules grafting; (4) recognition moieties. noble metal nps inducing an enhanced electric field when lspr (localized surface plasmon resonance) is excited by selected laser light sources [16] might be considered the sers tag core. the rar, an organic compound with a typical spectral fingerprint (i.e., benzenthiol, 4-mercaptobenzoic acid, etc.), ideally should cover the nps to provide a stable, intense, and reliable raman signal. the coating component of sers-tag, although not essential, can improve the colloid stability and provide several advantages: (a) prevent the rar leaching; (b) avoid contaminations; (c) reduce the intensity variations due to np-np interactions. several protective coatings have been proposed, including biomolecules (i.e., bovine serum albumin), polymers (i.e., peg), inorganic shell (i.e., sio2), liposomes [76] , and graphene [77] . in the last case, g acts as both a protective shell and rar. specific peptides, antibodies, or proteins are grafted in the external layer of the sers-tag as recognition ligands of biomarkers [76] . circulating tumor nucleic acids (ctnas), such as circulating cell-free dna, rna, microrna (figure 1) , represent an innovative tool for liquid biopsy applications [2, 78, 79] . the ctna levels, compared to other circulating free biomarkers (such as ctcs), are detectable early in the circulating tumor nucleic acids (ctnas), such as circulating cell-free dna, rna, microrna (figure 1) , represent an innovative tool for liquid biopsy applications [2, 78, 79] . the ctna levels, compared to other circulating free biomarkers (such as ctcs), are detectable early in the bloodstream; therefore, they can be used for the initial tumor detection and the disease monitoring [80] . to date, several ctna detection approaches based on fluorescence, sers spectroscopy, radiochemical, enzymatic approach, chemiluminescence have been investigated [46, 81, 82] . unfortunately, the detection of these biomarkers is challenging due to their small size and low concentrations in body fluids [80] . different ultra-sensitive detection methods, including nucleic-acid sequence-based amplification [83] , rolling circle amplification (rca) [84] , and polymerase chain reaction (pcr) [85] , have been proposed. however, the complexity, the high cost of reagents and equipment, and the time-consuming protocols prevent the translation of these strategies in the market. to overcome some of these disadvantages, also the electrochemical approaches, characterized by a lower cost and a high detection sensitivity via signal amplification, have been proposed in the last years [86] .go and rgo have been chosen as sensing platforms to detect circulating oligonucleotides and cells by fluorescent spectroscopy due to their ability to adsorb single-stranded (ss) oligonucleotides by noncovalent approaches (π-π interactions and/or hydrogen bonds) [87] . at the same time, go and rgo have shown a lower affinity towards the double-stranded (ds) oligonucleotides due to poor accessibility of nucleobases inside the double helix and a lower ability to adsorb longer oligonucleotides due to lower diffusivity processes [88] . moreover, g materials are able to almost completely quench the fluorescence emission of the fluorescent dye linked to ss oligonucleotide. in the presence of complementary target oligonucleotides (circulating oligonucleotides), the ss oligonucleotides marked with fluorescent dye can be released by g surface and complexed with the complementary target oligonucleotide, restoring the fluorescent emission, allowing the identification of the circulating oligonucleotide fragments.a biosensing platform able to simultaneously detect and evaluate the amounts of mir-141 and mir-21 (two mirnas overexpressed in the early and in the advanced stage of prostate cancer) from several body fluids (blood, urine, saliva) was investigated by salih hizir et al. [89] . the ability of go to adsorb ss dna on its surface and to quench fluorescence emission was exploited for the design of go platform engineered with two fluorophore-labeled antisense dna strands: fluorescein amidites (fam)-labeled anti-mir-21 and cy5-labeled anti-mir-141. the platform resulted in a fluorescent quenching at 520 nm (fam channel) and 670 nm (cy5 channel). in the presence of overexpressed mir-21, a fluorescent signal enhancement at 520 nm was observed, whereas overexpressed mir-141 induced a fluorescent signal increase at 670 nm. non-target mirnas induced only a lower fluorescent increase at these channels; therefore, the increase of fluorescent signal at 520 or 670 nm indicated the presence of mir-21 or mir-141, and the increase of intensity fluorescence signal level was used to determinate the concentration of mir-21 and mir-141 fragments. the system was proposed not only to detect prostate cancer disease but also to evaluate its advancement stage. unfortunately, the low sensitivity and low specificity are typical problems of these nanodevices, hindering their clinical application [89] .a new go-polymer-oligonucleotide (ngo-pegma/m2) and enzyme (dnase i) system able to detect mir-10b in an rna pool taken from metastatic breast cancer cells were reported by robertson et al. [90] . the insertion of a specific mismatch fragment into the probe sequence induced an increase of specificity towards mir-10b, an oligonucleotide overexpressed in breast cancer. the ngo-pegma/m2 dnase i system was able to distinguish mir-10b from mir-10a, which differed only for a single nucleotide. the presence of the endonuclease dnase i improved the fluorescent sensitivity of the probe but also the background fluorescent signal. to overcome this drawback, the edge of go was functionalized with pegma, which hindered the access of dnase i on the go surface to avoid the increase of fluorescence background signal due to undesired enzymatic activity [90] .the combination of the quenching properties of go and cyclic enzymatic amplification method (ceam) has allowed developing go/ssdna probes able to detect and discriminate among several mir-21 mirnas in cell lysate media. the up-regulation expression of mir-21 mirnas is involved in solid tumor growth. the biological media have been obtained from lung carcinoma cell line a-549 and mammary epithelial cells mcf-10a. the presence of complementary mirna has induced the restoration of fluorescence due to mirna/dna complex formation, previously quenched by go. subsequently, mirna released from the dnase i digestion can complex with another ssdna probe on the go surface to start another cycle, enhancing the fluorescent signal until all released ssdna probes are completely consumed [91] .in the presence of divalent salt, go is not able to discriminate between ssnas and dsnas [92] . on the contrary, rgo has shown a higher selectivity towards mirna compared to go in the same adsorption conditions [93] . taking into account these findings, yan et al. developed a magnetic system based on rgo (magnetic beads@aptes@rgo) able to selectively adsorb mirna from the rna pool isolated from healthy human plasma [88] . magnetic beads were employed to obtain a faster extraction process by centrifugation. moreover, in situ reverse transcriptions (rt), such as rolling circle amplification (rca) strategy, were applied to desorb and detect mirna by rgo surface [88] .several challenges have been also focused on the detection of both circulating ss/ds dna. ruiyi et al. developed a nitrogen-doped multiple graphene aerogel/gold nanostar biosensor (n-doped mga/gns) able to detect dsdna by human serum via electrochemical approach [94] . the hybrid n-doped mga/gns system showed an electrocatalytic activity towards fe (cn) 6 3−/4− improved in the presence of dsdna, which was demonstrated by amperometric detection. the authors ascribed this behavior to the interaction between dna and under-coordinated au(i) sites bonded on the n-doped mga-5 surface [94] . another electrochemical biosensor composed of g decorated with au nanorods and polythionine film (g/au nr/pt) deposited onto glassy carbon electrode (gce) was developed by huang et al. for the detection of human papillomavirus (hpv) dna in human serum [95] . g was used to enhance the surface area and the electric conductivity of the system; au nrs (au nanorods) were employed to increase the immobilization of dna probe; polythionines were selected due to their good electron transfer ability and due to their ability to bond the au nr surfaces by their amine groups. the thiolated capture probes (cp) were immobilized on the biosensor via electrostatic interactions and au-s covalent bonds. cp was hybridized with one terminal of dna target (td), which arose from hpv-16 long terminal repeat sequences. moreover, two auxiliary probes (ap) were developed to complex td (fragment to be detected in human serum) by a long-range self-assembly process. finally, the 1,10-phenanthrolineruthenium dichloride ([ru(phen) 3 ] 2+ ) was used as an electrochemical indicator due to its ability to bond the dna by electrostatic interactions. the increase of electrochemical response signal depended on the amount of ([ru(phen) 3 ] 2+ ) bonded to dna nanostructure. worth noticing, the two ap sequences could bond with each other on the biosensor surface, giving rise to considerable lengthy self-assembled dna nanostructure, only in the presence of td [95] .direct methods, exploiting graphene nanotechnology, for the rapid virus detection, have been only marginally investigated in the past, and no critical discussion has been reported in successive literature reviews [96, 97] .this attitude was unchanging even during sars-cov-1 emergency that was responsible for the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) infection in asia, causing about 8000 cases and 774 deaths, also during the middle east respiratory distress syndrome (mers) of 2013, which affected saudi arabia causing close to 858 deaths [12, [98] [99] [100] . advances in nanotechnology have begun to play an important role in viral detection, to improve the detection limit, operational simplicity of viral diagnostics [78] .a coplanar-gate graphene field-effect transistors (gfets) [71] have been proposed for the detection of hiv-1 (human immunodeficiency virus 1) and mlv (murine leukemia virus) viruses using antibodies of vesicular stomatitis indiana virus (vsv) as biorecognition element. vsv antibodies are immobilized on the g layer using 1-pyrenebutanoic acid succinimidyl ester (pase). pase binds g by π-π interactions, anchoring the antibody's primary amine groups by the opposite succinimidyl group. the formation of the virus-antibody complex leads to a downward shift of the dirac point voltage, regardless of the types of detected viruses. the proposed platform has worked in a wide range of concentrations (from 47.8 am to 10.55 nm), but the lack of virus specificity appears the main limitation of this strategy.an surface plasmon resonance (spr) sensor based on an polyamidoamine-functionalized rgo(composite, with monoclonal antibodies immobilized on self-assembled dithiobis (succinimidyl undecanoate, dsu) for the detection/quantification of dengue virus (denv), has been recently described [97] .the specificity and the sensibility of the sensor have been achieved by anchoring a stable biorecognition element (antibodies (igm) against dengue type 2 envelope proteins) on the gold surface of the sensor. the specific binding of antibody-denv 2 e-protein allows a significant change in the angle of the reflectivity minimum that is correlated to dengue virus detection. the proposed sensor has shown a sensitive and selective response towards denv 2 e-proteins compared to denv 1 e-proteins and zikv (zika virus) e-proteins. although no g materials have been integrated into the above-described sensor [97] , the criteria used for its fabrication were included in this review since the strategy could be extended to other viruses, and the performance of spr noble metal could be improved in the presence of g [76] .differently from the past, the current sanitary pandemic emergency caused by the new type of coronavirus (sars-cov-2) is characterized by global effort to identify biomarkers that predict the severity of covid-19 patients and to develop diagnostic tools for the rapid detection of sars-cov-2 infection [101] .currently, nucleic acid testing on respiratory specimens is the reference gold standard method for the diagnosis of covid-19 infected patients [102] . the test requires a series of laboratory procedures: (a) viral rna extraction; (b) addition to a master mix containing nuclease-free water, reverse primers, a fluorophore-quencher probe, and a reaction mix (i.e., polymerase, reverse transcriptase, magnesium, nucleotides, and additives); (c) loading of extracted rna/master mix into a pcr thermocycler; (d) several cycles at settled temperature. during the rt-pcr cycles, the cleavage of the fluorophore-quencher probe generates a fluorescent signal detected and recorded in real-time [101] .rt-pcr uses respiratory samples to genetically detect sars-cov-2; some data have suggested that 20-34% of covid-19 patients resulted negative in the test despite being infected. this variance in the sensitivity could be mainly attributed to low viral load (i.e., patients tested in the early stage of the viral disease) [102] . other rt-pcr issues include the time consuming and expensive analysis and the technical expertise in carrying out the text.other technologies, such as point-of-care technologies and serologic immunoassays, are rapidly emerging to address these deficiencies [78] .analytic methods to assess prior infection and immunity to sars-cov-2 by antibody identification are essential for epidemiologic studies, although sensibility and specificity of the tests currently available in the market remain undefined. cross-reactivity of antibody to non-sars-cov-2 coronavirus proteins is the main issue of these serologic tests [101, 102] . the development of an antigen detection test [102] could take advantage of progress in the production of monoclonal antibodies against the nucleocapsid protein of sars-cov-2. the global effort to increase sars-cov-2 testing capacity takes advantage of the most recent advances in chemistry, molecular biology, genome technology, and nanotechnology. several projects are ongoing in this direction, and some results are already reported in the literature [95, 103] .the detection of sars-cov-2 in respiratory samples has been achieved by lspr biosensor, combining the photothermal effect and plasmonic sensing transduction for sars-cov-2 viral nucleic acid [103] .a field-effect transistor (fet)-based biosensing device for detecting sars-cov-2 spike protein (s) in clinical samples was reported by seo et al. [104] . antibodies against s protein were anchored to the graphene sheet (external coating of fet) by 1-pyrenebutanoic acid succinimidyl ester (pbase, figure 3 ). the performance of the sensor is determined using antigen protein, cultured virus, and nasopharyngeal swab specimens from covid-19 patients. the device could detect s protein at concentrations of 1 fg/ml in pbs and 100 fg/ml in the clinical transport medium, and it could distinguish the sars-cov-2 antigen protein from those of mers-cov. the successful fabrication of a covid-19 fet sensor based on the integration of the sars-cov-2 spike antibody with graphene suggests the key role of g for diagnostic scope [80] . specifically, the functionalization of g with diverse functional molecules [14, 17, 105, 106] could be the key element to tailor its properties and to obtain advanced diagnostic tools for the sars-cov-2 diagnosis. meanwhile, for the revision of this manuscript, some works dealing with sensors for covid-19 diagnosis based on graphene are reported in the literature [107] , and, although further researches are undoubtedly necessary, the leading role of g in the world's fight against covid-19 is clearly coming out [108] .in summary, the biomolecules till now used to target sars-cov-2 includes the viral rna, the viral spike proteins, and the specific immunoglobulins produced by the host immune system. the biosensing community is actively working to improve portability, time, and cost of pcr-based sars-cov-2 detection, as well as to create manufacturable pcr-based microfluidic devices. recently, also the gene-editing technology (crispr/cas) has been developed to overcome the issues of pcr-based systems. two different detection modes have been proposed in crispr technology, i.e., binding-or cleavage-based [109] . the sensor is developed by immobilization on a graphene-based field-effect transistor (gfet) of cas9 with a sgrna, specific to the target sequence of sars cov-2; the electrical signal originated by the binding of the target nucleic acid by the cas9-sgrna complex is recorded via a simple handheld device without amplification.the extraordinary properties of g make it a potential candidate to be routinely implemented in the design of biosensing platforms for liquid biopsy. certainly, the innovation in diagnosis and monitoring of severe diseases could take advantage of the most recent progress in chemistry, molecular biology, genome technology, and nanotechnology. however, to give a significant contribution to the topics of great relevance for public health, such as cancer-fighting, neurodegenerative pathologies, emerging viral diseases, etc., the priority of collaborative research should be mainly focused on the opportunity to clinically translate the newly identified biomarkers using nanotechnology. significant advancement has been achieved in the last years; however, data reproducibility remains the main drawback, and the selection of suitable nanomaterials for the development of devices is one of the key elements to obtain diagnostic tools that guarantee reproducible and reliable quantitative measurements.finally, the covid-19 lesson indicates that the development of diagnostics is crucial to managing the pandemic outbreak, and certainly, g technology will assume a prominent role in the the performance of the sensor is determined using antigen protein, cultured virus, and nasopharyngeal swab specimens from covid-19 patients. the device could detect s protein at concentrations of 1 fg/ml in pbs and 100 fg/ml in the clinical transport medium, and it could distinguish the sars-cov-2 antigen protein from those of mers-cov. the successful fabrication of a covid-19 fet sensor based on the integration of the sars-cov-2 spike antibody with graphene suggests the key role of g for diagnostic scope [80] . specifically, the functionalization of g with diverse functional molecules [14, 17, 105, 106] could be the key element to tailor its properties and to obtain advanced diagnostic tools for the sars-cov-2 diagnosis. meanwhile, for the revision of this manuscript, some works dealing with sensors for covid-19 diagnosis based on graphene are reported in the literature [107] , and, although further researches are undoubtedly necessary, the leading role of g in the world's fight against covid-19 is clearly coming out [108] .in summary, the biomolecules till now used to target sars-cov-2 includes the viral rna, the viral spike proteins, and the specific immunoglobulins produced by the host immune system. the biosensing community is actively working to improve portability, time, and cost of pcr-based sars-cov-2 detection, as well as to create manufacturable pcr-based microfluidic devices. recently, also the gene-editing technology (crispr/cas) has been developed to overcome the issues of pcr-based systems. two different detection modes have been proposed in crispr technology, i.e., binding-or cleavage-based [109] . the sensor is developed by immobilization on a graphene-based field-effect transistor (gfet) of cas9 with a sgrna, specific to the target sequence of sars cov-2; the electrical signal originated by the binding of the target nucleic acid by the cas9-sgrna complex is recorded via a simple handheld device without amplification.the extraordinary properties of g make it a potential candidate to be routinely implemented in the design of biosensing platforms for liquid biopsy. certainly, the innovation in diagnosis and monitoring of severe diseases could take advantage of the most recent progress in chemistry, molecular biology, genome technology, and nanotechnology. however, to give a significant contribution to the topics of great relevance for public health, such as cancer-fighting, neurodegenerative pathologies, emerging viral diseases, etc., the priority of collaborative research should be mainly focused on the opportunity to clinically translate the newly identified biomarkers using nanotechnology. significant advancement has been achieved in the last years; however, data reproducibility remains the main drawback, and the selection of suitable nanomaterials for the development of devices is one of the key elements to obtain diagnostic tools that guarantee reproducible and reliable quantitative measurements.finally, the covid-19 lesson indicates that the development of diagnostics is crucial to managing the pandemic outbreak, and certainly, g technology will assume a prominent role in the fabrication of innovative devices for the detection/quantification of viral nucleic acids/proteins actionable for detection at the point-of-care. funding: this work was partially aided by pon project "biopsie liquide per la gestione clinica dei tumori" (biligect, ars01-00492).the authors declare no conflict of interest.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) emerged in december, 2019 (wilder-smith et al., 2020 , and today, it has become a global pandemic which killed thousands of patients. sars-cov-2 shares a close phylogenetic similarity to sars-cov (liu et al., 2020a) . recent studies suggest that sars-cov-2 infection, e.g., coronavirus disease 2019 , mimics clinical phenotypes of sars in its severity, including severe pneumonia and high mortality (arentz et al., 2020; holshue et al., 2020; matthay et al., 2020; peiris et al., 2004) . however, it exhibits much greater contagiousness and special clinical virulence, such as higher chances of transmission between humans guan et al., 2020; shi et al., 2020) , multiple organ injury especially cardiac injuries in considerable number of patients , immune system dysfunction (liu et al., 2020b; saghazadeh and rezaei, 2020) , and many more. however, it is not clear whether the liver is injured in covid-19 patients; moreover, its clinical phenotype and its association with clinical outcome are uncertain. in the present study, we have extracted the clinical data of 2,623 patients with covid-19, identified the cause for reduction in serum proteins, and established the association of such reductions with clinical performance and prognosis of these patients. figure 1 illustrates a flowchart of patient recruitment. briefly, the study population included 2,705 hospitalized patients with clinically confirmed covid-19, which, at the time of writing this manuscript, was the largest covid-19 cohort. among these patients, 18 had a history of renal dysfunction, eight had a history of cardiac dysfunction, and two had an acute myocardial infarction within one month. twenty-three patients were younger than 18 years old, and 31 patients lack clinical information. finally, 2,623 patients were recruited and 82 patients were excluded. in this study population, the median age was 64 (interquartile range (iqr), 52-71) years old, and 50% were women. compared to non-critically ill patients, critically ill patients were more likely to be older male individuals with a higher prevalence of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, coronary heart disease, malignancy, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. the proportion of patients complicated with at least one coexisting disease was significantly higher in the critically ill (65%) and death groups (69%) compared to the non-critically ill group (42.9%). the baselines of heart rate and respiratory rate were higher in the critically ill and death groups, while the mean arterial pressure and body mass in-dex (bmi) had no significant differences among the three groups. we summarized the baseline clinical characteristics of patients according to clinical outcomes in table 1 .the proportion of the patients with decreased albumin levels on the first laboratory test was 46.9%, and this proportion increased to 54.7% on the second test after hospitalization ( figure 2a ). the proportions of patients with decreased albumin levels were 38.2%, 71.2%, and 82.5% in the noncritically ill, critically ill and the death group, respectively, on the first laboratory test, and this proportion increased to 45.9%, 77%, and 95.6% after hospitalization ( figure 2b ). the average levels of serum albumin decreased in all three groups. during admission, the albumin was 36.60 (iqr, 33.18, 40.40) in the non-critically ill group, 32.20 (iqr, 29.60, 35.75) in the critically ill group, and 31.10 (iqr, 27.85, 34.20) in the death group. in a multivariable adjusted model (age, sex, and comorbidities), 1 g l -1 decrease in albumin was associated with higher risk of progressing to critical stage and death (critically ill vs. non-critically ill, adjusted odds ratio (or), 1.18; 95% confidence interval (ci), figure 2c ). after adjustments, the or was 1.23 (1.19-1.28; p=0.018) for critically ill vs. non-critically ill group and 1.47 (1.37-1.54; p=0.029) for death vs. non-critically ill group. such progressive decline of serum albumin was suggestive of poor prognosis. the level of albumin in the death group was significantly lower (median, 31.05 (iqr, 27.98, 34.23) ) than that in the survival patients (median, 35.90 (iqr, 32.20, 39.80) ). as the death group was originally derived from the critically ill group, the level of albumin in this combined group (critically ill+death) was 31.90 (iqr, 27.85, 35.75) , which was obviously lower than the non-critically ill group (median, 36.60 (iqr, 33.18, 40.40) ). the ratio of albumin (alb)/globulin (glo) was also significantly lower in the death group (median, 0.84 (0.74, 0.98)) and critical group (median, 0.93 (0.79, 1.10)) compared to that in the noncritically ill group (median, 1.16 (0.96, 1.38)) ( figure 2d ). meanwhile, the total protein also showed significant reduction in the critically ill and death group compared to the noncritically ill group ( figure 2e ). however, the glo increased with the severity of the disease, which especially became significantly higher in the death group 35.70 (iqr, 31.67, 39.05) in contrast to those in the survival groups (median, 32.10 (iqr, 28.80, 35.90)) ( figure 2f ). the significant re-duction in a/g (alb/glo ratio) might be due to a decrease in albumin and slight increase in globulin (within the normal range). the total protein (tp) decreased in the three groups, which was probably caused by diarrhea and anorexia in covid-19 patients ( figure 2d ). in conclusion, albumin levels and a/g ratio could be useful in the prognosis of covid-19 patients. the lower the albumin level, the worse the prognosis (table 2) . meanwhile, the serum lipoproteins exhibited marked differences between patients in the non-critically ill, critically ill, and death groups. the level of low-density lipoprotein (ldl) in the death group (median, 1.92 (1.43, 2.52)) was significantly lower than those in the critically ill (median, 2.09 (1.60, 2.68)) and non-critically ill (median, 2.44 (1.96, 2.97)) groups ( figure 3a ). the high-density lipoprotein (hdl) in the death group (median, 0.77 (iqr, 0.56, 0.92)) was also lower than that in the critically ill (median, 0.86 (0.73, 1.05)) and non-critically ill (median, 2.44 (0.80, 1.16)) groups ( figure 3b ), which suggests impaired lipoprotein synthesis in covid-19 patients. the triglyceride (tg) in the death group (median, 1.55 (iqr, 1.18, 2.21)) was also higher than that in the critically ill (median, 1.30 (0.99, 1.71)) and non-critically ill (median, 1.25 (0.96, 1.77)) groups ( figure  3c ), suggesting an impaired tg and total cholesterol (tc) ( figure 3d ) transportation caused by hepatocyte damage and reduction in hdl and ldl levels ( table 2) .to identify the mechanism that causes albumin reduction, we examined the urine protein, malb, β2-mg, and α1-mg. results showed that only 11% of patients in the death group (table 3 ). in summary, a small amount of urine protein loss in a very limited number of patients cannot justify the ex-tremely decreased albumin levels in the serum of a relatively large number of patients. therefore, there may be disruption in the albumin synthesis. we further analyzed the liver-related coagulation biomarkers, which demonstrated no significant extension in the prothrombin time (pt) (12-16) nor in the thromboplastin figure 2 covid-19 patients showed a decline in albumin and tp levels as the disease progressed. a, general proportion of patients with decreased albumin levels in serum during admission and after admission. b, the proportion of patients with decreased albumin level upon admission and after admission in the non-critical, critical, and death groups. c, the means of the albumin in serum during admission and after admission in the non-critical, critical, and death groups. d-f, the ratio of a/g and the level of total protein and serum globin in the three groups upon admission and after admission, respectively. the columns and error bars represent means and sem. ***p<0.001 were compared among non-critically ill, critically ill, and death groups. p values were calculated by kruskal-wallis rank-sum test. the red dotted line indicates normal range. a) data are shown as median (iqr). p values were calculated by kruskal-wallis rank-sum test. the plasma levels of albumin (alb), globulin (glo), total protein (tp), and alb/glo were included as serum protein and triglyceride (tg), cholesterol (tc), hdl-c, and ldl-c levels upon admission and after admission. p values were compared among non-critically ill, critically ill, and death groups. if the values of biomarkers were below the lower reference limit, half of the lower reference value was used. time (tt) in the three groups, while the activated partial thromboplastin time (aptt) was prolonged in the critically ill and death groups, suggestive of reduced coagulation factors ii, v, viii, ix, xi, and xii. this observation also suggests that as an acute phase protein during the coagulation process, fiber bragg grating (fbg) stress increased in the acute inflammatory phase of liver invasion by the virus, and fbg in all three groups was reduced to normal in the second test. prothrombin activity (pta) decreased with the exacerbation of the disease upon reexamination, which suggested that liver damage gradually increased (table 4 ). this was also consistent with our hypothesis that the covid-19 virus damages the ability of liver cells to synthesize albumin and some coagulation factors.the hepatic injury was generally mild. during the second observation, although the albumin level and a/g had greatly reduced, the mean value of total bilirubin (tbil) serum reflecting the microstructural damage in liver cells had always been in the normal range. the sera aspartate aminotransferase (ast), alanine aminotransferase (alt), and alt/ast figure 3 covid-19 patients showed a decline in lipid synthesis as the severity of the disease developed. panels a-d represent the lipoprotein of serum hdl-c, ldl-c, tc, and tg levels in the non-critically ill, critically ill, and death groups, respectively. the columns and error bars represent means and sem. ***p<0.001 were compared among non-critically ill, critically ill, and death groups. p values were calculated by kruskal-wallis rank-sum test. the red dotted line indicates the normal range. . p values were calculated by kruskal-wallis rank-sum test. the urine microalbumin (u-malb), urine β2-macroglobulin (β2-mg), and α1-microglobulin (α1-mg) during admission and after admission were compared among non-critically ill, critically ill, and death groups. if the values of biomarkers were below the lower reference limit, half of the lower reference value was used.were significantly increased in the critically ill and death groups. however, only the ast was mildly abnormal (41.00 (28.25, 60.50) iu l -1 ) in the death group during admission. it was worth noticing that the gamma-glutamyl transferase (ggt), a diagnostic biomarker for cholangiocyte injury, was significantly increased in the critically ill (median, 37.00 (22.00, 70.00)) and death (median 39.00 (25.00, 70.00)) groups compared to the non-critically ill group (median, 27.00 (18.00, 46.00)) upon admission and increased more significantly in the second test in the non-critically ill group (29.00 (19.00, 49.00), critically ill group (38.00 (22.00, 78.00)), and in the death group (43.00 (26.00, 75.50)) ( table  5) . however, the hepatocyte injury was relatively mild. patients often had no typical clinical symptoms of hepatitis. in a large cohort of 1,099 patients from 552 hospitals in 31 different regions in china, abnormal liver aminotransferase levels were more frequently observed in severe covid-19 patients than in non-critical patients . therefore, we speculated that the proportion of patients with transaminase abnormalities was high, but the transaminase abnormalities were mild, which indicated that liver cell necrosis seldom occurred. however, a decline in protein synthesis capacity, especially albumin synthesis, was induced by covid-19 infection.the cytokines, including il-6, il-8, il-10, il-2r, il-1β, and tnf-α, were significantly elevated at all levels in the three groups, which supports the notion that sars-cov-2 viruses trigger cytokine storm (table s1 in supporting information). we analyzed the correlation of the changes in cytokines with liver damage. the r values of ggt/il-6, ast/il-6, and alt/il-6 were 0.25, 0.43, and 0.16 (p<0.001) ( figure 4a -c), respectively, highlighting positive correlations between the levels of il-6 and hepatic injury indicators (ggt, ast, and alt). we further performed statistical analysis on the levels of cytokine (il-6, il-2r, and il-8) and albumin. we extracted the data during admission and on days 1-3, days 4-7, days 8-14, and>14 days after admission and analyzed the dynamic changes. we found that, upon the increase of il-6, the albumin gradually decreased, indicating the progression of the disease. interestingly, the il-6 peak level basically coincided with the lowest level of albumin on the third day of admission, demonstrating the relationship between liver function damage caused by cytokine storms and albumin reduction ( figure 4d ).in this retrospective study, we discovered that a substantial number of covid-19 patients exhibited significant reductions in the serum levels of albumin, ldl-c, and hdl-c. we also observed that patients with covid-19 have decreased coagulation activity reflected by prolonged aptt. these findings suggest that protein synthesis in liver parenchymal cells was markedly inhibited. importantly, reduced protein synthesis is strongly associated with the severity of covid-19 and poor prognoses of patients. furthermore, covid-19 patients exhibited a surge in inflammatory factors, such as il-6, il-8, and il-2 receptor (sst2) in serum, which are related to the inhibition of liver functions and severity of the disease. the liver has a strong compensatory ability. mild liver (pt), activated partial thromboplastin time (aptt), at:a, fibrinogen (fbg), and prothrombin activity (pta) upon admission and after admission were compared among non-critically ill, critically ill, and death groups. if the values of biomarkers were below the lower reference limit, half of the lower reference value was used. damage will not cause selective decrease in the serum albumin level (mao et al., 2020) . in this study, we found that the proportion of hypoalbuminemia (<35 g l -1 ) accounted for 49.6% of all patients on admission and further decreased to 39.4% after hospitalization. for patients with persistent hypoalbuminemia, the serum albumin level became even lower after hospitalization than that during admission, suggesting that liver damage in this group of patients was exacerbated as the disease progressed. furthermore, the decrease in serum albumin levels might result from mild diarrhea following the onset of the disease (murthy et al., 2020) . in our cohort, however, we found no significant difference in the frequency of diarrhea among three groups during the observational period; therefore, the decrease in albumin levels cannot be elucidated by the loss of albumin from the intestine. the intake of nutrients is unlikely the cause, either, because patients already had reduced albumin levels upon admission to the hospital. for patients under critical conditions, their serum albumin levels could not be normalized by daily intravenous supply of serum or albumin. renal damage can be largely excluded, given that the patients have very small amount of albumin in the urine. therefore, we extrapolate that hepatocyte dysfunction in albumin synthesis is likely to be the major cause of hypoalbuminemia. this conclusion is supported by facts that the patients display, such as (i) reduced ldl-c and hdl-c level and (ii) coagulation dysfunction. although hypoalbuminemia could also be attributed to vascular leakage of tissues and organs, such as the overwhelming inflammatory responses in pathological manifestation of covid-19 in the lungs of covid-19 patients, it appears not to support hy-poalbuminemia that resulted from extensive tissue edema, as massive macrophage infiltration and mucinous secretion in the bronchioles likely occur prior to serous and fibrinoid exudation in the alveoli. moreover, the pulmonary edema is a pathological change of every end stage .critical hypoalbuminemia is associated with poor prognosis and deserves clinical intervention. thus, it is important to understand how sars-cov-2 viruses injure protein synthesis of hepatocytes. one explanation is that sars-cov-2 might infect the liver and induce hepatitis. however, this hypothesis is not supported by histologic results, which did not suggest hepatitis , with an almost normal serum levels of glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (got) and glutamicpyruvic transaminase. notably, cytokine storm develops in critical covid-19 patients (sun et al., 2020) . in our cohort, a broad spectrum of inflammatory factors was tested, and a bundle of cytokines, including il-1, il-6, il-8, and il2r, as well as classical inflammatory biomarker c-reactive protein, dramatically increased. it is important to note that the levels of inflammatory cytokines are inversely correlated with albumin level. therefore, the most likely mechanism is that the upsurge of inflammatory cytokines results in the inhibition of protein synthesis in hepatocytes (imaeda et al., 2009 ) rather than viral hepatitis. although the viral receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), can be detected in certain types of cells in the liver (chai et al., 2020) , the liver damage directly from the viruses would alter the enzymes first and then affect albumin, lipoproteins, and coagulation functions, only if the viral infection prevailed in the liver. moreover, the reduction of albumin correlates well with the surge of cytokines, further supporting our notion that liver injury is immediately sec- a) data are shown as median (iqr) . p values were calculated by kruskal-wallis rank-sum test. the levels of alanine aminotransferase (alt), aspartate aminotransferase (ast), γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (ggt), ast/alt, total bilirubin (tbil), direct bilirubin (dbil), and indirect bilirubin (ibil) on admission and after admission were compared among non-critically ill, critically ill, and death groups. if the values of biomarkers were below the lower reference limit, half of the lower reference value was used. ondary to cytokine storm. but which cytokine(s) and how they injure liver functions need detailed studies in the future to be ruled out.in summary, our study demonstrated that some patients with covid-19 have distinct hypoalbuminemia, which is likely due to hepatotoxicity of cytokine storm. hypoalbuminemia is associated with poor prognosis of patients, and intravenous supplements of serum or albumin should be a therapeutic strategy to improve clinical outcomes ( figure 5 ).this study was a retrospective analysis involving 2,623 covid-19 patients between january 29, 2020 and march 6, 2020 in tongji hospital, wuhan, china, and was approved by the institutional review board of tongji hospital ethics committee (tj-irb20200229). the requirement for informed consent was waived because the data are anonymous.the healthcare data regarding clinical manifestations, coexisting diseases, laboratory results, and survival status were collected by data coordinators through the electronic medical chart. coexisting diseases were defined as preexisting diagnosis prior to hospital admission reported by patients themselves. the laboratory results, including inflammation biomarkers and hepatic injury biomarkers, albumin, lipo- figure 4 correlations of ggt, alt, and ast with il-6 during admission. a, ggt and il-6. b, ast and il-6. c, alt and il-6. d, the fluctuation of the serum levels of alb and il-6 on the 1st, 3rd, 7th, and 14th day and >14 days after admission. alt, alanine aminotransferase. ast, aspartate aminotransferase. ggt, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase. il-6, interleukin-6. alb, albumin. spearman correlations were calculated between il-6 level and ggt, ast, and alt levels, respectively. a two-sided p value below 0.05 was considered statistically significant. proteins, urine microalbumin (u-alb), and urine β2-macroglobulin (β2-mg) and α1-microglobulin (α1-mg) were extracted during admission and at the second test.patients included in this study were those diagnosed with covid-19, according to the clinical guidance for covid-19 and diagnosis and treatment published by the national health commission of china. all patients have typical medical history and imaging characteristics of covid-19. patients younger than 18 years old, had acute hepatitis within one month, and with history of liver or renal dysfunction were excluded from this study. according to the clinical guidance for covid-19 diagnosis and treatment published by the national health commission of china, all covid-19 patients were divided into four types: mild, general, severe, and critical covid-19 (national health commission of china, 2020). however, in this study, we only recruited general, severe, and critical covid-19 patients. all recruited patients were further categorized into three groups: non-critically ill (general and severe), critically ill (survival), and death. of these, patients belonging to the critically ill group met one of the following criteria: (i) patients had respiratory failure and needed mechanical ventilation; (ii) patients experienced shock during hospitalization; or (iii) patients with other organ failures required intensive care unit monitoring and treatment. furthermore, according to clinical outcomes, patients were identified as critically ill survivors if they survive until march 6, 2020, or discharged before march 6, 2020; otherwise, they will fall under death group.all serum biomarkers wildly used in the clinical practice were measured under standard hospital assays, including (i) activity of liver enzymes: alanine aminotransferase (alt), aspartate aminotransferase (ast), γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (ggt), ast/alt, and total bilirubin (tbil), direct bilirubin (dbil), and indirect bilirubin (ibil) as hepatic biomarker; (ii) serum protein level: albumin, globulin (glo), tp, alb/ glo, as well as triglyceride (tg), tc, and hdl-c, ldl-c are included as lipoprotein; (iii) tt, prothrombin time (pt), activated partial thromboplastin time (aptt), antithrombin activity (at:a), fibrinogen (fbg), prothrombin activity (pta), and d-dimer level were considered as biomarkers of coagulation; (iv) interleukin-6 (il-6), interleukin-8 (il-8), interleukin-10 (il-10), interleukin-2 receptor (il-2r), interleukin-1 beta (il-1β), and tumor necrosis factor α (tnfα) were used as inflammatory biomarkers. additionally, u-malb, β2-mg, and α1-mg were included as markers of protein loss in urine. the level change of these biomarkers was identified based on chemical laboratory criteria. these measures were recorded on the day of hospital admission and, thereafter, retested on the following days.the continuous values were shown as median and interquartile range and the categorical variables as counts and percentages. the kruskal-wallis rank-sum test was utilized to evaluate the differences in non-normal distributed continuous values, and the differences in categorical variables were evaluated under the pearson's χ 2 test. spearman correlations were calculated between il-6 level and ggt, ast, and alt levels, respectively. the or and 95% ci were calculated by multivariable regression models. a two-sided p value below 0.05 was considered statistically significant. all statistical analyses were performed using r packages (version 3.1.4, vienna, austria).all biomarkers were measured using standard assays run by the department of laboratory medicine of the hospital. coagulopathy was defined as a three-second prolongation of pt or a five-second prolongation of aptt. hypoproteinemia was defined as albumin <35 g l -1 serum. according to the manufacturers' instructions, the threshold of transaminase was defined as ast and alt <40 iu l -1 and alt/ast ratio between 0.8 and 1.5. the normal ranges of serum lipids were defined as tc 2.8-5.17 mmol l -1 , tg 2.8-5.17 mmol l -1 , ldl 2.8-5.17 mmol l -1, and hdl 0.78-2.0 mmol l -1 . the normal range of il-6, il-8, il-10, il-2r, il-1β, and tnf-α were below 7, 62, 9.1, 710, 5, and 8.1 pg ml -1 , respectively. day 1 means the first test upon admission, and day 3 means repeat tests on the following days (the interval between these two testing ranges from 3 to 14 days based on the severity of the disease. most of the retests were performed on the third to fourth day after admission).the author(s) declare that they have no conflict of interest.since its emergence in december 2019, the outbreak of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) outbreak has infected over 113,000 people globally with nearly 4000 deaths [1] . covid-19, caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), produces a respiratory and systemic illness which progresses to a severe form of pneumonia in 10-15% of patients [2] . severe covid-19 can lead to critical illness, with acute respiratory distress (ards) and multi-organ failure (mof) as its primary complications, eventually followed by intravascular coagulopathy [3] . in order to optimize patient care and resource allocation during this pandemic, biomarkers are urgently needed for stratifying patients' risk and for actively monitoring illness severity.platelet count is a simple and readily available biomarker, which is independently associated with disease severity and risk of mortality in the intensive care unit (icu) [4] [5] [6] . moreover, a low platelet count correlates with higher disease severity scores such as multiple organ dysfunction score (mods), simplified acute physiology score (saps) ii, and acute physiology and chronic health evaluation (apache) ii [5] . in the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak, thrombocytopenia was reported to occur in up to 55% of patients and was identified as a significant risk factor for mortality [7, 8] . platelet count, with hypoxemia, were the only two variables used by zou et al. for developing a sars prognostic model which displayed 96.2% accuracy [9] . in the present study, we aim to investigate whether platelet count could differentiate between covid-19 patients with or without severe disease, and assess if thrombocytopenia may be associated with severe covid-19.we carried out an electronic search in medline (pubmed interface), scopus and web of science, using the keywords "laboratory" or "platelets" and "coronavirus 2019" or "covid-19" or "2019-ncov" or "sars-cov-2", between 2019 and present time (i.e., march 6, 2020), without language restriction.the title, abstract and full text of all documents identified using these search criteria were screened independently by two investigators (gl and bmh), and all documents reporting information on platelet count (either the value or the rate of thrombocytopenia) in covid-19 patients with a clinically validated definition of severe disease were finally included in our meta-analysis. the reference list of all identified documents was scrutinized, with the aim of identifying additional potentially eligible studies.a meta-analysis was performed, with calculation of weighted mean difference (wmd) and 95% confidence interval (95% ci) of platelet number in covid-19 patients with or without severe disease, as well as the odds ratio (or) of thrombocytopenia for severe covid-19. subgroup analysis was performed based on study definition of severity. the statistical analysis was performed with metaxl, software version 5.3 (epigear international pty ltd., sunrise beach, australia). when unavailable, mean and standard deviation of platelet count were extrapolated from sample size, median and interquartile range (iqr), according to hozo et al [10] . the study was carried out in accordance with the declaration of helsinki and with the term of local legislation.overall, 98 documents could be initially identified based on our search criteria and from the reference lists, 89 of which were excluded after title, abstract or full text reading, since they were review articles (n=8), commentaries or other editorial materials (n=2), they did not deal with covid-19 disease (n=71), or did not expressly reported the number of platelets and/or the rate of thrombocytopenia in covid-19 5 patients with or without severe disease (n=8). therefore, 9 studies could finally be included in our metaanalysis, totaling 1779 covid-19 patients, 399 of whom (22.4%) with severe disease [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] .the characteristics of our included studies is presented in table 1. the sample size varied between 12 and 1099 covid-19 patients, whilst the rate of those with severe disease ranged between 14-62%. eight studies included chinese patients, whilst one was based in singapore [18] . the clinical severity was defined as the composite of icu admission, use of mechanical ventilation or death in two studies [11, 13] , icu admission in two studies [12, 16] , progression towards ards in one study [14] , death in three studies [15, 17, 19] , and need of mechanical ventilation in the remaining study [18] . all eight studies provided data on the platelet count, whilst only four studies provided information on the rate of thrombocytopenia [11, 12, 14, 19] , where thrombocytopenia was defined as platelet count <15010 9 /l in two studies [11, 14] , whilst was set at <10010 9 /l in the other two investigations [12, 19] .the mean difference in platelet count between covid-19 patients with or without severe disease in the nine individual studies is shown in figure 1 . in seven of the studies, patients with severe covid-19 displayed a lower platelet count compared to those with milder forms (mean difference ranging between -3 to -5410 9 /l) [11, [13] [14] [15] [16] 18, 19] , whilst in the remaining two studies the platelet count was found to be lower in patients with non-severe forms of covid-19 (mean difference ranging between 27 to 3110 9 /l) [12, 17] . the pooled results of these nine studies revealed that the platelet count was significantly lower in patients with more severe covid-19 (wmd -3110 9 /l; 95% ci, -35 to -2910 9 /l). the heterogeneity was high (i 2 , 92%; p<0.001). the platelet count remained significantly 6 lower (wmd, -2210 9 /l; 95% ci, -26 to -1610 9 /l; i 2 , 91%; p<0.001) in patients with more severe covid-19 after excluding the large study of guan et al. [11] , which accounted for nearly 71% of the overall sample size. in subgroup analysis of three studies [15, 17, 19 ] whose primary outcome was mortality, a more substantial drop in platelets was observed in non-survivors (wmd, -4810 9 /l; 95% ci, -57 to -3910 9 /l; i 2 , 91%; p<0.001). in subgroup analysis of the remaining six studies [11] [12] [13] [14] 16, 18] which used a variable clinical definition of covid-19 severity of which mortality was not the primary outcome, platelets remained significantly low in the severe form (wmd, -2910 9 /l; 95% ci, -32 to -2610 9 /l; i 2 , 92%; p<0.001). in the four studies reporting the rate of thrombocytopenia, a platelet count below the lower limit of the locally defined reference range was associated with a over fivefold enhanced risk of severe covid-19 (or, 5.13; 95% ci, 1.81-14.58).in the presence of this rapidly emerging, novel infection uncharacteristic of the era of modern medicine, identification of biomarkers that could predict disease severity and prognosis are essential to guiding clinical care. uniquely to covid-19, a wide range of variability in disease severity is observed ranging from asymptomatic to critical [2] . as such, biomarkers are needed to identify severe disease among hospitalized patients. in this study, we found that platelet count may be a simple, economic, rapid and commonly available laboratory parameter, that could straightforwardly discriminate between covid patients with and without severe disease. moreover, we observed that thrombocytopenia is also associated with threefold enhanced risk of severe covid-19.thrombocytopenia is commonplace in critically ill patients, and usually suggests serious organ malfunction or physiologic decompensation as opposed to primary hematologic etiology, as well as the development of intravascular coagulopathy, often evolving towards disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic) [20] . in covid-19 patients, the mechanism for thrombocytopenia patients is likely multifactorial. in sars, it was suggested that the combination of viral infection and mechanical ventilation leads to endothelial damage triggering platelet activation, aggregation and thrombosis in the lung, causing vast platelet consumption [7] . moreover, as lung may be a site of platelet release from fully mature megakaryocytes, a decrease or morphologic alternation in the pulmonary capillary bed may lead to deranged platelet defragmentation [7] . coronaviruses may also directly infect bone marrow elements resulting in abnormal hematopoiesis, or trigger an auto-immune response against blood cells [7, 21] . it also has been suggested that a consistently present low grade dic may propagate a low platelet count in sars [7]. however, as noted by the world health organization (who), significant differences are observed between sars and covid-19 [2] . as such, the pathophysiologic mechanisms behind each infection are likely to differ [21] .our study was limited by variable definition of disease severity among the studies, bias of which we in part mitigated through subgroup analysis. moreover, different cut-offs for thrombocytopenia limits interpretations of that analysis. high heterogeneity suggests inherent variability in platelet levels among patients. at the current time, there is a lack of individual patient data available for more in-depth analysis which may in the future enable more detailed analyses.outside findings from the early small, retrospective studies on this emerging pathogen, limited data is available on clinically useful biomarkers for severe covid-19. in a meta-analysis of early covid-19 studies, procalcitonin was found to proffer a nearly 5-fold higher risk of severe infection (or, 4.76; 95% ci, 2.74-8.29) [22] . future studies should aim to confirm our findings and pool data to identify other biomarkers of severe disease or poor outcomes in covid-19 infections. additional research shall also be planned to clarify the precise mechanisms underlying the reduction of platelet count in patients with severe covid-19, as well as their possible hyper-or hypo-activation. since its emergence in december 2019, the outbreak of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) outbreak has infected over 113,000 people globally with nearly 4000 deaths [1] . covid-19, caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), produces a respiratory and systemic illness which progresses to a severe form of pneumonia in 10-15% of patients [2] . severe covid-19 can lead to critical illness, with acute respiratory distress (ards) and multi-organ failure (mof) as its primary complications, eventually followed by intravascular coagulopathy [3] . in order to optimize patient care and resource allocation during this pandemic, biomarkers are urgently needed for stratifying patients' risk and for actively monitoring illness severity.platelet count is a simple and readily available biomarker, which is independently associated with disease severity and risk of mortality in the intensive care unit (icu) [4] [5] [6] . moreover, a low platelet count correlates with higher disease severity scores such as multiple organ dysfunction score (mods), simplified acute physiology score (saps) ii, and acute physiology and chronic health evaluation (apache) ii [5] . in the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak, thrombocytopenia was reported to occur in up to 55% of patients and was identified as a significant risk factor for mortality [7, 8] we carried out an electronic search in medline (pubmed interface), scopus and web of science, using the keywords "laboratory" or "platelets" and "coronavirus 2019" or "covid-19" or "2019-ncov" or "sars-cov-2", between 2019 and present time (i.e., march 6, 2020), without language restriction. the title, abstract and full text of all documents identified using these search criteria were screened independently by two investigators (gl and bmh), and all documents reporting information on platelet count (either the value or the rate of thrombocytopenia) in covid-19 patients with a clinically validated definition of severe disease were finally included in our meta-analysis. the reference list of all identified documents was scrutinized, with the aim of identifying additional potentially eligible studies.a meta-analysis was performed, with calculation of weighted mean difference (wmd) and 95% confidence interval (95% ci) of platelet number in covid-19 patients with or without severe disease, as well as the odds ratio (or) of thrombocytopenia for severe covid-19. subgroup analysis was performed based on study definition of severity. the statistical analysis was performed with metaxl, software version 5.3 (epigear international pty ltd., sunrise beach, australia). when unavailable, mean and standard deviation of platelet count were extrapolated from sample size, median and interquartile range (iqr), according to hozo et al. [10] . the study was carried out in accordance with the declaration of helsinki and with the term of local legislation.overall, 98 documents could be initially identified based on our search criteria and from the reference lists, 89 of which were excluded after title, abstract or full text reading, since they were review articles (n = 8), commentaries or other editorial materials (n = 2), they did not deal with covid-19 disease (n = 71), or did not expressly reported the number of platelets and/or the rate of thrombocytopenia in covid-19 patients with or without severe disease (n = 8). therefore, 9 studies could finally be included in our meta-analysis, totaling 1779 covid-19 patients, 399 of whom (22.4%) with severe disease [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] .the characteristics of our included studies is presented in table 1. the sample size varied between 12 and 1099 covid-19 patients, whilst the rate of those with severe disease ranged between 14 and 62%. eight studies included chinese patients, whilst one was based in singapore [18] . the clinical severity was defined as the composite of icu admission, use of mechanical ventilation or death in two studies [11, 13] , icu admission in two studies [12, 16] , progression towards ards in one study [14] , death in three studies [15, 17, 19] , and need of mechanical ventilation in the remaining study [18] . all eight studies provided data on the platelet count, whilst only four studies provided information on the rate of thrombocytopenia [11, 12, 14, 19] , where thrombocytopenia was defined as platelet count < 150 × 10 9 /l in two studies [11, 14] , whilst was set at < 100 × 10 9 /l in the other two investigations [12, 19] .the mean difference in platelet count between covid-19 patients with or without severe disease in the nine individual studies is shown in fig. 1. in seven of the studies, patients with severe covid-19 displayed a lower platelet count compared to those with milder forms (mean difference ranging between −3 and −54 × 10 9 /l) [11, [13] [14] [15] [16] 18, 19] , whilst in the remaining two studies the platelet count was found to be lower in patients with non-severe forms of covid-19 (mean difference ranging between 27 and 31 × 10 9 /l) [12, 17] . the pooled results of these nine studies revealed that the platelet count was significantly lower in patients with more severe covid-19 (wmd −31 × 10 9 /l; 95% ci, −35 to −29 × 10 9 /l). the heterogeneity was high (i 2 , 92%; p < 0.001). the platelet count remained significantly lower (wmd, -22 × 10 9 /l; 95% ci, −26 to −16 × 10 9 /l; i 2 , 91%; p < 0.001) in patients with more severe covid-19 after excluding the large study of guan et al. [11] , which accounted for nearly 71% of the overall sample size. in subgroup analysis of three studies [15, 17, 19 ] whose primary outcome was mortality, a more substantial drop in platelets was observed in non-survivors (wmd, −48 × 10 9 /l; 95% ci, −57 to −39 × 10 9 /l; i 2 , 91%; p < 0.001). in subgroup analysis of the remaining six studies [11] [12] [13] [14] 16, 18] which used a variable clinical definition of covid-19 severity of which mortality was not the primary outcome, platelets remained significantly low in the severe form (wmd, −29 × 10 9 /l; 95% ci, -32 to −26 × 10 9 /l; i 2 , 92%; p < 0.001). in the four studies reporting the rate of thrombocytopenia, a platelet count below the lower limit of the locally defined reference range was associated with a over fivefold enhanced risk of severe covid-19 (or, 5.13; 95% ci, 1.81-14.58).in the presence of this rapidly emerging, novel infection uncharacteristic of the era of modern medicine, identification of biomarkers that could predict disease severity and prognosis are essential to guiding clinical care. uniquely to covid-19, a wide range of variability in disease severity is observed ranging from asymptomatic to critical [2] . as such, biomarkers are needed to identify severe disease among hospitalized patients. in this study, we found that platelet count may be a simple, economic, rapid and commonly available laboratory parameter, that could straightforwardly discriminate between covid patients with and without severe disease. moreover, we observed that thrombocytopenia is also associated with threefold enhanced risk of severe covid-19.thrombocytopenia is commonplace in critically ill patients, and usually suggests serious organ malfunction or physiologic decompensation as opposed to primary hematologic etiology, as well as the development of intravascular coagulopathy, often evolving towards disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic) [20] . in covid-19 patients, the mechanism for thrombocytopenia patients is likely multifactorial. in sars, it was suggested that the combination of viral infection and mechanical ventilation leads to endothelial damage triggering platelet activation, aggregation and thrombosis in the lung, causing vast platelet consumption [7] . moreover, as lung may be a site of platelet release from fully mature megakaryocytes, a decrease or morphologic alternation in the pulmonary capillary bed may lead to deranged platelet defragmentation [7] . coronaviruses may also directly infect bone marrow elements resulting in abnormal hematopoiesis, or trigger an auto-immune response against blood cells [7, 21] . it also has been suggested that a consistently present low grade dic may propagate a low platelet count in sars [7] . however, as noted by the world health organization (who), significant differences are observed between sars and covid-19 [2] . as such, the pathophysiologic mechanisms behind each infection are likely to differ [21] .our study was limited by variable definition of disease severity among the studies, bias of which we in part mitigated through subgroup analysis. moreover, different cut-offs for thrombocytopenia limits interpretations of that analysis. high heterogeneity suggests inherent variability in platelet levels among patients. at the current time, there is a lack of individual patient data available for more in-depth analysis which may in the future enable more detailed analyses.outside findings from the early small, retrospective studies on this emerging pathogen, limited data is available on clinically useful biomarkers for severe covid-19. in a meta-analysis of early covid-19 studies, procalcitonin was found to proffer a nearly 5-fold higher risk of severe infection (or, 4.76; 95% ci, 2.74-8.29) [22] . future studies should aim to confirm our findings and pool data to identify other biomarkers of severe disease or poor outcomes in covid-19 infections.in december 2019, clusters of acute pneumonia cases of unclear etiology were identified in wuhan city, the capital of hubei province in china [1–3]. the pathogen has been reported as a novel coronavirus named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). the world health organization (who) has made the assessment that coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) can be characterized as a pandemic because the disease is still spreading rapidly around the world, especially in the united states, spain, and russia [4]. as of may 26, a total of 82993 cases (4634 deaths) were confirmed in china, including 50340 cases (3869 deaths) in wuhan city [5].the national health commission of china has issued a series of diagnosis and treatment recommendations and suggested classifying the disease into four grades: mild, moderate, severe and critical [5]. recent studies have reported the clinical characteristics and prognosis of the varied severity grades of covid-19 [1, 2, 6–8]. the underlying mechanisms of the novel coronavirus leading to disease exacerbation and organ dysfunction remain to be further explored. due to the high mortality and the lack of effective treatments in critically ill patients [7, 9], early identification and prediction of these patients are crucial. what are the risk factors for severe illness or death [10]? how can we identify groups that are most likely to have poor outcomes so that we can focus prevention and treatment efforts [10]? these studies are needed. huang et al [8] reported that patients admitted to the intensive care unit (icu) had more severe clinical symptoms and more abnormal serum parameters. however, fewer studies have been published that confirm an early and sensitive biomarker to estimate the disease severity and prognosis of covid-19. during our clinical work against the covid-19 epidemic in wuhan, we observed a high incidence of hypocalcemia in critically ill patients. therefore, we hypothesized that serum calcium levels were associated with the disease severity and prognosis of patients with covid-19. this study was performed to test this hypothesis and explore the causes of hypocalcemia.the median serum calcium levels were 2.12 (iqr, 2.04-2.20) mmol/l on admission. we divided the patients into three groups based on the serum calcium values: ≤2.0 mmol/l (defined as group a, n = 43), 2.0-2.2 mmol/l (defined as group b, n = 137), and >2.2 mmol/l (defined as group c, n = 61). as shown in table 2, significant differences in the clinical variables except for serum creatinine were found among the three groups, and the same differences were found between groups a and b (p <0.05). there were also differences in the clinical variables except for wbc count (p =0.07) and serum creatinine (p =0.244) between groups a and c, whereas differences in the variables except for wbc count (p =0.60), alt (p =0.839), the lowest spo2 (p =0.328), and serum creatinine (p =0.635) were found between groups b and c. these results indicated that patients with lower serum calcium levels had worse clinical variables.of the 241 patients, 26 were tested to determine levels of parathyroid hormone (pth) and 25-hydroxy-vitamin d (vd) according to clinical needs. the median serum calcium level of the 26 patients was 2.13 (iqr, 2.03-2.16) mmol/l. the median pth level was 55.27 (iqr, 42.73-73.15) pg/ml, and the median vd level was 10.20 (iqr, 8.20-12.65) ng/ml. all of these patients had low levels of vd (vd deficiency).the spss scatterplots and correlation analyses of serum calcium and the blood biomarkers are shown in figures 1 and 2. the serum calcium levels were significantly positively correlated with lymphocyte count (figure 1a, p <0.001), albumin levels (figure 1b, p <0.001), vd levels (figure 1c, p =0.004), and lowest spo2 (figure 1d, p< 0.001), whereas they are significantly negatively correlated with crp (figure 2a, p< 0.001), d-dimer (figure 2b, p< 0.001) and pth (figure 2c, p =0.048) levels. these results indicated that hypocalcemia may be associated with imbalanced vd and pth in the acute phase of covid-19.ards developed in 19 of 241 (7.9%) patients, and liver injury developed in 16 (6.6%), aki developed in 14 (5.8%), and cardiac injury developed in 12 (5.0%) patients during the research period. twelve patients received mv, and 7 patients received crrt. as shown in table 3, significant differences in the clinical severity and outcome variables were found among the abovementioned three groups (a, b, and c) (p <0.001) and between groups a and c (p <0.001). there were also differences in all these variables except for liver injury incidence (p =0.201). no differences were found between groups b and c (p >0.05). these results indicated that patients with serum calcium values ≤2.0 mmol/l had higher 28-day mortality, and a higher incidence of organ injury. moreover, the serum calcium values were significantly lower in patients who died and in patients with mods, septic shock, and organ injury, requiring mv or crrt (p <0.001) (table 4).roc curves were also performed to assess the associations between serum calcium and mods, septic shock, and 28-day mortality. as shown in figure 3, the area under the curves (aucs) of mods (figure 3a), septic shock (figure 3b), and 28-day mortality (figure 3c) were 0.923 (p <0.001), 0.905 (p =0.001), and 0.929 (p <0.001), respectively. optimal cut-off points of serum calcium values were derived from the roc curves. the optimal cut-off point for mods was 2.035 mmol/l, the sensitivity was 88.2%, and the specificity was 82.6%. the optimal cut-off point for septic shock was 2.01 mmol/l, the sensitivity was 100.0%, and the specificity was 84.3%. the optimal cut-off point for 28-day mortality was 2.01 mmol/l, the sensitivity was 100.0%, and the specificity was 85.7%. figure 4 shows the significant differences in the 28-day mortality among groups a, b, and c. the 28-day mortality of group a was significantly higher than that of groups b or c (p <0.001). no difference was found between groups b and c (p >0.05).this clinical retrospective study investigated the correlations between serum calcium and clinical severity and outcomes in patients with covid-19. the incidence of hypocalcemia was 74.7%. we found that patients with lower serum calcium levels (especially ≤2.0 mmol/l) had worse clinical variables, higher incidences of mods and septic shock, and higher 28-day mortality. hypocalcemia may be associated with imbalanced vd and pth in the acute phase of covid-19. the overall mortality was 4.1% (10/241), whereas the mortality of critically ill patients was increased to 40.0% (10/25).the who declared that covid-19 was a pandemic because the disease is still spreading rapidly around the world [4]. more than 5700000 patients have been diagnosed with covid-19 worldwide, and nearly 360000 have died [4]. although the national health commission of china and the who have issued a series of diagnosis and treatment recommendations, the mortality of critically ill patients is still extremely high. the underlying mechanisms of the novel coronavirus causing organ dysfunction are yet unknown. it is crucial to identify the risk factors for severe illness or death [10]. however, few reports have been published to establish an early and sensitive biomarker to predict the disease severity and prognosis of covid-19. in this study, we found that serum calcium levels were associated with the disease severity and prognosis of patients with covid-19.hypocalcemia is common in critically ill patients. the causes of hypocalcemia include oversecretion of pth, vd deficiency, decreased dietary intake, hypoproteinemia, hypomagnesemia drug interactions, and so on [15]. hypocalcemia was defined as a serum calcium level less than 2.2 mmol/l in our clinical laboratory. at present, there is no specific severity grading system for hypocalcemia. previous studies reported that serum calcium levels less than approximately 2.0 mmol/l were associated with worse clinical outcomes in critically ill patients [15–17]. therefore, we divided patients into three groups based on serum calcium values of ≤2.0 mmol/l, 2.0-2.2 mmol/l, and >2.2 mmol/l. we found that patients with serum calcium values ≤2.0 mmol/l had higher 28-day mortality, and a higher incidence of organ injury. the findings of this study were consistent with previous reports. however, this was the first study to investigate the correlations between serum calcium and clinical outcomes in patients with covid-19. these results suggested that correcting hypocalcemia could be an important strategy to improve the prognosis of patients with covid-19, especially for patients with serum calcium values less than 2 mmol/l. in addition, our study also revealed that hypocalcemia was associated with hypoproteinemia and imbalanced vd and pth in the acute phase of covid-19. hypoproteinemia and vd deficiency were also common and correlated with increased mortality in critically ill patients [18, 19]. therefore, improvement of hypoproteinemia and imbalanced hormone levels may also be useful in the treatment of covid-19.increased crp, alt, tni, and d-dimer levels and lymphocytopenia were present in most critical covid-19 patients [2, 7, 8]. our results also showed that patients with lower serum calcium values had higher levels of crp, alt, tni, and d-dimer and lower lymphocyte counts. the serum calcium values were significantly correlated with lymphocyte count and crp and d-dimer levels. moreover, crp and d-dimer were also indicators to predict the prognosis of critically ill patients [19]. the findings of this study were consistent with previous reports and confirmed that serum calcium levels were associated with the disease severity and prognosis of patients with covid-19. the lung is the main organ affected by this disease. in this study, the median lowest spo2 was 97.0% (iqr, 96.0%-98.0%; range, 80%-99%), and the spo2 values were significantly positively correlated with serum calcium levels. patients with serum calcium values ≤2.0 mmol/l had higher ards incidence, while patients with ards also had lower serum calcium values. these phenomena indicated that hypocalcemia might be crucial in the development of ards. early diagnosis and treatment of hypocalcemia may alleviate organ injury in the acute phase of covid-19.some limitations of the study should be discussed. because of our single-center retrospective design and small sample size, the results might be inconclusive, and the accuracy should be confirmed by large-scale prospective clinical studies. moreover, because the study was not based on pathophysiological models, the results were hypothesis generating, and the exact mechanisms of hypocalcemia and vd deficiency should be tested by more fundamental experiments. in addition, the values of serum calcium were of total calcium rather than ionized calcium in this study, which may not precisely reflect the extent of decreased calcium.in conclusion, this retrospective clinical study found that the incidence of hypocalcemia and vd deficiency was very high in patients with covid-19. hypocalcemia may be associated with imbalanced vd and pth levels. patients with lower serum calcium levels (especially ≤2.0 mmol/l) had worse clinical variables, higher incidences of mods and septic shock, and higher 28-day mortality. the overall mortality of covid-19 was 4.1%, whereas the mortality of critically ill patients was 40.0%.from february 10 to february 28, 2020, adult patients (age ≥18 years) with confirmed covid-19 admitted to our specialized isolation units, tongji hospital of huazhong university of science and technology in wuhan, were enrolled in this clinical retrospective study. patients with chronic organ dysfunction (e.g., hepatic or renal dysfunction), terminal cancer, immunodeficiency, and a history of long-term use of hormones were excluded. written informed consent was waived by our institutional review board because this was a retrospective study that assessed deidentified data and included no potential risk to patients. the diagnosis of covid-19 was made according to the who interim guidance and the recommendations of the national health commission of china [4, 5], and confirmed by rna detection of sars-cov-2 in the clinical laboratory of tongji hospital.an identified case of covid-19 was defined as a positive finding by real-time reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) assay of nasal and pharyngeal swab specimens [4, 5, 7]. only laboratory-confirmed cases were enrolled in the analysis. the clinical classifications of covid-19 were in accordance with the chinese recommendations [5]: mild, with minor clinical symptoms (e.g., fever, cough) without imaging manifestations. moderate, with fever or respiratory tract infection symptoms with imaging indicating pneumonia. severe, met any of the following, i—respiratory distress and respiratory rate ≥30 breaths/min; ii—pulse oxygen saturation (spo2) ≤93% at rest; or iii—arterial partial pressure of oxygen (pao2)/ fraction of inspired oxygen (fio2) ≤300 mmhg (1 mmhg =0.133 kpa). critical, met any of the following, i—respiratory failure with mechanical ventilation (mv); ii—shock; or iii—multiple organ failure requiring icu treatment. hypocalcemia was defined as a serum calcium level less than 2.2 mmol/l in our clinical laboratory. sepsis was defined as life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infection, and septic shock was defined as a subset of sepsis with circulatory and cellular/metabolic dysfunction that is associated with a higher risk of mortality [11]. the diagnostic criteria of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) were in accordance with the berlin definitions [12]. the definitions of acute kidney injury (aki) were based on the 2012 kidney disease: improving global outcomes (kdigo) guidelines [13]. cardiac injury was defined if serum levels of cardiac biomarkers (e.g., troponin i) were more than twice the reference upper limit or new abnormalities were found in electrocardiography and echocardiography [2]. liver injury was defined if serum levels of hepatic biomarkers (e.g., alanine aminotransferase) were more than twice the reference upper limit or if there was disproportionate elevation of alanine aminotransferase (alt) and aspartate aminotransferase (ast) levels compared with alkaline phosphatase levels [14]. multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (mods) was defined as the combined dysfunction of two or more organs.the baseline clinical characteristics, including age, sex, days from onset to admission, initial symptoms or signs, and clinical classifications were collected from electronic medical records, and all laboratory tests were performed according to the clinical needs of patients. the levels of serum calcium, c-reactive protein (crp), alt, albumin, creatinine, troponin i (tni), and plasma d-dimer and white blood cell (wbc) count, lymphocyte count, and the lowest spo2 within 24 hours of admission were recorded. the hormone levels associated with blood calcium (e.g., parathyroid hormone, 25-hydroxy-vitamin d) were also recorded. all blood parameters were detected by the clinical laboratory of tongji hospital. moreover, the numbers of patients with ards, aki, cardiac injury, liver injury, septic shock and mods and patients receiving noninvasive ventilation (niv), high-flow nasal cannula (hfnc), mv, and continuous renal replacement therapy (crrt) were also recorded. the primary endpoints were the development of septic shock, mods, and 28-day mortality. the secondary endpoints were the other disease severity parameters (e.g., organ injury or not).the kolmogorov-smirnov test was first performed to test the normal distribution of the data. normally distributed data were expressed as the means ± standard deviation and were compared by t tests. abnormally distributed data were expressed as the medians (interquartile ranges, iqr) and were compared by the mann-whitney u test or the kruskal-wallis test. categorical variables were presented as absolute numbers or percentages and were analyzed using the χ2 test or fisher’s exact test. to take into account the repeated nature of the variables, analysis of variance (anova) for repeated measurements of the general linear model was implemented. receiver operating characteristic (roc) curves were used to evaluate the associations between serum calcium and septic shock, mods, and 28-day mortality. ibm statistical package for the social sciences (spss, version 22.0, ny, usa) software was used for statistical analysis, and p <0.05 was considered statistically significant. spss scatterplots and a correlation analysis were performed to evaluate the relevance between serum calcium and blood biomarkers. the statistical methods of this study were reviewed by qiao liu, a biostatistician from the center for disease control and prevention of jiangsu province in china.coronavirus disease 2019 , caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), is now a global pandemic that is challenging modern medicine in many aspects [1] . the disease initially presents as a mild respiratory illness, developing into viral interstitial pneumonia, which may in turn, further progress into acute respiratory distress syndrome and multiple organ failure (mof) in 10-15% of adults [2] .interestingly, the course of the disease in children is generally mild compared to that seen in adults, for reasons that are yet to be clearly elucidated [3] . nonetheless, severe and fatal cases have been reported in children and are expected to continue to increase with the growing community transmission and overall current disease prevalence. in fact, a recent report from china on 2,143 children with suspected covid- 19 , described a particularly concerning rate of severe disease in young children, stratified by several age sub-categories [4] . specifically, the proportions of severe and critical cases by age group were 10.6% for <1 years, 7.3% for 1-5 years, 4.2% for 6-10 years, 4.1% for 11-15 years, and 3.0% for ≥16 years [4] .in a previous report, we briefly summarized the laboratory findings reported in the early case studies from china on children with covid-19, which despite the limited sample at the time, clearly suggested that children with covid-19 have different laboratory profiles compared with adult patients [3] . although a limited number of pediatric cases continue to be described in the current literature, the growing number of such reports allowed us to conduct this updated data synthesis. in this pooled analysis of literature data, we report the most common laboratory abnormalities observed in children with covid-19. moreover, because sex and age have been shown to factor into incidence and outcomes of covid-19 in adults, we also compared the laboratory findings across different age subgroups and across the sexes in children with finally, for children with severe disease, we summarized the most frequently observed laboratory abnormalities, highlighting the biomarkers that may be the best indicators at present, to monitor disease severity.an electronic search of medline (pubmed interface), scopus, web of science, and china national knowledge infrastructure (cnki), was performed using the keywords "children" or "pediatrics" or "infant" or "neonate" or "laboratory" or "chemistry" or "clinical" and "coronavirus 2019" or "covid-19" or "2019-ncov" or "sars-cov-2", between december 1, 2019 and may 1, 2020. no language restrictions were applied. the reference lists of all identified potentially relevant studies were reviewed to identify any additional eligible studies. this systematic review and meta-analysis was reported in conformity with the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma) guidelines (supplement 1).all studies were evaluated for inclusion by two independent reviewers. each reviewer screened the titles and abstracts of retrieved references for relevance and possible eligibility. full texts were then retrieved for references deemed eligible by at least one reviewer and screened for inclusion. studies were deemed eligible for inclusion if they were case reports, case series, or observational studies that report clear and extractable data on laboratory findings in rt-pcr confirmed cases of covid-19 in pediatric patients.editorials and reviews were excluded. cases of the multi-system inflammatory syndrome in children (mis-c) potentially linked to covid-19 were not included in this investigation. studies in the chinese language were evaluated by a medical professional fluent in both chinese and english, who translated the article into english when data on laboratory parameters in children were reported in these studies. interreviewer disagreements were resolved by discussion among the reviewers, and in certain cases, with a third author. given the limited data available to date on pediatric covid-19 cases, we decided to include single case reports and case series. as a result, we did not assess the risk of bias or grade the level of the generated evidence.two reviewers independently extracted data from the included studies, which covered the following information: study authors, sample size, country of study, sex and mean age of participants, disease severity, and laboratory tests performed with their corresponding values. the primary outcome was frequency of laboratory abnormalities, with mean laboratory values being collected whenever available, to allow for comparisons between different age and sex groups. individual patient data was also extracted whenever possible. when the mean and standard deviations (sds) of laboratory values were not reported, we extrapolated these values from sample size, median, and interquartile range (iqr), using the method suggested by hozo et al [5] . additional data was sought from original study authors when appropriate.severe disease was defined in our analysis as having any of the following: hypoxemia (oxygen saturation of ≤92%), central cyanosis, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), need for ventilation support, need for vital life support, need for intensive care unit (icu) support, or any combination of these. mild disease was defined as covid-19 with any severity below that as defined for severe.studies were grouped into two separate cohorts for analyses: a 'mild cohort' and a 'severe cohort', which include studies reporting relevant data on children having mild and severe covid-19, respectively. for the mild cohort, a meta-analysis was performed to calculate pooled prevalence estimates (ppe) with their 95% confidence interval (95% ci) for each of the laboratory parameters reported in the relevant studies.laboratory data was pooled whenever two or more studies reported a specific variable. for some parameters, appropriately, only increased or decreased values were reported by the studies, as such ppe represents prevalence estimate percentage of patients outside the normal ranges for a given value.increased and/or decreased laboratory values were defined according to the cut-off values reported in their corresponding study. to accommodate for any heterogeneity arising from using different cut-offs or measuring methods in the different studies, a random effects model was applied. heterogeneity among the included studies was assessed using the chi-square test and the i 2 statistic. for the chi-square test, significant heterogeneity among studies is indicated by a cochran's q p-value of <0.10. as for the i 2 statistic, heterogeneity was classified as results were interpreted as 25%, 50% and 75%, representing low, moderate, and high heterogeneity, respectively [6] .given that sex and age have each been found to affect covid-19 severity and outcomes, subgroup analyses were performed to compare mean lab values by age (<1 vs. >1 year) and sex (female vs. male).using inverse variance, we calculated a weighted mean difference (wmd) with a 95% ci, for each laboratory parameter assessed in each of these subgroups. statistical analysis was performed using the metaxl, software version 5.3 (epigear international pty ltd., sunrise beach, australia). due to the nature of the included studies, i.e., case reports and case series mainly, and the types of outcomes evaluated in this analysis, we did not investigate publication bias.additionally, given the limited number of studies reporting laboratory abnormalities in children with severe covid-19, with available ones showing marked variability across patients, we did not conduct a meta-analysis for studies evaluating severe covid-19 patients. instead, we only descriptively report the findings on such patients in a summary of findings table.supplementary figure 2 shows the flow diagram for this review. after removing duplicate references, a total of 553 articles were identified for title and abstract screening. among these, 117 were excluded for being review articles, 292 for not reporting data on covid-19, 44 for not providing lab data on pediatric patients with covid-19, and 79 for being editorials and/or commentaries. when we screened the reference lists of the 21 remaining articles eligible for inclusion, we identified three additional eligible studies. as a result, our final pooled analysis included 24 studies, which together covered a total of 624 laboratory-confirmed pediatric cases of covid-19, reporting data on 27 different laboratory parameters . all studies were from china, except for two: one from the united states [17] and the other from italy [30] . the age of patients ranged from 0 to 17.5 years old in these studies, with females accounting for around 43% of the pooled cohort. three patients with severe disease were included in the mild cohort analysis, as data was not able to be removed individually. the basic characteristics of the included studies are summarized in table 1 .twenty out of the 24 included studies, totaling 610 pediatric patients with mild covid-19, reported on laboratory abnormalities [7, 9, [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [18] [19] [20] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] . their pooled results are presented in table 2 with their corresponding forest plots in supplement 3. the most common hematologic aberration was a decreased neutrophil count with ppe of 38% (95% ci: 19-60%). elevations in the levels of c-reactive protein (crp), procalcitonin (pct), and lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) were also seen, with ppes of 18%, 26%, and 28%, respectively. interestingly, creatine kinase-mb (ck-mb) was also elevated in one-third of patients (ppe, 33%; 95% ci, 25-42%). heterogeneity varied between the parameters analyzed, but trended higher for inflammatory biomarkers.subgroup analyses by age and sex are presented in tables 3 and 4 , respectively. with respect to age, infants (<1 year) had significantly higher leukocyte, lymphocyte, and platelet counts, along with elevated aspartate aminotransferase (ast), alanine aminotransferase (alt), and ldh levels, without any of these changes being significant. however, they had significantly reduced hemoglobin and creatinine levels. no differences were observed with respect to crp, pct, or ck-mb. relatively lower heterogeneity was observed for the age-specific subgroup analyses, suggesting that laboratory findings are influenced by age, with infants having a slightly different biochemical presentation compared with children older than 1 year of age. with respect to sex, females had significantly higher leukocyte and neutrophil counts, with lower ck levels, compared with males. here too, heterogeneity trended lower for several variables suggesting that sex may also account for the variability observed for some variables in the main analysis.only 6 out of the 24 included studies, covering a total of 14 pediatric patients, addressed laboratory abnormalities in children with severe covid-19 [8, 10, 17, 21, 26, 27] . table 5 summarizes the characteristics and laboratory findings of these studies. given the limited data and high variation across these studies, we did not analytically pool their data together. nonetheless, certain trends could be noted from generally observing their reported findings and deserve to be mentioned. alterations in leukocyte count were observed at lower-than-expected frequency, with few patients having elevated counts (4/16, 25%). interestingly, increased and decreased lymphocyte count were observed at equal frequency (18.7%). in 2 studies (n=9 patients) [10, 21] that reported lymphocyte subsets, 44.4% of patients had an increase in cd4+ cell counts, with only 1 patient (11.1%) increased cd8+ cell count. however, 66.6% (6/9) had decreased counts of natural killer cells. when reported, crp (5 studies, n=13, ↑61.5%), pct (4 studies, n=11 ↑72.7%), and ldh (3 studies, n=11, ↑72.7%) were commonly elevated. only 2 studies (n=9 patients) reported on cytokines [10, 21] , with interleukin-10 (il-10) being the most frequently elevated cytokine, seen in up to 75% of cases. il-6 and interferon-gamma (ifn-gamma) were also elevated, though in only 37% and 25% of cases, respectively. all other cytokine levels were normal. though only reported in one severe case report, ck-mb and troponin was elevated, in congruence with our observations of frequently elevated ck-mb in 1/3 rd of the mild cohort. additionally, a trend of elevated d-dimer and prothrombin time (pt) could also be seen in severe cases.although laboratory abnormalities in adults with mild and severe covid-19 have been widely reported and appear to be somewhat consistent, little is known about the laboratory findings in children with covid-19. while the disease burden seems to be significantly lower in the pediatric population, with many children being almost completely asymptomatic or only mildly affected, the number of cases continues to increase. recent data has shown that up to 10% of infants testing positive for covid-19 may be at risk for developing severe disease that necessitates supplemental oxygen and other aggressive interventions [4] . nonetheless, the majority of laboratory data on covid-19 pediatric patients stems from case reports and case series, with very few small-sized observational studies contributing such data. thus, given that data on children with covid-19 is lacking and urgently needed to inform patient care, we conducted this pooled analysis in the hope that we may provide some insights into the expected laboratory abnormalities or trends for this cohort. table 6 provides a summary of the most common laboratory abnormalities seen in children with mild and severe covid-19. overall, children with mild disease have relatively few laboratory changes. leukocyte count is elevated with a ppe of only 13%, with an inconsistent overall pattern of derangement in white blood cell (wbc) indices in this category, compared with adults having mild disease [31] . unlike a summary of 80 laboratory-confirmed pediatric cases of sars that observed leukopenia in 47% of cases, the ppe for leukopenia was only 19% in this study [32] . moreover, while neutropenia and lymphopenia were reported in 52% and 46% of sars cases, respectively, the generated ppes corresponding to these abnormalities in our study were 38% and 17%, respectively. these changes emphasize notable differences between sars and mild covid-19 in children, despite the high genetic and molecular similarity between the two underlying viruses [32] . in influenza, leukopenia is common occurring in ~1/3 rd of hospitalized children. however, when compared to covid-19, a similar rate of leukocytosis (3-10%) and neutropenia (14-26%) are observed in influenza [33] .of interest, crp was not found to be as frequently elevated in mild covid-19 cases as would be expected, yielding a ppe of only 18%. in children hospitalized with influenza, the rate of elevated crp ranges from 37-67%) [33] . in contrast, we found an elevation in pct level of 26% ppe, suggesting the possibility of a secondary bacterial infection in children hospitalized with covid-19 pneumonia. this is higher than that noted in children hospitalized with influenza, in which pct elevations were noted in 6%-12% [33] .importantly, bacterial and viral co-infections at the time of admission have been reported as being common in children with covid-19 [24] . in adults, elevated pct was found to be associated with a nearly 5-fold increased risk of severe disease [34] . hence, we propose serially monitoring pct levels in children hospitalized with covid-19, as a potential biomarker of bacterial super-infection (either pulmonary or systemic) and consequent clinical deterioration.additionally, ck-mb levels were found to be increased over local thresholds in one-third of mild pediatric cases of covid-19, which resembles the case of adults with covid-19, in whom acute cardiac injury, demonstrated as elevated cardiac biomarkers, has been reported as a common finding that is associated with poorer outcomes. as such, the elevated ck-mb level may suggest either viral infiltration of cardiac tissue, which is among the organs known to express the viral receptor (i.e., angiotensin converting enzyme 2; ace2), or cardiac ischemia due to the frequent intravascular coagulopathy that is seen with this enigmatic disease. while the data on ck-mb presents potential evidence of cardiac damage in children affected by covid-19, more sensitive and specific cardiac biomarkers, like cardiac troponins (both ctni and t), need to be measured in a pediatric cohort. recently, a new hyperinflammatory shock phenomenon, referred to as mis-c has been reported in children and is likely associated with covid-19. in these patients, significant cardiac dysfunction and high levels of troponins have been observed [35] . as such, we suggest that clinicians regularly monitor cardiac troponins in hospitalized children with covid-19, as a likely indicator of ongoing or imminent cardiac injury.when we conducted a subgroup analysis in children with mild covid-19 by age, increased leukocyte counts, ldh levels, and liver enzymes were noted in infants (i.e., <1 year). this may reflect a higher viral burden in this age group, given that infants have been reported to have higher risk of developing severe disease. importantly, low heterogeneity was observed when comparing laboratory values across different age groups, suggesting that age may explain some of the differences seen between the various laboratory variables included in the primary analysis.moreover, since males have been reported to exhibit higher severity and mortality with covid-19 compared with females across all age groups, with numerous hypotheses attempting to explain this sexspecific discrepancy such as differences in ace2 expression, heterogeneous immune responses, presence of co-morbidities, and sex hormones variabilities, we also conducted a subgroup analysis by sex to check for such discrepancies in the pediatric population [36] . paradoxically, our pooled analyses showed that female children actually have higher leukocyte and neutrophil counts, as well as ldh levels, compared with males. all other parameters had low or non-significant differences between the sexes. table 6 highlights the most common laboratory findings in children with severe covid-19. despite the limited data on this category of patients, we were able to note some meaningful trends. first, unlike the case of adults with severe covid-19 who show significant lymphopenia, a near equal frequency of increased and decreased lymphocyte counts were seen in children with severe covid-19, with the majority having normal counts. in a limited analysis of t-lymphocyte subsets, 44% of patients showed an increase in cd4+ cell counts. because lymphopenia and immune dysregulation may impact disease severity, the differences between children and adults require further investigation, especially because sars-cov-2 has been found capable of directly infecting t-lymphocytes, which may be the mechanism underlying this lymphopenia [37] . lymphopenia in adults has been shown to correlate with increased risk of in-hospital mortality, whilst this association remains to be tested in pediatric patients [31] . however, it may be possible that the relative immaturity of the immune system in young children, accounts for differences in viral susceptibility or response to infection, possibly explaining the differences in laboratory trends seen in the pediatric versus adult population of covid-19 patients [3] . overall, based on our analysis, leukocyte indices do not appear to be reliable indicators of disease severity in children.children with severe covid-19 showed somewhat consistent trends of elevated ldh, crp, and pct levels, similar to what has been reported in adult patients with covid-19 [31] . additionally, trends of elevated d-dimer and pt were noted in children with severe covid-19, although these variables have not been consistently measured across studies. nonetheless, these also overlap with findings reported in adult patients, which have been suggested as markers of the recently highlighted hypercoagulability status seen in patients with severe disease [37] .it is worth mentioning that further information on other biomarkers that may help in covid-19 prognostication, such as il-6 and serum ferritin levels, remains limited in children. only two studies reported data on il-6 in covid-19, with none reporting data on serum ferritin. of note, il-6 was only elevated in 37.5% of severe pediatric cases. additional studies should therefore incorporate measurements of il-6, given that this biomarker is commonly elevated in viral respiratory tract infections, and perhaps plays an important role in the cytokine storm seen with the disease, which may make it part of a risk stratification test [3] . in children aged less than 5 years with severe pneumonia requiring mechanical ventilation, elevated il-6 is in fact associated with increased mortality [38] . interestingly, il-10 levels were elevated in 75% of severe cases reported in two studies included in this review. il-10 is an antiinflammatory cytokine which at high levels may contribute to or reflect a state of immunoparalysis in critically ill children, increasing the risk for secondary nosocomial infections [39] . this further supports the importance of serially monitoring pct levels in children hospitalized with severe disease. the use of il-10 as a measure of pediatric disease severity should also be further investigated in future studies.the major limitation of this study is the small number of relevant references that could be included, and their erratically observational nature. in fact, it is imperative to keep in mind when interpreting our results, that our pooled analyses included case reports and case series, which reduce our level of confidence in the generated estimates. nonetheless, we provide in this report, the most comprehensive summary to date, on the laboratory abnormalities seen in children with covid-19. the heterogeneity detected in our primary analyses, could be explained by different influences of age and sex, as differences were noted in subgroup analyses. moreover, heterogeneity may stem from differences among studies with regards to their outcome measures, such as the timing of specimen collection and measurement assays used, which were not clearly described in most of the included studies. lastly, as reference ranges and cut-offs used in the pediatric population for laboratory measures are traditionally heterogenous and may differ from institution to institution, this may partially explain the elevated levels of heterogeneity see for some measurements.importantly, however, as leukocyte indices appear to be unreliable markers of disease severity based on early data, urgent identification of reliable prognostic biomarkers should be a top priority of future studies in this population.despite the increasing number of pediatric covid-19 cases, little is known about the laboratory profiles of these patients. based on data available to date within the literature, alterations in leukocyte indices appear to be mostly inconsistent in children, unlike the case of adults with covid-19. therefore, leukocyte indices in children do not appear to be reliable markers of disease severity. instead, we propose that physicians serially monitor crp, pct, and ldh levels, to monitor the course of the disease in children hospitalized with covid-19. finally, elevated ck-mb levels in children with mild covid-19suggest the possibility of cardiac injury, highlighting the importance of monitoring cardiac biomarkers in hospitalized patients and the need for further investigation in future studies.funding: this research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. the disease-causing factor was determined to be a new coronavirus after reports of pneumonia cases identified in wuhan province of china in december 2019 to the world health organization (who) regional office. it was declared as a pandemic by who on march 11, 2020 , after the cases spread across the world. the new virus was an etiological agent of pandemic coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , and since the genome of the new virus was the same as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), it was named as sars-cov-2 (1). sars-cov-2 was found to have a much higher transmission rate than known human coronavirus strains, while also causing damage to the lung tissue, causing respiratory failure and potentially leading to death. individuals over 65 years of age, smokers, and people with chronic diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, kidney failure were more severely affected. patients often showed signs of dry cough, high fever, and shortness of breath, while some patients with abdominal pain, diarrhea, and headache have also been reported. it was understood that some infected individuals remained asymptomatic. as of the end of may 2020, the number of cases reported worldwide as sars-cov-2 positive has exceeded 4.5 million, and deaths exceeded 300,000 (2, 3) . in turkey, the first cases in which the who declared a pandemic, march 11, 2020 were seen, and 157.814 cases and 4369 death were present at the end of may 2020 (4). according to new phylogenetic analysis of the virus in turkey; the introduction of the virus into the country for the first time is earlier than the first reported case of infection, and the virus was found to have many independent international entries into the country (5) first of all, to prevent covid-19 pandemic, early detection and isolation of asymptomatic and symptomatic infections are necessary. diagnostic tests information for sars-cov-2 is still developing, and a clear understanding of the nature of the tests and interpretation of their findings is essential. during the covid-19 pandemic, in the diagnosis of sars-cov-2, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) and igm and igg enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay tests are often used (6, 7) . additionally, it remains unclear whether rt-pcr is the gold standard and whether false positive or false negative results are common. centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) recommends the collection of oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal swab specimens to test for sars-cov-2. (8) . various rna gene targets are used by different manufacturers; most tests target envelopes (e), spike (s), nucleocapsid (n), rna-linked rna polymerase (rdrp), and orf1 genes 1 or more (9) . among these assays, the rdrp assay had the highest analytical sensitivity (3.8 rna copies/ml reaction at 95% detection probability) (10) . in turkey, the diagnosis was made according to the recommendations given by "covid-19 diagnosis and treatment guide" published by the turkish ministry of health (11) . rt-pcr diagnostic kit for detecting sars-cov-2 in respiratory tract samples has been developed by the ministry of health general directorate of public health microbiology reference laboratories and biological products department virology laboratory. from the beginning of the covid-19 epidemic in turkey, rdrp assay developed in-house and applied in all regions of the country.in covid-19 infection, viral rna in the nasopharyngeal swab, measured by the threshold cycle (ct), can be detected in most individuals a week before the onset of symptoms and peaked in the first week of symptom onset. ct is the number of replication cycles required to produce a fluorescent signal with low ct values indicating high viral rna loads. those with pcr positive will have a ct value of less than 40. pcr positivity begins to decrease until the 3rd week and then becomes undetectable (12) . failure of the sampling process to coincide with the appropriate time and maloperation of nasopharyngeal swabs can cause false negative results. most rt-pcr tests have a specificity of 100% because their primary design is specific to the genome sequence of sars-cov-2. false positive results may occasionally occur due to technical errors and reagent contamination (13, 14) .rdrp assays had been implemented in 30 laboratories in europe (15) . however, this method requires improvement as a molecular diagnostic test used by clinical laboratories. the who recommended the detection of at least two different targets on the sars-cov-2 genome (16) . it is also recommended that e gene assay as a primary screening tool followed by the rdrp gene assay as confirmatory tests (17, 18) . however, there are problems in the ongoing diagnostic processes with pcr kits. we do not have sufficient information on the diagnostic powers, validations, and standards of the kits used. questions such as comparative analysis of pcr diagnostic kits, analysis compatibility with each other, and which genes of sars-cov-2 cause in diagnostic processes await answers. in the covid-19 pandemic, we aimed that we would understand the problems encountered during the diagnosis process with pcr kits and obtain data on how to improve the diagnostic process.international external quality controls of the kits used have not been established yet. therefore, an unknown sample is correlated with the close distances of the compared kits when measuring the correct diagnosis. also, pcr tests used in pandemics are qualitative for an early and accurate diagnosis. here we evaluated the compatibility of two different multiplex rt-pcr methodologies used in the simultaneous detection of two regions of the sars-cov-2 genome (e and rdrp genes) and the rdrp gene.a total of 96 patients oro/nasopharyngeal swab samples from different hospitals in kocaeli city (kocaeli state hospital, seka state hospital, gebze darıca state hospital and gölcük state hospital) which were sending for sars-cov-2 diagnosis to pcr unit of kocaeli university were included to this study between march and april 2020. all samples were studied by a comparison of two different rt-pcr kits produced in turkey.one of the rt-pcr kits is the bio-speddy® (bioeksen r&d technologies inc. covid-19 rt-qpcr detection kit v2.0, istanbul-turkey) determined valuable by the "turkish ministry of health" and used throughout covid-19 pandemic. the other kit; diagnovital® (rta laboratories inc, sars-cov-2 real-time pcr kit v2.0 istanbul-turkey) is a commercial kit and mainly exported to european and middle east-north africa zones during the pandemic. each rt-pcr kit production followed cdc's and who's detection guidelines (19, 20) . however, each kits are included in the who emergency use listing for sars-cov-2 in vitro diagnostic products (https://www.who.int/diagnostics_laboratory/eul/en/). viral rna extraction from samples were performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. for automated viral nucleic acid extraction processing qiagen -ez 1 advanced xl platform (qiagen, hilden germany) and for pcr assay run qiagen -rotorgene q thermal cycler platform (qiagen, hilden germany) was used. limit of detection values of the kits of analytical sensitivity belonging in 95% confidence. a negative (human specimen control) was included in every rna extraction procedure, and a non-template (water) control was included in every rt-pcr run. an internal control amplification was performed to monitor rna extraction and rt-pcr quality. characteristics of the sars-cov-2 rt-pcr kits are shown in table 1 .swab materials available for sample collection for covid-19 based on the cdc interim guidelines for collecting, handling, and testing clinical specimens from patients under investigation for covid-19 (21) . oropharyngeal/nasopharyngeal samples were collected from the patients by synthetic fiber swabs with plastic shafts (citotest scientific co, haimen city, p.r.china). the swabs were placed in 3 ml sterile viral transport media (citotest scientific co, haimen city, p.r.china) during the collection and transferred with biohazard specimen bag. after the samples were taken, they were transferred to the center and tested shortly within the 2 hours. samples were vortexed for 3-5 seconds prior to testing, and a calibrated pipette was used to transfer the sample volume specified in each manufacturer's instructions for use.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. .committee of kocaeli university (gokaek-2020/08.30 -2020/144).the chi-square tests were calculated using a significance level of 95%. chi-square scores were calculated using excel. the heatmap is obtained by comparing chi-square scores for a range of ct threshold combinations, where any patient with ct value below the threshold is assumed positive for bio-speedy and any patient with ct value below the threshold for both of the genes (gene e and rdrp) is assumed positive for diagnovital.for deming regressions, the data pairs with only positive ct values were used for each experiment, except cumulatives. to obtain the cumulative ct scores, an arbitrary copy number was obtained using 2 -ct for gene e and rdrp obtained by diagnovital, where the ct is available. otherwise, an arbitrary copy number of zero is used. the arbitrary copy numbers were added to obtain a cumulative copy number, and the cumulative ct is obtained by ln (cumulative copy number)/ln (2) . calculations were done using excel.of all analyzed samples, 68 were positive, and 28 were negative by two pcr kits. the mean age of the study population was 44 (range;17 -85), and 67 (64%) were male, including both genders showing signs and/or symptoms of covid-19 infection. demographic, laboratory, and medical findings of the study patients are shown in table 2 .diagnovital and bio-speedy kits were compared by rt-pcr amplification yield results. the initial quantity and yield quality of targets had been monitored by the exponential amplification phase of the rt-pcr reaction. there were different cts for the same patient samples, and each kit indicated differently yield quality. especially, diagnovital showed in a constricted range and conveniently exponential amplification curves than bio-speedy (fig 1) .the deming regression of ct values obtained for rdrp gene for the two separate kits and 95% confidence interval for the regression line shown in fig 2. diagnovital and bio-speedy both use rdrp as a biomarker for their detection. the regression of cts obtained for this biomarker showed correlation. it was important to note that since the isolation methods and possibly primers were different, we did not expect to observe a slope of 1. indeed, bio-speedy showed higher variation when it comes to cts, yet the correlation was statistically significant (p<0.01) with a pearson correlation of 0.73 (fig 2) .the deming regression of ct values obtained for rdrp gene and gene e for diagnovital and 95% confidence interval for the regression line shown in fig 3. the two biomarkers used by diagnovital, gene e, and rdrp gene were also showed some degree of correlation. this correlation was found statistically significant (p<0.01) with a pearson correlation of 0.82 (fig  3) . (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . only, showed that inclusion of a secondary biomarker by diagnovital improved the correlation of different kits.in fig 5 the analyzed heat map for chi-square scores obtained for a range of thresholds for bio-speedy and diagnovital kits are shown. black and white squares indicated chi-square score of 1 and 0, respectively. according to chi-square heat map, while the two kits showed high independence for manufacturers choice of ct, there was a range of ct combinations for the two where the two kits showed a high correlation. when the ct of 40 for bio-speedy and 35 for diagnovital was applied as instructed by the manufacturers, the chi-square score of 0.18 was obtained, indicating a high independence between the kits for manufacturer defined cts. on the other hand, the maximum dependence for the two kits could be established if the ct were modified to any of the 38 and 32, 38 and 34, 37 and 35, 34 and 37 combinations for bio-speedy and diagnovital, respectively. while dependence could increase at even higher ct values, it is important to note that high dependence is not an indication of high sensitivity or specificity.on january 26, the first batch of four registration certificates of novel coronavirus pcr kit was issued by the state food and drug administration for the emergency, without a series of clinical trials (https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/coronavirus-covid-19update-fdaissues-new-policy-help-expedite-vailability-diagnostics). then, new pcr kits began to be produced by different laboratories and institutes. many studies on the obtained kits have also been carried out and are still underway (22) . nowadays, turkey is among the countries producing sars-cov-2 diagnostic pcr kits. in this study, we investigated the compatibility between the two different sars-cov-2 pcr kits, which included different gene targets that produced in turkey during the covid-19 pandemic. we used two separate sars-cov-2 rt-pcr kits similar to each other, including the procedure, analytic sensitivity, storage of the kits, studied samples, and other features shown in table 1 . the differences were the addition of e gene analysis in addition to rdrp gene analysis in the diagnovital pcr kit and isolation methods. in the absence of international quality controls, an unknown sample may more accurately diagnose with a high cumulative correlation of kits. according to two pcr kits, there were 68 positive and 28 negative results as cumulative in our study.the mean age of our patient population was 44, and 64% of them were male. there are many articles reporting gender differences in terms of frequency and severity of the disease (23, 24, 25) . the higher prevalence is in males because ace2 expression is more dominant in men, and smoking is more common in men than in women (26) . the most common symptoms on admission were cough (24%), 10% fever, and there was more than one symptom association. within 68 positive patients, there were 15 patients (22%) without symptoms (data not shown). studies are showing variable results about the transmission rates of asymptomatic individuals (27, 28) . the samples came from the city of kocaeli, one among the cosmopolitan cities of the country, where the industry is developed, and the working class is quite high. the covid-19 epidemiology varies between regions. among the possible reasons for this variation are the demographic and socio-cultural structure, transportation. the city of kocaeli is also among the cities where the country's export and import are made the most. that is why the number of workers was considerably high (40%) in our study population. comorbidities were present in 13% of the patients. the comorbidities with the highest frequency were as follows: coronary artery disease with hypertension (33%), diabetes (25%), chronic obstructive lung diseases (17%). similar results for comorbid diseases were all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.20133967 doi: medrxiv preprint obtained in a study from china. (29) . in 5 of 28 pcr (18%) negative patients, ct findings were consistent with covid-19, and all five patients had symptoms (data not shown).it was interesting that different cts for the same patient samples were seen in each kit. starting quantities were the same, but they had different yield quality. especially, diagnovital pcr kit showed in a constricted range and conveniently exponential amplification curves than bio-speedy pcr kit (fig 1) . this case suggested that two different rna target gene assays were more appropriate as suggested by who in the diagnosis of covid-19 disease (15) . in general, it is difficult to understand the analytical sensitivity differences of different molecular tests due to natural variations in sample processing and reference materials used for validation in different laboratories. however, the study comparing three different molecule tests by uhteg k et al. showed that similar results were found; the pcr kit with two different genes of the sars-cov-2 had a higher yield than the other two kits performing one gene analysis (30) .our data suggested that all two pcr methods yielded comparable results (a pearson coefficient of 0.83) for both negative and positive clinical specimens (fig 4) . however, we did find a notable difference comparison of rdrps of the two kits had a correlation of 0.73 (fig 2) . it was important to note that since the isolation methods and possibly primers were different, we did not expect to observe a slope of 1. indeed, bio-speedy showed higher variation when it comes to cts, yet the correlation was statistically significant (p<0.01). this case indicated that while the two kits reported similar results for the rdrp gene, there was a considerable difference as well. the addition of a secondary biomarker for diagnovital improved the correlation of different kits and increased the correlation by 0.10 (fig 4) . while bio-speedy did not alone represent the true values, the increased correlation was an indication of improved diagnostic power. on the other hand, as shown in figure 3 , both biomarkers were somewhat correlated with the 95% confidence interval for the deming regression line of the ct values obtained for the diagnovital for the rdrp gene and the e gene. this result indicated that the two biomarkers reported relatively close results adding to the cumulative detection power.choosing a threshold level is essential to finalize the diagnosis and classify the patient. most diagnostic tools refer to any ct value above a specific threshold, too low for detection and refrain from a conclusive classification. in the case of a pandemic event, the doctors, however, do not have the luxury or resources. unfortunately, without true positives or true negatives, we do not have the means to perform roc analyses in order to determine the right thresholds to reach an optimum diagnostic power. in spite, we had the means to compare the two diagnostic tools and how they were correlated with each other. using deming, while it was possible to correlate the cts; however, the thresholds for diagnosis could not be correlated as a result of diagnosis was categorical rather than continuous data, as in cts. instead, we had the means of correlation of categorical data using the chi-square score as a specific threshold combination. however, depending on the choice of thresholds, this score was prone to change. during a grid search, we scanned a range of thresholds for both of the kits, producing a heatmap of chi-square scores (fig 5) . important to note that the heatmap did not provide information on accuracy, but rather, correlation of the kits. according to the chisquares heatmap, the range of high correlation thresholds is along the diagonal of ct ranges. surprisingly the correlation dramatically dropped outside of this diagonal, including the threshold combination determined by the kit manufacturers (35 for diagnovital and 40 for bio-speddy). this case indicated that while the correlation for cts exists, the choice of threshold might strongly influence the diagnosis. to obtain a higher accuracy, a combinatory study was advisable to determine optimum thresholds using multiple kits for even a few hundred cases.the rt-pcr tests today are so new that it is unclear how reliable they are. local laboratories are doing their best to validate tests on their own. they are also aimed at scanning more masses by reaching more tests and thus preventing the spread of the disease by detecting positives. in our country scientific and technological research council of turkey had also accepted all projects about pcr kits. this was conducted because the country needed these kits to help with quality assurance internally. a viewpoint published in jama earlier this month synthesized known data on the accuracy of different tests at different points in the disease process (31) . some kits have three target genes, use one target gene for the screening test and two other target genes for verification test. the confirmatory test result is considered positive only when both confirmatory genes are detected. if a gene is not detected, the result cannot be interpreted positively (21) .in conclusion, it should be mentioned that the international external quality controls for the diagnosis of sars-cov-2 by pcr techniques used have not been established yet. our results suggest, in an unknown sample on the light of clinic symptoms of covid -19 using together different pcr kits that target different genes during the pandemic situation may provide a more accurate diagnosis. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.20133967 doi: medrxiv preprint 2  6  2  7  2  8  2  9  3  0  3  1  3  2  3  3  3  4  3  5  3  6  3  7  3  8  3  9  4  0  4  1  4  2  4  3  4  4  4  5  2  5  2  6  2  7  2  8  2  9  3  0  3  1  3  2  3  3  3  4  3  5  3  6  3  7  3  8  3 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.20133967 doi: medrxiv preprintthe outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), that first emerged in wuhan in december 2019, has rapidly spread throughout china in the past two months. [1, 2] considering the ongoing outbreak in china and fast worldwide spread of coronavirus disease 2019 , infected by sars-cov-2, it has led to the declaration of public health emergency of international concern by the world health organization (who) on 30 january 2020.[3] as of feb 16, 2020, a total of 58182 laboratory-confirmed cases, has been identified in china (primarily in wuhan), with 1696 fatal cases, according to the data from chinese government official reports. [2] it has been reported that the covid-19 was more likely to occur in older men with comorbidities [4] [5] [6] , who have weaker immune functions. as a new type of highly contagious disease in human, the pathophysiology of unusually high pathogenicity for covid-19 has not been completely understood yet. several studies have shown that increased amounts of proinflammatory cytokines in serum were associated with pulmonary inflammation and extensive lung damage in sars [7] and mers-cov infection [8] , and recently in covid-19 [5] . however, little is known about lymphocyte subsets and the immune response of patients with covid-19.this retrospective, single-center study aimed to analyze the expression of infection related biomarkers, inflammatory cytokines and lymphocyte subsets by flow cytometry in laboratory-confirmed cases, and compare the difference between severe cases and non-severe ones. 7 we retrospectively recruited totally 452 patients with covid-19 from january 10 to february 12, 2020 , at tongji hospital, the largest comprehensive medical treatment center of the central china and "the specific hospital for the treatment of severe patients with covid- 19 in wuhan" designated by the government. the study was performed in accordance with tongji hospital ethics committee (irb id: tj-c20200121). written informed consent was waived by the ethics commission of the designated hospital for emerging infectious disease.the severity of covid-19 was judged according to the fifth revised trial version of the novel coronavirus pneumonia diagnosis and treatment guidance. [9] those who met the criterion as follows were defined as severe-type: 1. respiratory distress with the respiratory rate over 30 per minute; 2. oxygen saturation ≤ 93% in the resting state; 3. arterial blood oxygen partial pressure (pao2) / oxygen concentration (fio2) ≤300mmhg.data including demographic data, medical history, symptoms, signs, and laboratory findings were collected from patients' medical record. laboratory results included blood routine, lymphocyte subsets, infection-related biomarkers, inflammatory cytokines, immunoglobulins and complement proteins. the total number of lymphocytes in peripheral blood was counted by hemocytometer. lymphocyte subsets percentage were analyzed with facscanto flow cytometer for those covid-19 patients on admission. [10] the absolute numbers of different lymphocyte subsets were calculated by multiplying the percentages with total lymphocyte count. pma/ionomycin-stimulated lymphocyte function assay was performed as described previously. [11] the percentages of ifn-γ positive cells in different cell subsets were defined as the function of them. the data were reviewed by a trained team of physicians in tongji hospital.a confirmed covid-19 case was defined as positive for real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase-chain reaction (rt-pcr) assay for nasal and pharyngeal swab specimens according to the who guidance. on receipt of the samples, viral rna extraction was performed using a magnetic viral rna/dna extraction kit on pan9600 automated nucleic acid extraction system (tianlong, xi'an, china), according to the manufacturer's instructions, followed by polymerase-chain-reaction (pcr) screening for the presence of specific 2019-ncov with a commercial kit (tianlong, xi'an, china) in a volume of 25 μl pcr mixture containing 17.5 μl reaction solution, 1.5 μl probes, 1.5 μl taq, and 5 μl nucleic acid. conditions for the amplifications include reverse transcription at 50°c for 30 min, pre-denaturation at 95°c for 10 min, followed by 5 cycles of 94°c for 15 s, 50°c for 30 s and 72°c for 30 s, and 40 cycles of 94°c for 10 s and 58°c for 30 s for fluoresce detection.a cycle threshold value (ct-value) ≤ 37 was defined as a positive test, which was based on the recommendation by the national institute for viral disease control and prevention (china).we described the categorical variables as frequency rates and percentages, and continuous variables as mean and standard deviation (sd), median and interquartile range (iqr) values.independent group t tests were used for the comparison of means for continuous variables that were normally distributed; conversely, the mann-whitney u test was used for continuous variables not normally distributed. proportions for categorical variables were compared using the χ2 test. all statistical analyses were performed using spss (statistical package for the social sciences) version 20.0 software (spss inc.). two-sided p-values of less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.by moreover, severe patients were significantly more likely to have short of breath and fatigue (58.4% vs 39.2%; p < 0.001; 51.4% vs 39.2%; p = 0.014; respectively) than non-severe patients. table 2 presents the laboratory findings in patients with covid-19. among 452 patients who underwent laboratory examinations on admission, most of them tended to have lymphopenia, higher infection-related biomarkers (i.e. procalcitonin, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, serum ferritin, and c-reactive protein) and several elevated inflammatory cytokines (i.e. tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-α, interleukin (il)-2r and il-6), and there were numerous differences in blood cell counts and infection related biomarkers between severe group and non-severe group. severe cases had higher leukocyte (5.6 vs 4.9 ×10⁹ ; p < 0.001) and neutrophil (4.3 vs 3.2 ×10⁹ ; p < 0.001) counts, lower lymphocytes counts (0.8 vs 1.0 ×10⁹ ; p < 0.001), higher neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (nlr) (5.5 vs 3.2; p < 0.001) as well as lower percentages of monocytes (6.6 vs 8.4 %; p < 0.001), eosinophils (0.0 vs 0.2 %; p < 0.001), and basophils (0.1 vs 0.2 %; p = 0.015). compared with non-severe group, most of severe cases demonstrated elevated levels of infection-related biomarkers, including procalcitonin (0.1 vs 0.05 ng/ml; p < 0.001), serum ferritin (800.4 vs 523.7 ng/ml; p < 0.001), and c-reactive protein (57.9 vs 33.2 mg/l; p < 0.001). a bunch of inflammatory cytokines were also elevated in severe cases than the non-severe ones, including interleukin (il)-2r (757.0 vs 663.5 u/ml; p = 0.001), il-6 (25.2 vs 13.3 pg/ml; p < 0.001), il-8 (18.4 11 vs 13.7 pg/ml; p < 0.001), il-10 (6.6 vs 5.0 pg/ml; p < 0.001), and tnf-α (8.7 vs 8.4 pg/ml; p = 0.037). immunoglobulins (iga, igg and igm) and complement proteins (c3 and c4) in patients with covid-19 were within normal range. there were no significant differences in the levels of iga, igg, and complement proteins c3 or c4 between the mild and severe groups, while igm slightly decreased in severe ones.lymphocyte subsets were analyzed in 44 patients with covid-19 on admission (table 3 ).covid-19 (852.9 /ul), and more evident in the severe cases (743.6 vs 1020.1 /ul; p = 0.032) compared to the non-severe group. the mean values of the three main subsets of lymphocytes were generally decreased in patients with covid-19, as t cells and nk cells below normal levels, and b cells within the lower level of normal range. t cells were shown to be more affected by sars-cov-2 as t cell count was nearly half the lower reference limit, and tend to be more hampered in severe cases (461.6 vs 663.8 /ul; p = 0.027) when compared with non-severe group.the function of cd4+, cd8+ t cells, and nk cells, as indicated by pma/ionomycin stimulated ifn-γ positive cells in these three subsets, was within normal range. and no significant difference was found between severe cases and non-severe ones. we reported here dysregulated immune system in a cohort of 452 patients with laboratory confirmed covid-19 in wuhan, china. totally, increase of nlr, and t lymphopenia-in particular, decrease of cd4+ t cells-were common among patients with covid-19, and more evident in the severe cases, but no significant change in the number of cd8+ cells and b cells. based on these data, we suggested that covid-19 might damage lymphocytes, especially t lymphocytes, and the immune system was impaired during the period of disease.in the cohort, we observed that 44.0% of patients had at least one underlying disorder (i.e., hypertension, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), and a higher percentage of hypertension and cardiovascular disease in the severe cases than the mild individuals, in 13 consistent with those reports [5, 12] , suggested that covid-19 is more likely to infect those elder men with chronic comorbidities due to weaker immune functions.in terms of laboratory tests, we noted that most of infected patients presented lymphopenia and elevated levels of infection-related biomarkers, more interestingly, a higher number of neutrophils and a lower number of lymphocytes, ie, the increase of neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (nlr), were found in the severe group with covid-19 compared to the mild group. nlr, a well-known marker of systemic inflammation and infection, has been studied as a predictor of bacterial infection, included pneumonia [13] [14] [15] . the increase of nlr in our study, consistent with the findings from wang et al that several patients with covid-19 had a rising neutrophil count and a falling lymphocyte count during the severe phase [12] , indicated that serious disturbance in internal environment and potential critical condition in those severe infected cases.higher serum levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines (tnf-α, il-1 and il-6) and chemokines (il-8) were found in patients with severe covid-19 compared to individuals with mild disease, similar to the results in sars and mers [7, 16] . cytokines and chemokines have been thought to play an important role in immunity and immunopathology during virus infections [16, 17] . although there is no direct evidence for the involvement of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines in lung pathology during covid-19, the change of laboratory parameters, including elevated serum cytokine, chemokine levels, and increased nlr in infected patients were correlated with the severity of the disease and adverse outcome, suggesting a possible role for hyper-inflammatory responses in covid-19 pathogenesis.virus-induced direct cytopathic effects and viral evasion of host immune responses are believed to play major roles in disease severity [16, 17] . a rapid and well-coordinated innate immune response is the first line of defense against viral infections, however, when immune response is dysregulated, it will result in an excessive inflammation, even cause death [18] . in our study, we demonstrated pronounced lymphopenia and low counts of cd3+ cells and cd4+ cells in covid-19 cases. the differentiation of naïve cd4+ t-cells into effector and memory subsets is one of the most fundamental facets of t-cell-mediated immunity [19] . and the balance between the naïve and memory cd4+ t cells is crucial for maintaining an efficient immune response. our results of lymphocyte subsets with higher naïve cd4+ t-cell subpopulations and smaller percentages of memory cells, higher naïve: memory ratio, in severe cases indicated that immune system in severe infection subgroup was impaired more severely. in addition, the decrease of regulatory t cells, especially induced regulatory t cells which have a key role in restraining allergic inflammation at mucosal surfaces, was demonstrated in those infected patients, especially in the severe group. furthermore, similar tendency was also presented in naïve regulatory t cells, which underlie the control of systemic and tissue specific autoimmunity. it has been shown that t cells, especially cd4+ and cd8+ t cells, play an important role in weakening or dampening overactive innate immune responses during viral infection [18] . whereas, regulatory t cells, a subset of t helper cells, play a crucial role in negatively regulating the activation, proliferation, and effector functions of a wide range of immune cells for the maintenance of self-tolerance and immune homeostasis [20, 21] . given that higher expression of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines in covid-19 patients, especially in the severe cases, the consumption of cd4+ and cd8+ t cells, and the decrease of regulatory t cells, presented in our study, might result in aggravated inflammatory responses, the production of cytokine storm and make damaged tissue worse. although not so sure, correlative evidence from those severe patients with lower number of lymphocytes suggested a role for dysregulated immune responses in covid-19 pathogenesis. 15 there were several limitations in our study which might make some potential bias. first, it was a retrospective, single center and small sample study of patients admitted to hospital; standardized data for a larger cohort would be better to assess the temporal change of immune response after infection with covid-19. second, those patients with covid-19 who have bacterial co-infection or superinfection might affect the results of immune response. most of them presented the increase of nlr and procalcitonin, and more evident in severe cases, indicated potential bacterial co-infection due to dysregulated immune system.despite that, our study demonstrated several novel information about dysregulated immune response in covid-19 patients that sars-cov-2 might mainly act on lymphocytes, especially t lymphocytes, induce a cytokine storm in the body, and generate a series of immune responses to damage the corresponding organs; thus, surveillance of nlr and lymphocyte subsets is helpful in the early screening of critical illness, diagnosis and treatment of covid-19. 16 none.all authors declare no competing interests. leucocytes, × 10⁹ per l 3.5-9. tumor necrosis factor-α, pg/ml 0.0-8.1 8.6 (6.9-10.9) 8.4 (6.9-10.4) 8.7 (7.1-11.6) 0.037interleukin-1β, pg/ml 0.0-5. various studies have been carried out to find out the etiology of kawasaki disease (kd). viral infection is thought to be one of the causes of kd, but it is still controversial [1] [2] [3] [4] . although several potential viral causes of kd are identified, the diagnosis of kd with concomitant viral infection is a little unclear to confirm kd. adenoviral infection is frequently involved in young children less than 3 years and is characterized with prolonged high fever, upper and lower respiratory tract symptom, conjunctivitis and gastrointestinal symptom with hepatic involvement. inflammatory biomarker such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr) and c-reactive protein (crp) levels are mostly ele vated in patients with adenoviral infection. because of strong inflammatory response, adeno viral infection closely resembles bacterial infection and kd [5] [6] [7] [8] . although the majority patients of adenoviral infection presented respiratory condition, extrapulmonary manifestation of conjunctivitis, skin rash, mucous membrane changes, cervical lymphadenopathy and encephalitis can be associated. the various clinical manifestation of adenovirus infections are particularly similar to kd regarding the clinical aspects [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] .a recent study demonstrated the distinction of clinical and virologic characteristics of adenoviral infection differentiating from kd with incidental adenoviral detection 14) . because of clinical similarities, early and acute diagnosis and intravenous immunoglo bulin (ivig) therapy are essential to prevent coronary artery abnormalities in kd. the aim of this study is to compare the clinical and laboratory characteristics of kd patients with adenovirus detection and those with only adenoviral infection and to identify biomarkers that can differentiate kd from adenovirus infections at the initial hospitalization stage. in addition, we also assessed the clinical and laboratory distinction of kd with adenovirus from kd without adenovirus infection.we conducted a retrospective study from august 2012 to june 2016. a total of 129 patients with kd were diagnosed during this period. the diagnosis of kd was established in patients who fulfilled the diagnostic criteria of kd. typical kd was diagnosed in the presence of fever for at least 5 days combined with at least 4 of the 5 following clinical features; the lip and tongue change, bilateral bulbar conjunctivitis, skin rash, erythema and edema of the hands and feet and cervical lymphadenopathy with diameter of ≥1.5 cm. incomplete kd was diagnosed if the patients had symptoms that were associated with kd met the inflammatory biomarker criteria 15) .among 129 kd patients, respiratory virus polymerase chain reaction was performed in 107 patients. respiratory virus panel included influenza a and b, adenovirus, parainfluenza virus types 1 through 4, respiratory syncytial virus types a and b, bocavirus types 1 through 4, coronavirus nl 63, oc 43, and 229e, enterovirus, human metapneumovirus, and rhinovirus types a, b, and c.in addition, we retrospectively analyzed 147 patients with isolated adenoviral infection. the most common symptoms were fever more than 4 days (81.3%), cough (73.2%), sputum (68.8%), rhino rrhea (65.2%). the most common diagnosis at admission was acute pharyn gotonsillitis (57.3%), followed by pneumonia (16.1%), bronchiolitis (12.5%), and gastroenteritis (5.9%). the pharyngoconjunctival fever was initially diagnosed in 12 patients (8.2%).we compared 147 patients with adenoviral infection and 11 pa ti ents with kd with adenovirus detection. in addition, we also com pared 11 patients with kd with adenovirus and 87 kd without ade novirus detection. this study protocol was approved by the institutional review board of hallym university kangdong sacred heart hospital (kangdong 2018-01-004). written informed consent was obtained from all patients.all patients with kd were examined for inflammatory markers such as total white blood cell count, neutrophil count, neutrophil/ lymphocyte ratio, esr, crp, lactate dehydrogenase (ld), and b-type natriuretic peptide (bnp).in addition, other laboratory findings such as hemoglobin, serum sodium, serum albumin, aspartate aminotransferase (ast), alanine aminotransferase (alt), and urinalysis were also assessed. however, bnp was not detected in most patients with isolated adenoviral infection.regarding the criteria of typical kd 15) , the acute clinical features such as conjunctival injection, lip and tongue changes, skin rash, cervical lymphadenopathy, and changes in extremities were also evaluated.all of the kd patients were initially treated with ivig (2 g/kg) for 12 hours and additionally treated with ivig in case of ivig resistance. ivig resistance was defined as a persistent or recrude scent fever for >48 hours after initial ivig completion. in the case of recurrent or persistent fever with twice ivig therapy, we managed with the fever with methylprednisolon pulse therapy or infliximab. after the acute phase, all patients have been given low dose aspirin for 8 weeks. low dose aspirin was discontinued unless the coronary artery abnormalities persisted.in all patients with kd, transthoracic echocardiography was performed to define the involvement of the coronary arteries during the acute phase and also at an outpatient clinic at 2-3 weeks and 8 weeks. the coronary abnormalities analysis by echocardiography was performed off-line retrospectively. echocardiographic recording at 3 different times was reviewed in each patient. measurement were conducted at the left main coronary artery, the left anterior de scending artery and the right coronary artery. to identify the coronary abnormalities, we assessed the z value of coronary arteries according to the body surface area. we defined the coronary abnormalities as a coronary z score of more than 2.5, the presence of wall irregularity, no acute tapering of the coronary artery branch and saccular or diffuse coronary aneurysm 15) .continuous variables were expressed as the median (interquartile range) and categorical variables as either a number or a percentage. for continuous variables, the comparisons were performed using mann-whitney u test. categorical variables were compared using fisher's exact test, or chi-square analysis, as appropriate. multivariate analysis was performed to detect the independent variables as sociated with kd with adenoviral detection using all parameters with a p value<0.05 via univariate analysis. the area under the receiver operating characteristics (roc) curve was used to evaluate the discrimination of kd with adenoviral detection from isolated korean j pediatr 2018;61(2):43-48 adenoviral infection and then to derive sensitivity and specificity values for crp. the cutoff value of crp parametric variable was determined by roc curve. a p-value ≤0.05 was considered statistically significant.various kinds of virus were detected in 42 out of 107 (39.2%) patients in kd. fig. 1 showed the virus distribution of kd in virus positive patients. rhinovirus was the most commonly detected (40.5%). additionally, 12 adenoviruses were identified in kd. two patients had coinfection: rsv type b and rhinovirus in 1 patient and adenovirus and coronavirus in 1 patient. we excluded 1 adenovirus patient with co-infection of coronavirus.among 129 patients with kd, adenovirus without coinfection was identified in 11 patients. baseline clinical and laboratory characteristics of kd with adenoviral detection are shown in table 1 . the median age of these patients was 36 months (range, 5-109 months). nine patients (81.8%) were diagnosed as typical kd. most of the kd patients had 4 or more clinical symptoms satisfying the kd criteria, and 2 incomplete kd patients had 3 clinical features of kd accompanied by coronary artery abnormalities. in the laboratory findings, crp was more than 50 mg/l as a whole. bnp was found to be higher than 100 pg/ml in only 3 patients. ast/alt elevation more than 45 iu/l was detected in 3 patients and sterile pyuria defined as ≥10 wbc/ high-power field was shown in 6 patients. four patients had developed coronary artery abnormalities.we compared 11 patients with kd with adenovirus and 147 patients with isolated adenoviral infection. table 2 showed the comparison of clinical and laboratory variables between the 2 groups. in patients with kd with adenovirus detection, the median fever dura tion was 6 days and was not different from isolated adenoviral infec tion group (p=0.356). regarding the clinical features of kd, lip and tongue changes and skin rash and changes in extremities were more frequently demonstrated in the kd with adenoviral detection group than the adenoviral infection group (81.8% vs. 15.6%, p< 0.001 in lip and tongue changes; 72.7% vs. 36.7%, p=0.007 in skin rash; 63.6% vs. 10.2%, p=0.001 in changes in extremities). we also compared the differences in laboratory parameters between the 2 groups. there were significant differences in crp (67. 5 table 3 ).the cutoff value of crp that differentiated adenovirus-positive kd from isolated adenoviral infection was 56 mg/l, which resulted in a sensitivity of 81.8% and a specificity of 75.9% (fig. 2 ). in a total of 129 patients with kd, the clinical and laboratory characteristics of patients with kd who were adenovirus positive (n=11) were compared with those who were adenovirus-negative (n=87). we excluded the patients with other virus isolation (n=31) in the adenovirus-negative group. the age, sex, and fever duration did not differ between patient groups. fourteen patients (16.1%) in the adenovirus-negative kd group were diagnosed with incomplete kd compared with 2 patients (22.2%) in the adenovirus-positive kd group. there were no statistically significant differences in the clinical manifestation of kd and laboratory parameters between the two groups. in addition, coronary artery complications were not different between the 2 groups (36.4% [4 of 11] vs. 33.3% [29 of 87], p=0.868). our findings demonstrate that lip and tongue changes, higher serum crp level and sterile pyuria were significantly related to the adenovirus-positive kd differentiating from isolated adenoviral infection. the cutoff crp level was 56 mg/l, with 81.8% sensitivity and 75.9% specificity. the development of coronary artery abnormalities was not different between the adenovirus positive group and adenovirus negative group in kd patients.this study demonstrated the clinical and laboratory characteristics of kd with incidental adenoviral detection that may help differentiate isolated adenoviral infection. although the clinical features of adenovirus-positive kd are similar to an isolated adenoviral infection, adenoviral-positive kd usually had frequent lip and tongue change, skin rash and changes in extremities compared to adenoviral infection. however, cervical lymphadenopathy was not differently observed between the 2 groups. in the present study, crp, hypoalbuminemia and sterile pyuria could be differentiated between the adenovirus-positive kd group and adenoviral infection group. in addition, the cutoff crp level of 56 mg/l aids in the discrimination of diagnosis of kd from adenoviral infection. this distinct clinical and laboratory pattern was characteristic of adenovirus positive kd. however, high crp level could also be observed in adenoviral infection with secondary bacterial infection. although the american heart association guidelines suggest that a crp ≥30 mg/l or esr ≥40 mm/hr may consider incomplete kd 15) , a recent study demonstrated that a crp ≥30 mg/l has a lack specificity for kd. additionally, a higher crp ≥70 mg/l suggesting the discrimination of kd from adenoviral infection was consistently observed in the kd group 14) .previous studies investigated viral etiology in kd and the role of viral infection associated with kd. several potential viruses including rhinovirus, coronavirus, parainfluenza virus, human metapneumovirus and adenovirus were detected in kd patients [1] [2] [3] [4] . in contrast, no association of coronavirus and bocavirus with kd was demonstrated in the other study 16) .although the relationship between virus and kd was not precisely identified, clinical presentation of adenovirus still mimics kd [9] [10] [11] [12] . it remains to be determined whether this virus causes kd with triggering pathophysiology, leading to similar clinical features as adenoviral infection. this study has several important clinical im plications. the early differential diagnosis of kd from adenoviral infection was important to prevent inadvertent coronary artery complications. the suggested clinical features and inflammatory markers could be useful in differentiating kd from isolated adeno viral infection in the early period of disease. in addition, other inflammatory markers such as bnp and procalcitonin should be assessed, because no specific inflammatory biomarker was establish ed during the acute phase.however, there were no significant differences in clinical and laboratory findings between the adenovirus-positive and adenovirusnegative kd groups. the development of coronary artery abnormalities was also not different. therefore, the adenovirus detection could not be excluded in kd, but might not affect the occurrence of coronary artery abnormalities a better understanding of the pathophysiological mechanisms of virus associated kd and detection of specific biomarkers of kd are crucial to diagnose and treat without untoward coronary complications.although we found clinical manifestations and laboratory parameters differentiating adenovirus-positive kd from isolated adeno viral infection, no specific adenoviral type was identified in 11 pati ents with adenovirus-positive kd. in addition, there was no relationship between adenoviral detection and coronary artery abnormality in kd.in the study, we did not routinely examine for bnp in the adenoviral infection, so we could not assess the difference between the 2 groups.this was a retrospective study and we evaluated a relatively small number of adenovirus-positive kd patients; further prospective studies with larger numbers of patients are warranted to confirm our results.despite the similarities between kd and adenoviral infection, clinical and laboratory features can be used to differentiate kd with incidental adenoviral detection from adenoviral infection. serum crp can be used as a biomarker to predict kd from isolated adenoviral infection at the early stage of hospitalization.the concept of microarrays was developed from an earlier concept termed ambient analyte immunoassay, first introduced by roger ekins in 1989. in the following decade, microarrays were first successfully realized as dna or oligonucleotide microarrays, which allowed the quantification of the mrna expression levels of thousands of genes in parallel. this technology has changed many aspects of biological research. though extremely successful, the chemistry of dna hybridization precludes its application for studying proteins, which are considered the major driving force in cells. consistent with this view, mrna profiles do not always correlate with protein expression as reported in many recent mass spectrometry studies [1] [2] [3] . therefore, protein microarrays were developed as a high-throughput tool to overcome the limitations of dna microarrays, and to provide a versatile platform for protein functional analyses [4] [5] [6] .at the beginning of the development of protein array technology, bacterial strains of a cdna expression library were gridded and grown on nylon membranes, followed by lysis of the bacteria and immobilization of the total protein complement [7, 8] . however, these early attempts only had limited success, because 1) heterologous proteins (e.g., human proteins) were expressed in bacteria, yielding proteins that lacked critical eukaryotic posttranslational modifications; 2) denaturing conditions were used to lyse the bacterial host, resulting in improperly folded proteins; 3) proteins of interest were not purified away from thousands of unwanted bacterial proteins; and 4) the density of the array was low. before long, other research groups began to report their efforts to fabricate high-density protein microarrays with purified proteins or antibodies [9] [10] [11] [12] . in order to improve protein stability and preserve the native conformation of purified proteins, many research groups developed a variety of surface features to keep proteins hydrated during protein microarray fabrication. these efforts included reports on the 3d gel-pad chips [13] , nanowell chips [11] , and plasma membrane-coated chips [14] , to name a few.the real breakthrough was a 2001 report on the fabrication of a yeast proteome microarray by the snyder group [15] . in this study, approximately 5,800 full-length yeast orfs were individually expressed in yeast and their protein products purified as n-terminal gst-fusion proteins. then, each purified protein was robotically spotted on a single glass slide in duplicate at high-density to form the first "proteome" microarray, as it covered more than 75% of the yeast proteome. more recently, proteome microarrays have been fabricated from the proteomes of viruses, bacteria, plants, and humans [4, [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] .on the basis of their applications, protein microarrays can be divided into two classes: analytical and functional protein microarrays [22] . unlike antibody arrays (analytical microarrays), functional protein microarrays are made by spotting purified proteins on solid surfaces and are therefore useful for direct characterization of protein functions, such as protein binding properties, posttranslational modifications, enzyme-substrate relationships, and immune responses [5, 22] . more recently, a reverse-phase array was developed in which tissue or cell lysates, as opposed to antibodies, are used to construct the array [23] .meanwhile, we and others have developed various types of biochemical assays that can be conducted using protein microarrays to characterize protein-binding properties, including protein-protein, -dna, -rna, and, -lipid interactions, and to identify substrates of various types of enzymes, such as protein kinases, acetyltransferases, and ubiquitin and sumo e3 ligases via covalent reactions [9, 15, [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] (table 1) . these efforts clearly demonstrate the versatility and power of protein microarray technology as a systems biology and proteomics tool [6, 32] . in this review, we will summarize recent applications of protein microarrays in clinical proteomics, including biomarker identification, pathogen-host interactions, and cancer biology ( table 2 ).one of the most rapidly growing applications of protein microarray technology in the field of clinical proteomics is biomarker identification. this application for protein microarrays stemmed from traditional serology studies, which focus on the diagnostic identification of antibodies in patient serum samples. these antibodies can be produced as part of an immune response to an infection, against a foreign protein, or even against a person's own proteins. when proteins on a protein microarray are viewed as potential antigens, researchers can use it as a platform to identify autoantibodies that show statistically significant association with an infection or with a disease of interest. in general, the following approach is used: first, patient sera are diluted (e.g., 1000-fold) and incubated on a pre-blocked antigen microarray (i.e., protein microarray), followed by a stringent washing step. then, positive signals are detected using anti-human igg, igm, or iga antibodies coupled with various fluorophores for detection ( figure 1 ). compared with traditional serology techniques, such as elisa, agglutination, precipitation, complement-fixation, and fluorescent antibodies, protein microarray-based serum profiling is much more sensitive and can be performed at a much higher throughput. another significant advantage is that it offers an unbiased platform for novel biomarker identification. in this section, we will review four studies to illustrate the history and development of protein microarrays in biomarker identification.in 2003, zhu et al fabricated the first viral proteome microarray composed of every fulllength protein and protein fragment encoded by sars coronavirus (sars-cov), as well as proteins from five additional mammalian coronaviruses [16] . these microarrays were then used to screen 400 canadian serum samples collected during the 2002 sars outbreak, including samples from confirmed sars-cov cases, respiratory illness patients, and healthcare professionals. antibody response was quantified by the application of both anti-human igg and igm antibodies each coupled to different fluorophores, followed by measurement of fluorescence signal intensity ( figure 2 ). to identify potential biomarkers, serum samples were first clustered according to the relative signal intensities of all of the coronavirus proteins in an unsupervised fashion (see data analysis section). the serum samples fell into two major groups, which upon subsequent comparison with clinical data were largely correlated with either sars-positive or sars-negative sera. in the cluster of markers, five fragments of the sars n protein associated tightly with sars infection, while sars sera also exhibited statistically significant binding to one spike protein fragment. however, a few proteins encoded by other coronaviruses also showed significant correlation. to determine the best classifiers and classification model, two different supervised analysis approaches, k nearest neighbor (k-nn) and logistics regression (lr) were applied, and the n protein of sars cov, as well as the spike protein s from both sars cov and hcov-229e, were identified as the best classifiers. a useful feature of a serum test relative to a nucleic acid diagnostic test is that anti-pathogen antibodies can potentially be detected long after infection. taking advantage of this, serum samples collected from sars patients, who recovered from respiratory disease (~320 days after diagnosis), were used to probe the microarray and positive signals were detected with both anti-human igg and igm antibodies ( figure 2 ; middle panel). these results clearly showed that sars cov n proteins could be readily recognized by human igg antibodies and importantly, not by igm antibodies, as expected. however, serum samples collected from the chinese patients immediately after fever was detected showed much stronger signals both in the igg and igm profiling ( figure 2 ; left panel). these results indicated that the protein microarray approach is capable of detecting anti-pathogen antibodies in serum samples long after infection, as well as detecting infection at early stages of infection as demonstrated by anti-human igm profiling. the approach developed here is potentially applicable to all viruses and expected to have a great impact on epidemiological studies and possibly in clinical diagnoses.a similar approach has been applied to profile humoral immune responses to two human herpesviruses, epstein-barr virus (ebv) and kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (kshv). ebv is a ubiquitous human herpesvirus, while kshv has a restricted seroprevalence. both viruses are associated with malignancies and show an increased frequency in individuals who are co-infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (hiv-1). the zhu and hayward groups generated a protein microarray consisting of 174 ebv and kshv full-length proteins that were individually expressed and purified from yeast [33, 34] . instead of sera, plasma antibody responses to ebv and kshv were examined from healthy volunteers and patients with b cell lymphoma or with aids-related kaposi's sarcoma or lymphoma. these experiments detected igg responses to known antigens, as well as the tegument proteins orf38 (kshv), bbrf (ebv), bglf2 (ebv), and bnrf1 (ebv), and to the ebv early lytic proteins brrf1 and borf2. because iga responses to ebv ebna1 and viral capsid antigens have long been used as a diagnostic tool for nasopharyngeal carcinoma, they also found iga responses in healthy and hiv-infected patients. iga responses to vca and to ebna1 were found to be frequently elevated in lymphoma patients and in individuals who were hiv-1 positive. comparison between the igg and iga responses indicated that iga responses were much higher against bcrf1, brrf2, and lmp2a. therefore, this study demonstrated that plasma can be used for biomarker identification; immunoglobulin responses of other isotypes, such as iga, are therefore also worth testing.to demonstrate that protein microarrays could also be used to identify new biomarkers in autoimmune diseases, chen et al decided to apply an e. coli k12 proteome microarray [17] to profile serum samples collected from crohn's disease (cd) and ulcerative colitis (uc) patients [35] . cd and uc are chronic, idiopathic, and clinically heterogeneous intestinal disorders collectively known as inflammatory bowel disease (ibd). although ibds have been suggested to be autoimmune diseases, anti-microbial antibodies are present in the sera of ibd patients, and some of these antigens have proven to be valuable serological biomarkers for diagnosis and/or prognosis of the disease. in this study, a protein microarray, including 4,256 proteins encoded by a commensal k12 strain, was screened using individual serum from healthy controls (n = 39) and clinically well-characterized patients with ibd (66 cd and 29 uc) . surprisingly, among the 417 e. coli proteins that were differentially recognized by serum antibodies from healthy controls and either cd or uc patients, 169 proteins were identified as highly immunogenic in healthy controls, 186 proteins were identified as highly immunogenic in cd patients, and only 19 proteins were identified as highly immunogenic in uc patients. using several statistical tools, they identified two sets of serum antibodies as novel biomarkers for specifically distinguishing cd from healthy controls (accuracy, 86±4%; p < 0.01) and cd from uc (accuracy, 80±2%; p < 0.01). this study was the first demonstration of using high-density, high-content proteome microarrays to discover novel serological biomarkers. it was also the first effort to examine human immune responses to the entire proteome of a microbial species in a disease context.a protein microarray composed of individually purified human proteins would be an ideal tool for discovery of novel autoantigens associated with an autoimmune disease. take autoimmune hepatitis (aih) as an example: aih is a chronic necroinflammatory disease of human liver with little known etiology. detection of non-organ-specific and liver-related autoantibodies using immunoserological approaches has been widely used for diagnosis and prognosis. however, these traditional autoantigens, such as anti-sma (smooth muscle autoantibodies) and anti-ana (antinuclear autoantibodies) are often mixtures of complex biological materials. unambiguous and accurate detection of the disease demands identification and characterization of these autoantigens. therefore, song et al fabricated a human protein microarray of 5,011 non-redundant proteins that were expressed and purified as gst fusions in yeast [36] . there are several advantages associated with producing human proteins in yeast rather than bacteria: 1) higher solubility, 2) higher yields of large proteins (e.g. > 50 kd), 3) better preserved conformation of proteins, and 4) proteins are less immunogenic when produced in yeast than in e. coli [17, 21, 25] . however, unlike a viral or bacterial protein microarray, a significant obstacle to the use of a human protein microarray of high content is its high cost. for example, a human protein array of 9,000 proteins can exceed $1000 per array. in order to reduce this cost, song et al developed a two-phase strategy to identify new biomarkers in aih. phase i is designed for rapid selection of candidate biomarkers, which are then validated in phase ii ( figure 3 ). in phase i, 30 aih and 30 control serum samples were selected and individually used to probe the human protein microarrays at a 1000-fold dilution, followed by detection of bound human autoantibodies using a cy-5-conjugated anti-human igg antibody. statistical analysis revealed 11 candidate autoantigens. to validate these candidates and to avoid a potential overfitting problem (see below), which is especially likely when dealing with a small sample size, the 11 proteins and 3 positive controls were re-purified to build a large number of lowcost small arrays for phase ii validation. these arrays were then sequentially probed with serum samples used in phase i and serum samples obtained from an additional 22 aih, 50 primary biliary cirrhosis (pbc), 43 hepatitis b (hb), 41 hepatitis c (hc), 11 system lupus erythematosus (sle), 11 primary sjögren's syndrome (pss), and 2 rheumatoid arthritis (ra) patients. as negative controls, they also included 26 serum samples from patients suffering from other types of severe disease and 50 samples from healthy subjects. three new antigens, rps20, alb2-like, and dutpase, were identified as highly aih-specific biomarkers with sensitivities of 47.5% (rps20), 45.5% (alba-like), and 22.7% (dutpase), which were further validated with additional aih samples in a double-blind design. finally, they demonstrated that these new biomarkers could be readily applied to elisa-based assays for clinical diagnosis and prognosis.this study represents a new paradigm in biomarker identification using protein microarrays for three reasons. first, a manageable number of candidate biomarkers can be rapidly identified at low cost because fewer expensive protein microarrays of high-content are needed in the first phase of this two-phase strategy. second, by using small arrays comprised of selected candidate proteins, the validation step can be rapidly carried out with a much larger cohort at lower cost. this validation step is extremely important for avoiding the overfitting problem associated with statistical analysis in biomarker or classifier identification, especially when dealing with a small cohort (e.g., <40). overfitting is a problem in which a statistical model describes random error or noise instead of the underlying relationship. it generally occurs in biomarker identification when the system is excessively complex, such as having too many individual-to-individual variations relative to the number of samples used. as a result, biomarkers that have been overfit generally have poor predictive performance. therefore, testing an additional, larger cohort in a double-blind design is an effective way to rule out overfit biomarkers. third, the author developed elisa-based assays to examine the performance of the validated biomarkers with additional samples. these newly identified biomarkers serve as a translational step toward clinical practice.in addition, there have seen a series of studies that employed pathogen protein microarrays to profile serological responses following infection. for example, protein microarrays have been developed in bacteria and viruses for biomarker identification in various infectious diseases [37] [38] [39] [40] . these studies have clearly demonstrated the power of protein microarrays in identification of potential biomarkers; however, several shortcomings are repeatedly seen in these studies. for instance, many of these arrays were fabricated using proteins translated in e. coli lysates without purification [37] [38] [39] [40] . because these proteins are contaminated with unwanted e. coli proteins, sensitivity of the assay is likely reduced due to their high immunogenicity [34] . as a result, e. coli lysates had to be used as a blocking reagent to alleviate this problem. also problematic is that in many of these studies, identified biomarkers were not validated with additional cohorts and therefore, the possibility of overfitting was not completely ruled out.an emerging application of protein microarrays in the field of clinical proteomics is an unbiased, proteome-wide survey of important players involved in pathogen-host interactions. the identified factors, encoded by either a pathogen or a host, have the potential to be developed into novel therapeutic targets. protein microarrays can serve as an ideal platform for such purposes: once a protein microarray is fabricated from a host or pathogen, it can be used to identify direct pathogen-host interactions. this strategy is particular useful for investigating virus-host interactions because after entering the host cells, the viral genome and encoded proteins are in direct physical contact with the host's biological materials. as we will discuss in this section, such interactions can be investigated at multiple levels, such as rna-protein interactions, enzyme-substrate relationships, and protein-protein interactions.in 2007, zhu et al described the first study using a yeast proteome microarray to identify host factors that can affect replication of brome mosaic virus (bmv), a plant-infecting rna virus that can also replicate in s. cerevisiae [25] . previous studies have shown that this positive-stranded rna virus encodes a trna-like structure at the 3′-end of its rna genome, in which a clamped adenine motif (cam) is required for packaging its genome into the capsid. to identify crucial host proteins that can interfere with the viral packaging process, a cy3-labeled cam-containing rna stem-loop structure was incubated on the yeast proteome microarray in the presence of an equal amount of a cy5-labeled mutated cam hairpin. using cy3-to-cy5 fluorescence signal intensity ratios, the top hits were identified and validated using an in vitro gel-shift assay. two validated candidate proteins, pseudouridine synthase 4 (pus4) and actin patch protein 1 (app1), were selected for further characterization in tobacco plants. both proteins modestly reduced bmv genomic plusstrand rna accumulation, but dramatically inhibited bmv systemic spread in plants. pus4 also prevented the encapsidation of the bmv rnas in plants and the reassembly of bmv virions in vitro.this work is significant because it established the first rna-binding assay on a proteome microarray and demonstrated the utility of protein microarrays for identifying important players involved in pathogen-host interactions.in the course of evolution, viruses have been very successful at exploiting the host via development of their own arsenals, some of which were hijacked from the host in the form of both dna and proteins. to develop more effective antivirals, one must understand the molecular mechanisms by which viruses exploit the host machineries for their own use. the human α, β, and γ herpesviruses infect different tissues and cause distinct diseases, ranging from mild cold sores to pneumonitis, birth defects, and cancers [41] . however, they each confront many of the same challenges in infecting their hosts, including reprogramming cellular gene expression, sensing cell-cycle phase and modifying cell-cycle progression, and reactivating the lytic life cycle to produce new virions and spread infection. on the other hand, many lytic cycle genes involved in replication of the viral genomes (e.g., the orthologous serine/threonine protein kinases) are highly conserved across the herpesvirus family. therefore, it became an attractive hypothesis that the shared substrates targeted by these orthologous viral kinases would reveal host pathways that are critical for replication across the herpesvirus family.to test the above hypothesis, li et al employed a human protein microarray [42] . the authors purified four orthologous kinases encoded by ebv, kshv, hcmv, and hsv-1, performed kinase reactions on a human protein microarray described previously [4] , and identified 110 shared substrates. like every large-scale screen, the next challenge was to select candidates that would be worth pursuing. to do so, the authors then applied gene ontology (go) and string analyses (http://string-db.org/, a database of known and predicted protein-protein interactions) to these candidates and found a highly connected cluster of 15 proteins. strikingly, these proteins were all known to be involved in the dna damage response (ddr) (figure 4 ). the host ddr has been known to be important to many viruses, including human herpesviruses, and is relevant to virus-induced tumorigenesis [43] . to narrow down this list to a single candidate for in-depth characterization, the authors reasoned that the viruses are likely to target an upstream master regulator, which triggers the dna damage response. on the basis of a literature search and the structure of this cluster, tat-interactive protein 60 (tip60) emerged as an excellent candidate for follow-up, because 1) tip60 is further upstream in the ddr pathway than any of the other candidates in the cluster; 2) it serves as a master regulator in ddr via activation of atm autophosphorylation activity by acetylation; 3) it regulates chromatin dynamics via histone acetylation; and 4) its importance has been shown in other viruses. indeed, the authors observed that when tip60 was knocked down in ebv-infected b cells, ebv's lytic replication was greatly reduced. next, the authors applied a series of cell-based assays and showed that during ebv replication, tip60 activation by the bglf4 kinase triggers ebvinduced ddr and also mediates induction of viral lytic gene expression. finally, the authors demonstrated that tip60 was also required for efficient lytic replication in hcmv, kshv, and hsv-1.this work illustrates the value of high-throughput, unbiased approaches for the discovery of conserved viral targets in the host that have the potential to be developed into novel therapeutic targets for antivirals. currently, there are few drugs available to treat herpesvirus infections, and viral escape mutants develop as a result of extensive use of this limited repertoire. the herpesvirus protein kinases are attractive antiviral drug targets. however, developing broadly effectively drugs targeting protein kinases requires knowledge of their common cellular substrates. the information provided by common substrate identification will assist in the design of assays for new and broadly effective anti-herpesvirus therapeutics.protein microarrays can also serve as a convenient tool for profiling protein-protein interactomes between a pathogen and a host. in a recent example, hayward and colleagues surveyed the interactome between a kshv-encoded virulent factor, lana, and the human host using human protein microarrays, in order to identify host proteins that can be recognized by lana [44] . lana functions in latently infected cells as an essential participant in kshv genome replication and as a driver of dysregulated cell growth. although yeast two-hybrid screens, glutathione s-transferase (gst) affinity, immunoprecipitation (ip) assays, and chromatography coupled with mass spectroscopy have been applied to the identification of lana binding proteins, each approach has strengths and weaknesses, and each tend to identify different sets of proteins. in this study, the authors used purified flag-tagged lana applied to human protein microarrays to identify 61 potential binding partners, many of which were previously unknown. 8 out of 9 proteins were validated by co-immunoprecipitation, including tip60, protein phosphatase 2a (pp2a), replication protein a (rpa) and xpa. although human papillomavirus (hpv) e6, hiv-1 tat, and human cytomegalovirus (hcmv) pul27 interact with tip60 and induce tip60 degradation, lana-associated 42 retained acetyltransferase activity and showed increased stability. this observation is in line with the study described in the previous section that showed that tip60 plays a positive role in kshv lytic replication. on the other hand, identification of rpa as a lana interacting partner suggested that lana may play a role in regulating the length of host telomeres, because rpa1 and rpa2 are known to be essential in the replication of cellular telomeric dna. to test this hypothesis, the authors performed chip assays with anti-rpa1 and -rpa2 antibodies using primers specific to the telomere regions and found that the presence of lana drastically reduced the recruitment of both rpa1 and rpa2 to the host telomeres, while it had no impact on the protein level of the rpa complex. this observation raised the possibility that lana might have an impact on telomere length. using southern blot analysis of terminal restriction fragments, the standard method for quantifying telomere length, the authors demonstrated that the average length of telomeres was shortened by at least 50% in both lana-expressing endothelial cells and kshv-infected primary effusion lymphoma cells. many interesting questions remain to be answered. how does lana block the rpa complex recruitment to the telomeres? is it achieved via direct competition since lana is also a ssdna binding protein? or, does lana serve as a kinase sink for the rpa complex and regulate rpa recruitment via phosphorylation?on the flip side, a human factor of interest can be used to survey a virus protein microarray to identify important viral factors. similar to the ubiquitylation pathway, sumoylation involves a series of sequential enzymatic reactions that conjugate sumo to lysine residues on substrate proteins. previous studies have shown that both latent and lytic ebv proteins interact with the sumo system. noncovalent sumo-ebv protein interactions can occur via a sumo interaction motif (sim) in the target proteins. to comprehensively identify additional ebv proteins that bind to sumo, li et al performed a protein-binding assay with human sumo2 [45] on a previously described ebv proteome microarray [34] and identified a total of 11 proteins, including the conserved viral kinase bglf4. the mutation of potential sims in bglf4 at both n-and c-termini changed the intracellular localization of bglf4 from nuclear to cytoplasmic, while bglf4 mutated in the n-terminal sim remained predominantly nuclear. the mutation of the c-terminal sim yielded an intermediate phenotype with nuclear and cytoplasmic staining. the authors also found that bglf4 abolished the sumoylation of the ebv lytic cycle transactivator zta, and that this inhibitory effect on zta sumoylation was dependent on both bglf4 sumo binding and bglf4 kinase activity. the global profile of protein sumoylation was also suppressed by bglf4 but not by the sim or kinase-dead bglf4 mutant. furthermore, bglf's interaction with sumo was required to induce the cellular dna damage response and to enhance the production of extracellular virus during ebv lytic replication.the identification of pathogen proteins that interact with human factors has also been applied to understanding the mechanisms of bacterial infection. margarit and others harnessed the power of protein microarrays to identify proteins expressed by two species of the streptococcus gram-positive bacteria, streptococcus pyogenes and s. agalactiae, that interact with human factors known to mediate pathogenesis [46] . rather than develop whole-proteome arrays, they used a bioinformatics approach to predict those proteins present on the cellular surface-and thus most likely to play a role in infection, and used this list of 200 proteins to develop their arrays. they also carefully considered the human probes that they would use, choosing three human ligands: fibronectin, fibrinogen, and c4 binding protein, all known to play important roles in the colonization and infection processes. binding experiments conducted using the streptococcal arrays and human protein probes identified 17 of the 20 known interactions previously reported as well as 8 newly identified streptococcal proteins, many of which they confirmed by far-western blot analysis. these novel proteins included proteins of unknown function as well as 3 related proteins that they termed the fib proteins. they then used domain mapping to identify regions of the fib proteins required for their interaction with the human ligands. interestingly, sera samples from patients with s. agalactiae infections show high titers of fib-specific antibodies, indicating that these proteins are highly expressed during infection. further work will determine the role of these proteins in infection and whether they will emerge as suitable drug targets to fight pathogenic streptoccus infections.in summary, the above studies have demonstrated the power of protein microarrays in the discovery of novel molecular mechanisms underlying host-pathogen interactions at various levels. in recent years, other high-throughput approaches, such as shotgun mass spectrometry [47] , genome-wide rnai screens [48, 49] , and yeast two-hybrid [50, 51] have been applied to understand host-pathogen interactions; however, the protein microarray approach provides a more versatile platform than any of these single approaches for identifying multiple types of direct interactions between a pathogen and host, including protein-protein interactions [44] [45] [46] , rna-protein interactions [25] , and enzyme-substrate interactions [43] .over the past five years, rapid development of genome-wide sequencing technologies (i.e., next-gen sequencing) has revealed the heterogeneous nature of tumors [52, 53] . however, clinical diagnosis of tumors is largely still dependent on morphologic patterns. the fact that tumors with indistinguishable morphology can have vastly different clinical outcomes suggests that the molecular heterogeneity of each patient's tumor cells have to be better understood before more effective therapies can be developed. therefore, the future of cancer treatment is tailored molecular therapy specific for each individual, which will require a new class of proteomic profiling technologies. as a widely adopted technology, protein microarrays can meet this need for the profiling of the functional state of tumors and for cancer biomarker identification.a widely adopted approach to determining the status of signaling pathways in tumor cells is based on immunoblot analysis with antibodies that can recognize phosphorylated proteins. to transform the low-throughput immunoblot to a high-throughput format, haab et al first reported the development of antibody microarray technology, in which individual commercial antibodies were spotted on glass at high density [12] . this technology allows for simultaneous detection of multiple antigens presented in a complex biological sample, such as cells, tissues, and body fluids [54, 55] .the term "reverse phase protein microarray" was proposed by liotta, petricoin, and colleagues in 2001 [56] as an array in which lysates of cells or tissues are immobilized on the array surface rather than antibodies. using phosphoprotein-specific antibodies, these arrays can then be used to interrogate the phosphorylation state of proteins present in these mixtures as a proxy of signaling status in tumors. there are several ongoing clinical trials currently utilizing the reverse phase protein microarray [57] . an obvious advantage of this approach is that it allows for evaluating the state of multiple components of a signaling pathway, even though the cell is lysed. because fabrication of such microarrays requires a minimum amount of sample, multiple clinical samples, such as biopsy samples, tumors, and body fluids, can be printed on a series of identical arrays and analyzed in parallel using commercially available anti-phosphoprotein or other specific antibodies.for example, petricoin and coworkers used cancer cell lysates, representing 59 patient samples obtained from the children's oncology group intergroup rhabdomyosarcoma study (irs), to fabricate reverse phase microarrays [63] . rhabodymyosarcoma is a rare childhood cancer that arises from undifferentiated muscle progenitor cells. although current treatments can yield as high as a 67% disease-free survival rate, the reasons for treatment failure in the remaining one-third of patients are unknown. the identification of biomarkers to allow distinguishing these patients from those that respond to traditional therapies would help identify those patients best suited for alternative therapies, and also potential drug targets. these reverse phase arrays were therefore used as platforms to detect the phosphorylation status of proteins thought to underlie whether rhabdomyosarcoma subtypes were responsive to standard chemotherapy regimens. using phosphosite-specific antibodies, the authors identified higher phosphorylation levels in 4 akt/mtor pathway components in patients with poor survival outcomes. network analysis based on this data and known pathway information was used to find that, on the other hand, patients with good treatment outcomes showed mtor pathway suppression. together, these findings suggested that pharmacologically inducing mtor pathway suppression could result in improved outcomes for patients that failed to respond to standard chemotherapy regimens. the authors proceeded to test this hypothesis using a mouse xenograft model with rhabdoymyosarcoma cell lines and a known mtor pathway inhibitor. they found that treatment with the inhibitor resulted in reduced phosphorylation of the protein 4e-bp1 that had been identified by the protein microarray studies, as well as inhibition of tumor growth. these results suggest that mtor pathway inhibitors may be a potential way to improve treatment outcomes for patients that fail to respond to standard chemotherapy regimens. additionally, they demonstrate the power of tumor cell lysate arrays in (1) identifying specific patient subpopulations that could benefit from tailored therapies, as well as (2) identifying the specific molecules that should be targeted in developing and testing these therapies. however, there are several major problems with the reverse phase array approach. first, well-characterized antibodies are not available for the great majority of human proteins [58, 59] . second, several recent studies have suggested that many commercially available monoclonal antibodies (mabs) may not even recognize their purported targets, and cross-react extensively with other cellular antigens [60] . third, antibody cross-reactivity is an even more pressing problem in diagnostic and therapeutic applications, as underlined by the recent withdrawal of several mab-based pharmaceuticals from the market [61, 62] . finally, this approach requires prior knowledge as to which phosphoproteins should be evaluated and as a result, is not an ideal platform for the discovery of novel biomarkers.current screening for breast cancer using mammograms detects only 70% of breast cancers, and false-positive mammograms lead to unnecessary biopsies. the identification of biomarkers that would allow early detection of breast cancer could provide a non-invasive, low cost method that could improve patient outcomes. one promising category of cancer biomarkers are autoantibodies to tumor antigens which offer better stability, specificity, ease of purification, and ease of detection compared to other serum proteins. in order to identify autoantibodies to tumor antigens associated with breast cancer, anderson et al. used protein arrays containing candidate tumor antigens and applied breast cancer patient and control serum samples to identify differences in the human antibody repertoire that could be used as biomarkers [64] . these custom protein arrays, termed "nappa" arrays (nucleic acid protein programmable array), are fabricated by the spotting of cdnas that encode the target proteins at each feature of the array. proteins are transcribed and translated by a cellfree system and immobilized by encoded epitope tags, thus bypassing the protein purification process. additionally, the authors used a three-phase screening approach to home in on the best candidate breast cancer biomarkers. in the first phase, they used arrays with the full set of 4988 tumor antigens in order to eliminate uninformative autoantibodies that were present at similar levels in both early breast cancer patients and healthy women. subtracting these antigens, the protein set was reduced to 761, allowing them to fabricate smaller arrays for the next phase that offer the benefits of reduced cost and fewer false positives. in the second phase, sera from patients with invasive early breast cancer and benign breast disease were compared, in order to identify antigens specific to early breast cancer but absent from benign breast disease, resulting in 119 antigens. in the third phase, they set out to validate this antigen list, finding 28 antigens that maintained high levels of specificity in a blinded validation assay, including the protein atp6ap1, a known autoantigen. they then focused on this protein and went on to show high expression of atp6ap1 in 4 breast cancer cell lines by western blot, as well as significantly higher atp6ap1 autoantibody levels in ~13% of early breast cancer serum cases compared to controls. although only a first step, this work demonstrates the power of protein microarrays, in particular programmable protein microarrays, in identifying biomarkers for the early detection of breast cancer.an important goal of identifying cancer biomarkers is to define new strategies for early diagnosis that can allow early intervention with current therapies to improve patient survival rates. additionally, since cancer-associated autoantibodies often target proteins that are mutated, modified, or aberrantly expressed in tumor cells, they could also be considered immunologic reporters that could uncover molecular events underlying tumorigenesis [65] . the molecular players in these events, in turn, may be the best place to start in efforts to develop novel therapies. in order to identify autoantibody biomarkers that could act as indicators of bladder cancer, as well as the underlying molecular pathology contributing to disease, orenes-pinero turned to a protein array strategy using the invitrogen protoarray containing ~8,000 purified human proteins to identify antibodies to tumor-associated antigens in serum [65] . comparing serum samples collected from 12 patients with bladder cancer and 10 control patients without bladder cancer, they identified 171 differentially expressed proteins. among these, they selected clusterin and dynamin for validation based in part on their known role in cancer biology.using immunohistochemistry on a custom tissue microarray comprised of bladder cancer tumor samples, they found reduced expression levels of clusterin in muscle invasive bladder tumors as compared to nonmuscle invasive tumors. on the other hand, they found that low protein expression of dynamin was associated with increased tumor stage and grade, higher recurrence rate after surgery, as well as shorter survival. paradoxically, their follow-up tests revealed lower expression levels of dynamin and clusterin associated with disease, in contrast to their protein array results which showed increased autoantibody levels to these proteins among bladder cancer patients compared to controls. despite these contradictory findings, the authors demonstrated significant associations between dynamin and clusterin expression levels and bladder cancer disease progression that could potentially allow them to use these as informative biomarkers in the clinic as well as potential drug targets. this work demonstrates the power of protein microarrays for the identification of autoantibodies to tumor associated antigens and its application to the discovery of cancer biomarkers.cell surfaces, especially mammalian cell surfaces, are heavily coated with complex polyand oligosaccharides, and these glycans have been implicated in many functions, such as cell-to-cell communication, host-pathogen interactions and cell matrix interactions. aberrations of glycosylation are usually indicative of the onset of specific diseases, such as cancer. there are a handful of tools that can be used to study glycosylation, such as liquid chromatography (lc) [66, 67] , mass spectrometry [68] , capillary electrophoresis [69, 70] , and flow cytometry [71, 72] .to take advantage of the specific glycan-binding properties of lectins and the parallel analysis capability of microarrays [73] , we and others have developed the lectin microarray technology for profiling glycans in a high-throughput fashion [74] [75] [76] [77] [78] . although lectin microarrays in early reports were only composed of a small number of lectins, in a later report a high-content lectin microarray composed of 94 unique commercial lectins was fabricated and used to profile accessible surface glycans of mammalian cells [74] . a total of 24 human cell lines were labeled and applied to this lectin microarray. a binary algorithm was developed to generate a "glycan signature" for each cell line, resulting in a hierarchical cluster based on their accessible glycan composition. by comparing the glycan profiles of a breast cancer cell line and its cancer stem-like cell derivatives, three lectins, namely lel, aal, and wga, were found to specifically recognize mcf7 cells but not the derivatives. to confirm this result, the authors first employed lel-conjugated beads to purify away the normal mcf7 cells from the cancer stem-like cells (estimated as ~0.1% in the cell population) in a mcf7 cell population as a means to enrich cancer stem-like cells. next, using a mouse model to test the enrichment of the cancer stem-like cells, they showed that two weeks following injection of the lel-depleted cancer stem-like cell enriched cultures, average tumor size was > 2-fold bigger than the control group injected with a similar number of regular mcf7 cells. this study demonstrated the utility of a lectin microarray in the identification of novel cell surface markers on cancer stem-like cells that subsequently allowed enrichment for cancer stem-like cells.because the affinity of lectins is usually low (kd is in the range of 10 −3~1 0 −6 m) [75] , in processing a cell binding assay on a lectin microarray an analyte of low affinity may be washed away from the immobilized lectins, especially when dealing with live cells. in order to overcome these problems, researchers have modified lectin microarray technology in many ways [79] . one example is antibody-assisted lectin profiling (alp) that was developed for detecting glycoproteins at low concentrations. kuno et al. used this method to analyze the glycan structures of a protein hpod, which has been proposed to enhance the metastatic potential of glioblastoma cells [77] . the hpod protein complex was first ipenriched with the appropriate antibody and then incubated on a lectin array to identify its associated glycans. an additional modification of the lectin microarray platform is the use of the evanescent-field activated fluorescence detection system, which allows for label-free, real time detection. since the evanescent field is generated within 200 nm, the background signals are so low that washing steps are not necessary. it has been reported that this detection system has by far the highest sensitivity among the lectin microarray detection systems, with a reported detection limit in the 100 pm range [80] . finally, li et al reported a two-phase discovery and validation approach to improve the sensitivity of the lectin microarray technology in cancer biomarker discovery for prostate cancer [81] . first, pooled tissue samples for each group were generated by mixing equal amounts of tissue proteins (50 μg) from the four cases in the normal, nonaggressive cancer, aggressive cancer, and metastasis groups. in the first phase, or discovery phase, prostate specific antigen (psa) and membrane metallo-endopeptidase (mme) proteins were extracted from each tissue group using anti-total psa antibody and anti-mme mabs, respectively. after incubating the iped psa or mme proteins on a lectin microarray, captured psa or mme proteins were detected with anti-psa or anti-mme mabs. comparison of signals between each group of pooled tissue revealed that the fraction of psa that is o-glycosylated (as recognized by jacalin) or neu5ac-conjugated (as detected by sna), as well as the fraction of mme that was modified by either galnac or glcnac was highly elevated in aggressive prostate cancer and metastatic prostate cancer groups. these results were confirmed with immunosorbent assay in phase ii, in which psa and mme were first captured on an ecl plate coated with anti-psa and anti-mme mabs, followed by detection with biotinylated lectins. these studies demonstrate the power and adaptability of protein microarrays for detection of even lowaffinity interactions such as those between lectins and glycans.recent years have witnessed tremendous growth in the use of protein microarrays to address important questions in the field of clinical proteomics. in the area of biomarker identification, most of the recent research has been focused on either infections or autoimmune diseases. we believe that protein microarrays, especially functional protein microarrays, will be widely used for identification of cancer biomarkers in the near future. indeed, recent advances in immunoproteomics and high-throughput technologies have suggested that the autoantibody repertoire in cancer patients might be quite different as compared with that in healthy subjects, leading to the hypothesis that autoantigens might be identified as biomarkers for cancer diagnosis, as well as cancer prognosis [82] . ideally, a human protein microarray developed for such a purpose should cover the entire human proteome, in order to enable a comprehensive screen for the autoantigens. to our knowledge, we have fabricated a human proteome microarray of the best coverage (>70%) [21] . however, when hundreds, if not thousands, of serum samples are needed to screen for biomarkers, the cost of using these human proteome microarrays accumulates very rapidly. an effective strategy to overcome this obstacle is to apply the two-phase strategy as described in the aih study [36] . we expect that this strategy will become popular in the near future. finally, we expect that functional protein microarrays will be used as a readout to obtain reaction profiles of the collected activities of various types of enzymes, such as kinases, acetyltransferases, ubiquitin and sumo e3 ligases in cancerous tissues. comparing ptm profiles obtained from cancer and healthy tissues will allow us to identify biomarkers and to gain new insights into the molecular mechanisms of disease. principle of serum profiling assays performed on a functional protein microarray. a functional protein microarray, composed of hundreds of thousands of individually purified proteins, is first blocked with bsa in pbs buffer. then, a diluted serum sample is incubated on the microarray typically at rt for 1 hr. after extensive washes, bound antibodies (e.g., human igg, iga, or igm) can be detected with anti-human immunoglobulin antibodies, followed by a signal amplification step with fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies. detection of immunoglobulin isotypes can be multiplexed with different fluorophores as illustrated. examples of igg and igm profiles obtained with serum samples of sars-cov-infected patients. sample fp b0352 was collected immediately following detection of fever in a patient in beijing; sample dp c08 was collected from a recovered sars patient in toronto. signals in the upper panel and the bsa control were detected with anti-human iggs, while signals in the lower panel of the two patient samples were detected with anti-human igms. scheme of the two-phase strategy for biomarker identification in human autoimmune diseases. in phase i, a small cohort is used to rapidly identify a group of candidate biomarkers via serum profiling assays on a human protein microarray of high cost. because a small number of microarrays are needed, cost of the experiments is relatively low. in phase ii, a focused protein microarray of low cost is fabricated by spotting down purified candidate proteins. a much larger cohort is then assayed on these arrays in a double blind fashion to validate the candidates identified in phase i. identification of most relevant candidate for in-depth in vivo studies. assisted by go analysis, 110 shared substrates of conserved herpesvirus kinases were plugged into the string database. a highly connected cluster of 15 proteins was revealed, all of which are known to play a role in ddr. based on the literature and topology of the cluster, tip60 emerged as the most promising candidate. protein nodes are color coded by functional class, with proteins involved in ddr colored red. small blue circles adjacent to protein nodes indicate that the protein is herpesvirus associated, while small pink circles indicate the proteins are associated with other viruses. edges between the proteins represent known or predicted connections, such as protein-protein interactions, catalytic reactions, and enzymesubstrate relationships. autoimmune hepatitisserum autoantibodies detected on human arrays comprised of 5011 purified proteins [37] primary biliary cirrhosis serum autoantibodies detected on human arrays comprised of ~17,000 purified proteins [90] sjögren's syndrome saliva autoantibody detected on human arrays comprised of ~8,000 purified proteins [91] cancer breast cancerserum autoantibodies detected on human arrays comprised of 4988 candidate tumor antigens [64] cancer stem-like cell glycan signature identified using array of 94 lectins [74] bladder cancer serum autoantibodies detected on human arrays comprised of ~8,000 purified proteins [65] rhabdomyosarcoma phosphorylation status of 27 proteins detected on human arrays spotted with cancer cell lysates [63] the concept of microarrays was developed from an earlier concept termed ambient analyte immunoassay, first introduced by roger ekins in 1989. in the following decade, microarrays were first successfully realized as dna or oligonucleotide microarrays, which allowed the quantification of the mrna expression levels of thousands of genes in parallel. this technology has changed many aspects of biological research. though extremely successful, the chemistry of dna hybridization precludes its application for studying proteins, which are considered the major driving force in cells. consistent with this view, mrna profiles do not always correlate with protein expression as reported in many recent mass spectrometry studies [1] [2] [3] . therefore, protein microarrays were developed as a high-throughput tool to overcome the limitations of dna microarrays, and to provide a versatile platform for protein functional analyses [4] [5] [6] .at the beginning of the development of protein array technology, bacterial strains of a cdna expression library were gridded and grown on nylon membranes, followed by lysis of the bacteria, and immobilization of the total protein complement [7, 8] . however, these early attempts only had limited success, because (i) heterologous proteins (e.g. human proteins) were expressed in bacteria, yielding proteins that lacked critical eukaryotic ptms; (ii) denaturing conditions were used to lyse the bacterial host, resulting in improperly folded proteins; (iii) proteins of interest were not purified away from thousands of unwanted bacterial proteins; and (iv) the density of the array was low. before long, other research groups began to report their efforts to fabricate high-density protein microarrays with purified proteins or antibodies [9] [10] [11] [12] . in order to improve protein stability and preserve the native conformation of purified proteins, many research groups developed a variety of surface features to keep proteins hydrated during protein microarray fabrication. these efforts included reports on the 3d gel-pad chips [13] , nanowell chips [11] , and plasma membrane-coated chips [14] , to name a few.the real breakthrough was a 2001 report on the fabrication of a yeast proteome microarray by the snyder group [15] . in this study, approximately 5800 full-length yeast orfs were individually expressed in yeast and their protein products purified as n-terminal glutathione s-transferase (gst) fusion proteins. then, each purified protein was robotically spotted on a single glass slide in duplicate at high-ensity to form the first "proteome" microarray, as it covered more than 75% of the yeast proteome. more recently, proteome microarrays have been fabricated from the proteomes of viruses, bacteria, plants, and humans [4, [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] .on the basis of their applications, protein microarrays can be divided into two classes: analytical and functional protein microarrays [22] . unlike antibody arrays (analytical microarrays), functional protein microarrays are made by spotting purified proteins on solid surfaces and are therefore useful for direct characterization of protein functions, such as proteinbinding properties, ptms, enzyme-substrate relationships, and immune responses [5, 22] . more recently, a reverse-phase array was developed in which tissue or cell lysates, as opposed to antibodies, are used to construct the array [23] .meanwhile, we and others have developed various types of biochemical assays that can be conducted using protein microarrays to characterize protein-binding properties, including protein-protein, protein-dna, protein-rna, and, protein-lipid interactions, and to identify substrates of various types of enzymes, such as protein kinases, acetyltransferases, and ubiquitin and sumo e3 ligases via covalent reactions [9, 15, [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] (table 1) . these efforts clearly demonstrate the versatility and power of protein microarray technol- [11, 26] human human cdk5, ckii [33, 34] four herpesvirus kinases [35] arabidopsis arabidopsis mapks [18, 19] herpesvirus ebv bglf4 [36] ubiquitylation yeast hect-domain e3 rsp5 [28, 37] human hect-domain e3 nedd4 and nedd4l [38] acetylation yeast nua4 complex [27, 29] e. coli pat [39] sumoylation human e3 rangap1 [30] yeast and human n/a [40] ogy as a systems biology and proteomics tool [6, 32] . in this review, we will summarize recent applications of protein microarrays in clinical proteomics, including biomarker identification, pathogen-host interactions, and cancer biology ( table 2 ).one of the rapidly growing applications of protein microarray technology in the field of clinical proteomics is biomarker identification. this application for protein microarrays stemmed from traditional serology studies, which focus on the diagnostic identification of antibodies in patient serum samples. these antibodies can be produced as part of an immune response to an infection, against a foreign protein, or even against a person's own protein. when proteins on a protein microarray are viewed as potential antigens, researchers can use it as a platform to identify autoantibodies that show statistically significant association with an infection or with a disease of interest. in general, the following approach is used: first, patient sera are diluted (e.g. 1000-fold) and incubated on a preblocked antigen microarray (i.e. protein microarray), followed by a stringent washing step. then, positive signals are detected using anti-human igg, igm, or iga antibodies coupled with various fluorophores for detection ( fig. 1) . compared with traditional serology techniques, such as elisa, agglutination, precipitation, complementfixation, and fluorescent antibodies, protein microarray-based serum profiling is much more sensitive and can be performed at a much higher throughput. another significant advantage is that it offers an unbiased platform for novel biomarker identification. in this section, we will review four studies to illustrate the history and development of protein microarrays in biomarker identification.in 2003, zhu et al. fabricated the first viral proteome microarray composed of every full-length protein and protein fragment encoded by sars coronavirus (sars-cov), as well as proteins from five additional mammalian coronaviruses [16] . these microarrays were then used to screen 400 canadian serum samples collected during the 2002 sars outbreak, including samples from confirmed sars-cov cases, respiratory illness patients, and healthcare professionals. antibody response was quantified by the application of both anti-human igg and igm antibodies each coupled to different fluorophores, followed by measurement of fluorescence signal intensity (fig. 2) . to identify potential biomarkers, serum samples were first clustered according to the relative signal intensities of all of the coronavirus proteins in an unsupervised fashion (see data analysis section). the serum samples fell into two major groups, which upon subsequent comparison with clinical data were largely correlated with autoimmune hepatitis serum autoantibodies detected on human arrays comprised of 5011 purified proteins [47] primary biliary cirrhosis serum autoantibodies detected on human arrays comprised of approximately 17 000 purified proteins [48] sjögren's syndrome saliva autoantibody detected on human arrays comprised of approximately 8000 purified proteins [49] cancer breast cancer serum autoantibodies detected on human arrays comprised of 4988 candidate tumor antigens [50] cancer stem-like cell glycan signature identified using array of 94 lectins [51] bladder cancer serum autoantibodies detected on human arrays comprised of approximately 8000 purified proteins [52] rhabdomyosarcoma phosphorylation status of 27 proteins detected on human arrays spotted with cancer cell lysates [53] either sars-positive or sars-negative sera. in the cluster of markers, five fragments of the sars n protein associated tightly with sars infection, while sars sera also exhibited statistically significant binding to one spike protein fragment.however, a few proteins encoded by other coronaviruses also showed significant correlation. to determine the best classifiers and classification model, two different supervised analysis approaches, k nearest neighbor and logistics regression were applied, and the n protein of sars-cov, as well as the spike protein s from both sars-cov and hcov-229e, were identified as the best classifiers. a useful feature of a serum test relative to a nucleic acid diagnostic test is that anti-pathogen antibodies can potentially be detected long after infection. taking advantage of this, serum samples collected from sars patients, who recovered from respiratory disease (∼320 days after diagnosis), were used to probe the microarray and positive signals were detected with both anti-human igg and igm antibodies ( fig. 2 ; middle panel). these results figure 1 . principle of serum profiling assays performed on a functional protein microarray. a functional protein microarray, composed of hundreds of thousands of individually purified proteins, is first blocked with bsa in pbs buffer. then, a diluted serum sample is incubated on the microarray typically at rt for 1 h. after extensive washes, bound antibodies (e.g. human igg, iga, or igm) can be detected with anti-human immunoglobulin antibodies, followed by a signal amplification step with fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies. detection of immunoglobulin isotypes can be multiplexed with different fluorophores as illustrated. clearly showed that sars-cov n proteins could be readily recognized by human igg antibodies and importantly, not by igm antibodies, as expected. however, serum samples collected from the chinese patients immediately after fever was detected showed much stronger signals both in the igg and igm profiling ( fig. 2 ; left panel). these results indicated that the protein microarray approach is capable of detecting anti-pathogen antibodies in serum samples long after infection, as well as detecting infection at early stages of infection as demonstrated by anti-human igm profiling. the approach developed here is potentially applicable to all viruses and expected to have a great impact on epidemiological studies and possibly in clinical diagnoses.a similar approach has been applied to profile humoral immune responses to two human herpesviruses, epstein-barr virus (ebv) and kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (kshv). ebv is an ubiquitous human herpesvirus, while kshv has a restricted seroprevalence. both viruses are associated with malignancies and show an increased frequency in individuals who are co-infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (hiv-1). the zhu and hayward groups generated a protein microarray consisting of 174 ebv and kshv full-length proteins that were individually expressed and purified from yeast [36, 41] . instead of sera, plasma antibody responses to ebv and kshv were examined from healthy volunteers and patients with b-cell lymphoma or with aids-related kaposi's sarcoma or lymphoma. these experiments detected igg responses to known antigens, as well as the tegument proteins orf38 (kshv), bbrf (ebv), bglf2 (ebv), and bnrf1 (ebv), and to the ebv early lytic proteins brrf1 and borf2. because iga responses to ebv ebna1 and viral capsid antigens have long been used as a diagnostic tool for nasopharyngeal carcinoma, they also found iga responses in healthy and hiv-infected patients. iga responses to vca and to ebna1 were found to be frequently elevated in lymphoma patients and in individuals who were hiv-1 positive. comparison between the igg and iga responses indicated that iga responses were much higher against bcrf1, brrf2, and lmp2a. therefore, this study demonstrated that plasma can be used for biomarker identification; immunoglobulin responses of other isotypes, such as iga, are therefore also worth testing.to demonstrate that protein microarrays could also be used to identify new biomarkers in autoimmune diseases, chen et al. decided to apply an e. coli k12 proteome microarray [17] to profile serum samples collected from crohn's disease (cd) and ulcerative colitis (uc) patients [46] . cd and uc are chronic, idiopathic, and clinically heterogeneous intestinal disorders collectively known as inflammatory bowel disease (ibd). although ibds have been suggested to be autoimmune diseases, anti-microbial antibodies are present in the sera of ibd patients, and some of these antigens have proven to be valuable serological biomarkers for diagnosis and/or prognosis of the disease. in this study, a protein microarray, including 4256 proteins encoded by a commensal k12 strain, was screened using individual serum from healthy controls (n = 39) and clinically well-characterized patients with ibd (66 cd and 29 uc) . surprisingly, among the 417 e. coli proteins that were differentially recognized by serum antibodies from healthy controls and either cd or uc patients, 169 proteins were identified as highly immunogenic in healthy controls, 186 proteins were identified as highly immunogenic in cd patients, and only 19 proteins were identified as highly immunogenic in uc patients. using several statistical tools, they identified two sets of serum antibodies as novel biomarkers for specifically distinguishing cd from healthy controls (accuracy, 86 ± 4%; p < 0.01) and cd from uc (accuracy, 80 ± 2%; p < 0.01). this study was the first demonstration of using high-density, high-content proteome microarrays to discover novel serological biomarkers. it was also the first effort to examine human immune responses to the entire proteome of a microbial species in a disease context.a protein microarray composed of individually purified human proteins would be an ideal tool for discovery of novel autoantigens associated with an autoimmune disease. take autoimmune hepatitis (aih) as an example: aih is a chronic necro-inflammatory disease of human liver with little known etiology. detection of nonorgan-specific and liver-related autoantibodies using immunoserological approaches has been widely used for diagnosis and prognosis. however, these traditional autoantigens, such as anti-sma (smooth muscle autoantibodies) and anti-ana (antinuclear autoantibodies) are often mixtures of complex biological materials. unambiguous and accurate detection of the disease demands identification and characterization of these autoantigens. therefore, song et al. fabricated a human protein microarray of 5011 nonredundant proteins that were expressed and purified as gst fusions in yeast [45] . there are several advantages associated with producing human proteins in yeast rather than bacteria: (i) higher solubility, (ii) higher yields of large proteins (e.g. > 50 kd), (iii) better preserved conformation of proteins, and (iv) proteins are less immunogenic when produced in yeast than in e. coli [17, 21, 25] . however, unlike a viral or bacterial protein microarray, a significant obstacle to the use of a human protein microarray of high content is its high cost. for example, a human protein array of 9000 proteins can exceed $1000 per array. in order to reduce this cost, song et al. developed a two-phase strategy to identify new biomarkers in aih. phase i is designed for rapid selection of candidate biomarkers, which are then validated in phase ii (fig. 3) . in phase i, 30 aih and 30 control serum samples were selected and individually used to probe the figure 3 . scheme of the two-phase strategy for biomarker identification in human autoimmune diseases. in phase i, a small cohort is used to rapidly identify a group of candidate biomarkers via serum profiling assays on a human protein microarray of high cost. because a small number of microarrays are needed, cost of the experiments is relatively low. in phase ii, a focused protein microarray of low cost is fabricated by spotting down purified candidate proteins. a much larger cohort is then assayed on these arrays in a double blind fashion to validate the candidates identified in phase i.human protein microarrays at a 1000-fold dilution, followed by detection of bound human autoantibodies using a cy-5-conjugated anti-human igg antibody. statistical analysis revealed 11 candidate autoantigens. to validate these candidates and to avoid a potential overfitting problem (see below), which is especially likely when dealing with a small sample size, the 11 proteins and three positive controls were re-purified to build a large number of low-cost small arrays for phase ii validation. these arrays were then sequentially probed with serum samples used in phase i and serum samples obtained from an additional 22 aih, 50 primary biliary cirrhosis, 43 hepatitis b, 41 hepatitis c, 11 system lupus erythematosus, 11 primary sjögren's syndrome, and two rheumatoid arthritis patients. as negative controls, they also included 26 serum samples from patients suffering from other types of severe disease and 50 samples from healthy subjects. three new antigens, rps20, alb2-like, and dut-pase, were identified as highly aih-specific biomarkers with sensitivities of 47.5% (rps20), 45.5% (alba-like), and 22.7% (dutpase), which were further validated with additional aih samples in a double-blind design. finally, they demonstrated that these new biomarkers could be readily applied to elisabased assays for clinical diagnosis and prognosis. this study represents a new paradigm in biomarker identification using protein microarrays for three reasons. first, a manageable number of candidate biomarkers can be rapidly identified at low cost because fewer expensive protein microarrays of high content are needed in the first phase of this two-phase strategy. second, by using small arrays comprised selected candidate proteins, the validation step can be rapidly carried out with a much larger cohort at lower cost. this validation step is extremely important for avoiding the overfitting problem associated with statistical analysis in biomarker or classifier identification, especially when dealing with a small cohort (e.g. <40). overfitting is a problem in which a statistical model describes random error or noise instead of the underlying relationship. it generally occurs in biomarker identification when the system is excessively complex, such as having too many individual-to-individual variations relative to the number of samples used. as a result, biomarkers that have been overfit generally have poor predictive performance. therefore, testing an additional, larger cohort in a double-blind design is an effective way to rule out overfit biomarkers. third, the author developed elisabased assays to examine the performance of the validated biomarkers with additional samples. these newly identified biomarkers serve as a translational step toward clinical practice.in addition, there have been a series of studies that employed pathogen protein microarrays to profile serological responses following infection. for example, protein microarrays have been developed in bacteria and viruses for biomarker identification in various infectious diseases [43, 44, 47, 54] . these studies have clearly demonstrated the power of protein microarrays in identification of potential biomarkers; however, several shortcomings are repeatedly seen in these studies. for instance, many of these arrays were fabricated using proteins translated in e. coli lysates without purification [43, 44, 47, 54] . because these proteins are contaminated with unwanted e. coli proteins, sensitivity of the assay is likely reduced due to their high immunogenicity [41] . as a result, e. coli lysates had to be used as a blocking reagent to alleviate this problem. also problematic is that in many of these studies, identified biomarkers were not validated with additional cohorts and therefore, the possibility of overfitting was not completely ruled out.an emerging application of protein microarrays in the field of clinical proteomics is an unbiased, proteome-wide survey of important players involved in pathogen-host interactions. the identified factors, encoded by either a pathogen or a host, have the potential to be developed into novel therapeutic targets. protein microarrays can serve as an ideal platform for such purposes: once a protein microarray is fabricated from a host or pathogen, it can be used to identify direct pathogenhost interactions. this strategy is particularly useful for investigating virus-host interactions because after entering the host cells, the viral genome and encoded proteins are in direct physical contact with the host's biological materials. as we will discuss in this section, such interactions can be investigated at multiple levels, such as rna-protein interactions, enzyme-substrate relationships, and protein-protein interactions.in 2007, zhu et al. described the first study using a yeast proteome microarray to identify host factors that can affect replication of brome mosaic virus (bmv), a plant-infecting rna virus that can also replicate in saccharomyces cerevisiae [25] . previous studies have shown that this positive-stranded rna virus encodes a trna-like structure at the 3 -end of its rna genome, in which a clamped adenine motif (cam) is required for packaging its genome into the capsid. to identify crucial host proteins that can interfere with the viral packaging process, a cy3-labeled cam-containing rna stem-loop structure was incubated on the yeast proteome microarray in the presence of an equal amount of a cy5-labeled mutated cam hairpin. using cy3-to-cy5 fluorescence signal intensity ratios, the top hits were identified and validated using an in vitro gel-shift assay. two validated candidate proteins, pseudouridine synthase 4 and actin patch protein 1, were selected for further characterization in tobacco plants. both proteins modestly reduced bmv genomic plus-strand rna accumulation, but dramatically inhibited bmv systemic spread in plants. pseudouridine synthase 4 also prevented the encapsidation of the bmv rnas in plants and the reassembly of bmv virions in vitro.this work is significant because it established the first rna-binding assay on a proteome microarray and demonstrated the utility of protein microarrays for identifying important players involved in pathogen-host interactions.in the course of evolution, viruses have been very successful at exploiting the host via development of their own arsenals, some of which were hijacked from the host in the form of both dna and proteins. to develop more effective antivirals, one must understand the molecular mechanisms by which viruses exploit the host machineries for their own use. the human ␣, ␤, and ␥ herpesviruses infect different tissues and cause distinct diseases, ranging from mild cold sores to pneumonitis, birth defects, and cancers [55] . however, they each confront many of the same challenges in infecting their hosts, including reprogramming cellular gene expression, sensing cell-cycle phase, and modifying cell-cycle progression, and reactivating the lytic life cycle to produce new virions and spread infection. on the other hand, many lytic cycle genes involved in replication of the viral genomes (e.g. the orthologous serine/threonine protein kinases) are highly conserved across the herpesvirus family. therefore, it became an attractive hypothesis that the shared substrates targeted by these orthologous viral kinases would reveal host pathways that are critical for replication across the herpesvirus family.to test the above hypothesis, li et al. employed a human protein microarray [56] . the authors purified four orthologous kinases encoded by ebv, kshv, human cytomegalovirus (hcmv), and hsv-1, performed kinase reactions on a human protein microarray described previously [4] , and identified 110 shared substrates. like every largescale screen, the next challenge was to select candidates that would be worth pursuing. to do so, the authors then applied gene ontology and string analyses (http://string-db.org/, a database of known and predicted protein-protein interactions) to these candidates and found a highly connected cluster of 15 proteins. strikingly, these proteins were all known to be involved in the dna damage response (ddr) (fig. 4) . the host ddr has been known to be important to many viruses, including human herpesviruses, and is relevant to virus-induced tumorigenesis [35] . to narrow down this list to a single candidate for in-depth characterization, the authors reasoned that the viruses are likely to target an upstream master regulator, which triggers the dna damage response. on the basis of a literature search and the structure of this cluster, tat-interactive protein 60 (tip60) emerged as an excellent candidate for follow-up, because (i) tip60 is further upstream in the ddr pathway than any of the other candidates in the cluster; (ii) it serves as a master regulator in ddr via activation of atm autophosphorylation activity by acetylation; (iii) it regulates chromatin dynamics via histone acetylation; and (iv) its importance has been shown in other viruses. indeed, the authors observed that when tip60 was knocked down in ebv-infected b cells, ebv's lytic replication was greatly reduced. next, the authors applied a series of cell-based assays and showed that during ebv replication, tip60 activation by the bglf4 kinase triggers ebvinduced ddr and also mediates induction of viral lytic gene expression. finally, the authors demonstrated that tip60 was also required for efficient lytic replication in hcmv, kshv, and hsv-1.this work illustrates the value of high-throughput, unbiased approaches for the discovery of conserved viral tar-gets in the host that have the potential to be developed into novel therapeutic targets for antivirals. currently, there are few drugs available to treat herpesvirus infections, and viral escape mutants develop as a result of extensive use of this limited repertoire. the herpesvirus protein kinases are attractive antiviral drug targets. however, developing broadly effective drugs targeting protein kinases requires knowledge of their common cellular substrates. the information provided by common substrate identification will assist in the design of assays for new and broadly effective anti-herpesvirus therapeutics.protein microarrays can also serve as a convenient tool for profiling protein-protein interactomes between a pathogen and a host. in a recent example, hayward et al. surveyed the interactome between a kshv-encoded virulent factor, lana, and the human host using human protein microarrays, in order to identify host proteins that can be recognized by lana [57] . lana functions in latently infected cells as an essential participant in kshv genome replication and as a driver of dysregulated cell growth. although yeast two-hybrid screens, gst affinity, immunoprecipitation assays, and chromatography coupled with ms have been applied to the identification of lana binding proteins, each approach has its strengths and weaknesses, and each tend to identify different sets of proteins. in this study, the authors used purified flag-tagged lana applied to human protein microarrays to identify 61 potential binding partners, many of which were previously unknown. eight out of nine proteins were validated by co-immunoprecipitation, including tip60, protein phosphatase 2a, replication protein a (rpa) and xpa. although human papillomavirus e6, hiv-1 tat, and hcmv pul27 interact with tip60 and induce tip60 degradation, lana-associated 42 retained acetyltransferase activity and showed increased stability. this observation is in line with the study described in the previous section that showed that tip60 plays a positive role in kshv lytic replication. on the other hand, identification of rpa as a lana interacting partner suggested that lana may play a role in regulating the length of host telomeres, because rpa1 and rpa2 are known to be essential in the replication of cellular telomeric dna. to test this hypothesis, the authors performed chip assays with anti-rpa1 and -rpa2 antibodies using primers specific to the telomere regions and found that the presence of lana drastically reduced the recruitment of both rpa1 and rpa2 to the host telomeres, while it had no impact on the protein level of the rpa complex. this observation raised the possibility that lana might have an impact on telomere length. using southern blot analysis of terminal restriction fragments, the standard method for quantifying telomere length, the authors demonstrated that the average length of telomeres was shortened by at least 50% in both lana-expressing endothelial assisted by go analysis, 110 shared substrates of conserved herpesvirus kinases were plugged into the string database. a highly connected cluster of 15 proteins was revealed, all of which are known to play a role in ddr. based on the literature and topology of the cluster, tip60 emerged as the most promising candidate. protein nodes are color coded by functional class, with proteins involved in ddr colored red. small blue circles adjacent to protein nodes indicate that the protein is herpesvirus associated, while small pink circles indicate the proteins are associated with other viruses. edges between the proteins represent known or predicted connections, such as protein-protein interactions, catalytic reactions, and enzyme-substrate relationships.many interesting questions remain to be answered. how does lana block the rpa complex recruitment to the telomeres? is it achieved via direct competition since lana is also an ssdna-binding protein? or, does lana serve as a kinase sink for the rpa complex and regulate rpa recruitment via phosphorylation?on the flip side, a human factor of interest can be used to survey a virus protein microarray to identify important viral factors. similar to the ubiquitylation pathway, sumoylation involves a series of sequential enzymatic reactions that conju-gate sumo to lysine residues on substrate proteins. previous studies have shown that both latent and lytic ebv proteins interact with the sumo system. noncovalent sumo-ebv protein interactions can occur via a sumo interaction motif (sim) in the target proteins. to comprehensively identify additional ebv proteins that bind to sumo, li et al. performed a protein-binding assay with human sumo2 [58] on a previously described ebv proteome microarray [41] and identified a total of 11 proteins, including the conserved viral kinase bglf4. the mutation of potential sims in bglf4 at both n-and c-termini changed the intracellular localization of bglf4 from nuclear to cytoplasmic, while bglf4 mutated in the n-terminal sim remained predominantly nuclear. the mutation of the c-terminal sim yielded an intermediate phenotype with nuclear and cytoplasmic staining. the authors also found that bglf4 abolished the sumoylation of the ebv lytic cycle transactivator zta, and that this inhibitory effect on zta sumoylation was dependent on both bglf4 sumo binding and bglf4 kinase activity. the global profile of protein sumoylation was also suppressed by bglf4 but not by the sim or kinase-dead bglf4 mutant. furthermore, bglf's interaction with sumo was required to induce the cellular dna damage response and to enhance the production of extracellular virus during ebv lytic replication.the identification of pathogen proteins that interact with human factors has also been applied to understanding the mechanisms of bacterial infection. margarit et al. harnessed the power of protein microarrays to identify proteins expressed by two species of the streptococcus gram-positive bacteria, streptococcus pyogenes, and s. agalactiae, that interact with human factors known to mediate pathogenesis [59] . rather than developing whole-proteome arrays, they used a bioinformatics approach to predict those proteins present on the cellular surface-and thus most likely to play a role in infection, and used this list of 200 proteins to develop their arrays. they also carefully considered the human probes that they would use, choosing three human ligands: fibronectin, fibrinogen, and c4-binding protein, all known to play important roles in the colonization and infection processes. binding experiments conducted using the streptococcal arrays and human protein probes identified 17 of the 20 known interactions previously reported as well as eight newly identified streptococcal proteins, many of which they confirmed by far western blot analysis. these novel proteins included proteins of unknown function as well as three related proteins that they termed the fib proteins. they then used domain mapping to identify regions of the fib proteins required for their interaction with the human ligands. interestingly, sera samples from patients with s. agalactiae infections show high titers of fib-specific antibodies, indicating that these proteins are highly expressed during infection. further work will determine the role of these proteins in infection and whether they will emerge as suitable drug targets to fight pathogenic streptococcus infections. in summary, the above studies have demonstrated the power of protein microarrays in the discovery of novel molecular mechanisms underlying host-pathogen interactions at various levels. in recent years, other high-throughput approaches, such as shotgun ms [60] , genome-wide rnai screens [61, 62] , and yeast two-hybrid [63, 64] have been applied to understand host-pathogen interactions; however, the protein microarray approach provides a more versatile platform than any of these single approaches for identifying multiple types of direct interactions between a pathogen and host, including protein-protein interactions [57] [58] [59] , rna-protein interactions [25] , and enzyme-substrate interactions [35] .over the past 5 years, rapid development of genome-wide sequencing technologies (i.e. next-gen sequencing) has revealed the heterogeneous nature of tumors [65, 66] . however, clinical diagnosis of tumors is largely still dependent on morphologic patterns. the fact that tumors with indistinguishable morphology can have vastly different clinical outcomes suggests that the molecular heterogeneity of each patient's tumor cells have to be better understood before more effective therapies can be developed. therefore, the future of cancer treatment is tailored molecular therapy specific for each individual, which will require a new class of proteomic profiling technologies. as a widely adopted technology, protein microarrays can meet this need for the profiling of the functional state of tumors and for cancer biomarker identification.a widely adopted approach to determining the status of signaling pathways in tumor cells is based on immunoblot analysis with antibodies that can recognize phosphorylated proteins. to transform the low-throughput immunoblot to a high-throughput format, haab et al. first reported the development of antibody microarray technology, in which individual commercial antibodies were spotted on glass at high density [12] . this technology allows for simultaneous detection of multiple antigens presented in a complex biological sample, such as cells, tissues, and body fluids [67, 68] . the term "reverse phase protein microarray" was proposed by liotta, petricoin et al. in 2001 [69] as an array in which lysates of cells or tissues are immobilized on the array surface rather than antibodies. using phosphoproteinspecific antibodies, these arrays can then be used to interrogate the phosphorylation state of proteins present in these mixtures as a proxy of signaling status in tumors. there are several ongoing clinical trials currently utilizing the reverse phase protein microarray [70] . an obvious advantage of this approach is that it allows to evaluate the state of multiple components of a signaling pathway, even though the cell is lysed. because fabrication of such microarrays requires a minimum amount of sample, multiple clinical samples, such as biopsy samples, tumors, and body fluids, can be printed on a series of identical arrays and analyzed in parallel using commercially available anti-phosphoprotein or other specific antibodies.for example, petricoin et al. used cancer cell lysates, representing 59 patient samples obtained from the children's oncology group intergroup rhabdomyosarcoma study (irs), to fabricate reverse phase microarrays [53] . rhabodymyosarcoma is a rare childhood cancer that arises from undifferentiated muscle progenitor cells. although current treatments can yield as high as a 67% disease-free survival rate, the reasons for treatment failure in the remaining one-third of patients are unknown. the identification of biomarkers to allow distinguishing these patients from those that respond to traditional therapies would help identify those patients best suited for alternative therapies, and also potential drug targets. these reverse phase arrays were therefore used as platforms to detect the phosphorylation status of proteins thought to underlie whether rhabdomyosarcoma subtypes were responsive to standard chemotherapy regimens. using phosphosite-specific antibodies, the authors identified higher phosphorylation levels in four akt/mtor pathway components in patients with poor survival outcomes. network analysis based on this data and known pathway information was used to find that, on the other hand, patients with good treatment outcomes showed mtor pathway suppression. together, these findings suggested that pharmacologically inducing mtor pathway suppression could result in improved outcomes for patients that failed to respond to standard chemotherapy regimens. the authors proceeded to test this hypothesis using a mouse xenograft model with rhabdoymyosarcoma cell lines and a known mtor pathway inhibitor. they found that treatment with the inhibitor resulted in reduced phosphorylation of the protein 4e-bp1 that had been identified by the protein microarray studies, as well as inhibition of tumor growth. these results suggest that mtor pathway inhibitors may be a potential way to improve treatment outcomes for patients that fail to respond to standard chemotherapy regimens. additionally, they demonstrate the power of tumor cell lysate arrays in (i) identifying specific patient subpopulations that could benefit from tailored therapies, as well as (ii) identifying the specific molecules that should be targeted in developing and testing these therapies. however, there are several major problems with the reverse phase array approach. first, well-characterized antibodies are not available for the great majority of human proteins [71, 72] . second, several recent studies have suggested that many commercially available monoclonal antibodies (mabs) may not even recognize their purported targets, and cross-react extensively with other cellular antigens [73] . third, antibody cross-reactivity is an even more pressing problem in diagnostic and therapeutic applications, as underlined by the recent withdrawal of several mab-based pharmaceuticals from the market [74, 75] . finally, this approach requires prior knowledge as to which phosphoproteins should be evaluated and as a result, is not an ideal platform for the discovery of novel biomarkers.current screening for breast cancer using mammograms detects only 70% of breast cancers, and false-positive mammograms lead to unnecessary biopsies. the identification of biomarkers that would allow early detection of breast cancer could provide a noninvasive, low cost method that could improve patient outcomes. one promising category of can-cer biomarkers is autoantibodies to tumor antigens that offer better stability, specificity, ease of purification, and ease of detection compared to other serum proteins. in order to identify autoantibodies to tumor antigens associated with breast cancer, anderson et al. used protein arrays containing candidate tumor antigens and applied breast cancer patient and control serum samples to identify differences in the human antibody repertoire that could be used as biomarkers [50] . these custom protein arrays, termed "nappa" arrays (nucleic acid protein programmable array), are fabricated by the spotting of cdnas that encode the target proteins at each feature of the array. proteins are transcribed and translated by a cellfree system and immobilized by encoded epitope tags, thus bypassing the protein purification process. additionally, the authors used a three-phase screening approach to home in on the best candidate breast cancer biomarkers. in the first phase, they used arrays with the full set of 4988 tumor antigens in order to eliminate uninformative autoantibodies that were present at similar levels in both early breast cancer patients and healthy women. subtracting these antigens, the protein set was reduced to 761, allowing them to fabricate smaller arrays for the next phase that offer the benefits of reduced cost and fewer false positives. in the second phase, sera from patients with invasive early breast cancer and benign breast disease were compared, in order to identify antigens specific to early breast cancer but absent from benign breast disease, resulting in 119 antigens. in the third phase, they set out to validate this antigen list, finding 28 antigens that maintained high levels of specificity in a blinded validation assay, including the protein atp6ap1, a known autoantigen. they then focused on this protein and went on to show high expression of atp6ap1 in four breast cancer cell lines by western blot, as well as significantly higher atp6ap1 autoantibody levels in approximately 13% of early breast cancer serum cases compared to controls. although only a first step, this work demonstrates the power of protein microarrays, in particular programmable protein microarrays, in identifying biomarkers for the early detection of breast cancer.an important goal of identifying cancer biomarkers is to define new strategies for early diagnosis that can allow early intervention with current therapies to improve patient survival rates. additionally, since cancer-associated autoantibodies often target proteins that are mutated, modified, or aberrantly expressed in tumor cells, they could also be considered immunologic reporters that could uncover molecular events underlying tumorigenesis [52] . the molecular players in these events, in turn, may be the best place to start in efforts to develop novel therapies. in order to identify autoantibody biomarkers that could act as indicators of bladder cancer, as well as the underlying molecular pathology contributing to disease, orenes-pinero turned to a protein array strategy using the invitrogen protoarray containing approximately 8000 purified human proteins to identify antibodies to tumor-associated antigens in serum [52] . comparing serum samples collected from 12 patients with bladder cancer and ten control patients without bladder cancer, they identified 171 differentially expressed proteins. among these, they selected clusterin and dynamin for validation based in part on their known role in cancer biology. using immunohistochemistry on a custom tissue microarray comprised bladder cancer tumor samples, they found reduced expression levels of clusterin in muscle invasive bladder tumors as compared to nonmuscle invasive tumors. on the other hand, they found that low-protein expression of dynamin was associated with increased tumor stage and grade, higher recurrence rate after surgery, as well as shorter survival. paradoxically, their follow-up tests revealed lower expression levels of dynamin and clusterin associated with disease, in contrast to their protein array results that showed increased autoantibody levels to these proteins among bladder cancer patients compared to controls. despite these contradictory findings, the authors demonstrated significant associations between dynamin and clusterin expression levels and bladder cancer disease progression that could potentially allow them to use these as informative biomarkers in the clinic as well as potential drug targets. this work demonstrates the power of protein microarrays for the identification of autoantibodies to tumorassociated antigens and its application to the discovery of cancer biomarkers.cell surfaces, especially mammalian cell surfaces, are heavily coated with complex poly-and oligosaccharides, and these glycans have been implicated in many functions, such as cellto-cell communication, host-pathogen interactions, and cell matrix interactions. aberrations of glycosylation are usually indicative of the onset of specific diseases, such as cancer.there are a handful of tools that can be used to study glycosylation, such as lc [76, 77] , mc [78] , ce [79, 80] , and flow cytometry [81, 82] .to take advantage of the specific glycan-binding properties of lectins and the parallel analysis capability of microarrays [83] , we and others have developed the lectin microarray technology for profiling glycans in a high-throughput fashion [51, [84] [85] [86] [87] . although lectin microarrays in early reports were only composed of a small number of lectins, in a later report a high-content lectin microarray composed of 94 unique commercial lectins was fabricated and used to profile accessible surface glycans of mammalian cells [51] . a total of 24 human cell lines were labeled and applied to this lectin microarray. a binary algorithm was developed to generate a "glycan signature" for each cell line, resulting in a hierarchical cluster based on their accessible glycan composition. by comparing the glycan profiles of a breast cancer cell line and its cancer stem-like cell derivatives, three lectins, namely lel, aal, and wga, were found to specifically recognize mcf7 cells but not the derivatives. to confirm this result, the authors first employed lel-conjugated beads to purify away the normal mcf7 cells from the cancer stem-like cells (estimated as ∼0.1% in the cell population) in an mcf7 cell population as a means to enrich cancer stem-like cells. next, using a mouse model to test the enrichment of the cancer stem-like cells, they showed that 2 weeks following injection of the lel-depleted cancer stem-like cell enriched cultures, average tumor size was greater than twofold bigger than the control group injected with a similar number of regular mcf7 cells. this study demonstrated the utility of a lectin microarray in the identification of novel cell surface markers on cancer stem-like cells that subsequently allowed enrichment for cancer stem-like cells.because the affinity of lectins is usually low (kd is in the range of 10 −3 -10 −6 m) [84] , in processing a cell-binding assay on a lectin microarray, an analyte of low affinity may be washed away from the immobilized lectins, especially when dealing with live cells. in order to overcome these problems, researchers have modified lectin microarray technology in many ways [88] . one example is antibody-assisted lectin profiling that was developed for detecting glycoproteins at low concentrations. kuno et al. used this method to analyze the glycan structures of a protein hpod, which has been proposed to enhance the metastatic potential of glioblastoma cells [86] . the hpod protein complex was first ip enriched with the appropriate antibody and then incubated on a lectin array to identify its associated glycans. an additional modification of the lectin microarray platform is the use of the evanescentfield activated fluorescence detection system, which allows for label-free, real-time detection. since the evanescent field is generated within 200 nm, the background signals are so low that washing steps are not necessary. it has been reported that this detection system has by far the highest sensitivity among the lectin microarray detection systems, with a reported detection limit in the 100 pm range [89] . finally, li et al. reported a two-phase discovery and validation approach to improve the sensitivity of the lectin microarray technology in cancer biomarker discovery for prostate cancer [90] . first, pooled tissue samples for each group were generated by mixing equal amounts of tissue proteins (50 g) from the four cases in the normal, nonaggressive cancer, aggressive cancer, and metastasis groups. in the first phase, or discovery phase, prostate-specific antigen (psa) and membrane metallo-endopeptidase (mme) proteins were extracted from each tissue group using anti-total psa antibody and anti-mme mabs, respectively. after incubating the iped psa or mme proteins on a lectin microarray, captured psa or mme proteins were detected with anti-psa or anti-mme mabs. comparison of signals between each group of pooled tissue revealed that the fraction of psa that is o-glycosylated (as recognized by jacalin) or neu5ac conjugated (as detected by sna), as well as the fraction of mme that was modified by either galnac or glcnac was highly elevated in aggressive prostate cancer and metastatic prostate cancer groups. these results were confirmed with immunosorbent assay in phase ii, in which psa and mme were first captured on an ecl plate coated with anti-psa and anti-mme mabs, followed by detection with biotinylated lectins. these studies demonstrate the power and adaptability of protein microarrays for detection of even low-affinity interactions such as those between lectins and glycans.recent years have witnessed tremendous growth in the use of protein microarrays to address important questions in the field of clinical proteomics. in the area of biomarker identification, most of the recent research has been focused on either infections or autoimmune diseases. we believe that protein microarrays, especially functional protein microarrays, will be widely used for identification of cancer biomarkers in the near future. indeed, recent advances in immunoproteomics and high-throughput technologies have suggested that the autoantibody repertoire in cancer patients might be quite different as compared with that in healthy subjects, leading to the hypothesis that autoantigens might be identified as biomarkers for cancer diagnosis, as well as cancer prognosis [91] . ideally, a human protein microarray developed for such a purpose should cover the entire human proteome, in order to enable a comprehensive screen for the autoantigens. to our knowledge, we have fabricated a human proteome microarray of the best coverage (>70%) [21] . however, when hundreds, if not thousands, of serum samples are needed to screen for biomarkers, the cost of using these human proteome microarrays accumulates very rapidly. an effective strategy to overcome this obstacle is to apply the two-phase strategy as described in the aih study [45] . we expect that this strategy will become popular in the near future. finally, we expect that functional protein microarrays will be used as a readout to obtain reaction profiles of the collected activities of various types of enzymes, such as kinases, acetyltransferases, ubiquitin, and sumo e3 ligases in cancerous tissues. comparing ptm profiles obtained from cancer and healthy tissues will allow us to identify biomarkers and to gain new insights into the molecular mechanisms of disease.this work is supported in part by the nih (rr020839, dk082840, ro1gm076102, ca125807, ca160036, and hg006434 to hz; r01ey017589 to jq, and an aha predoctoral fellowship (10pre3040000) to ec).the authors have declared no conflicts of interest.even with the advancement of infectious disease surveillance over the last century, communicable diseases still pose significant risks to public health. on the world health organisations (who) top 10 threats to global health in 2019, four on the list directly refer to infectious diseases: pandemic influenza, hiv, dengue and another for high-threat pathogens such as ebola (world health organisation, 2019) . emerging infectious diseases caused by novel pathogenic organisms are of notable concern, it was highlighted by who that since the 1970s, over 1,500 new pathogens were discovered and nearly 40 new infectious diseases have been identified (world health organisation, 2018a) . many of these have severely impacted communities, with several major outbreaks occurring within the last 20 years including severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) (2002) (2003) , ebola (2014 ebola ( -2016 , h1n1flu (swine flu) (2009) (2010) , zika virus (2015 zika virus ( -2016 and covid-19 (2019 covid-19 ( -2020 (world health organisation, 2020a) . two others on this list are regarding the prevention and treatment of infectious disease, one being hesitation to vaccinate and the other the rise in antimicrobial resistance (amr), both have been linked to the re-emergence of communicable diseases.there are a number of drivers affecting the emergence and re-emergence of infectious diseases (woolhouse and gowtage-sequeria, 2005) . these range from climate change, poverty and unprecedented population increases with uncontrolled urbanisation. another driver is globalisation linked with tourism and trade, resulting in a strong network of air links. with regards to international flights it has been highlighted that the incubation period of any human disease is still longer than the lengthiest aviation time for any international flight (frenk and gómez-dantés, 2002) . outbreaks are therefore not confined to one geographic location but are less than 24 hours away from being a threat somewhere else.another key factor for the re-emergence of infectious diseases has been linked with drug resistant pathogens. whilst microbial evolution happens naturally, inappropriate usage of antimicrobials puts additional selective pressures and further facilitates rates of resistance (allen et al., 2010; andersson and hughes, 2014) . whilst antibiotics tends to be focused on in discussions of amr, rising cases of both fungal and viral resistances still pose significant threats (fisher et al., 2018) . for example, candida auris, an emerging multidrug resistant yeast, is a cause of major hospital acquired infection with high associated mortality, having only first been identified in 2009 it has resistance to all clinically available antifungals (lockhart et al., 2017) .the rising rate of resistance has resulted in amr being hailed as one of the biggest public health risks threatening medicine in the 21st century (o'neill, 2014) . increasing concerns of amr have led to the establishment of the global antimicrobial resistance surveillance system (glass) in 2015 by who with the aims of sharing information on a global scale to strengthen data and aid decision making on national and international actions (world health organisation, 2015) . whilst the recent report (2017) (2018) has revealed detailed results with participation from over 60 countries, several limitations in the study were discussed (world health organisation, 2018b) . it was recognised that there was a lack of sampling strategy leading to selection bias, also patient samples are typically taken from those that have sought out medical care and hence might not be representative for a population. it was further highlighted the need to move away from laboratory data to include epidemiological and population data.threats of (re)emerging infectious diseases along with rising rates of amr reinforce that infectious disease surveillance is still an integral component of public health today. this has given rise to multiple techniques to monitor spatial and temporal trends of diseases.there are several techniques with a range of advantages and disadvantages currently used for infectious disease surveillance (table 1) . disease monitoring (which is often disease specific), can vary significantly with country and will depend upon the resources and sophistication of the public health services and facilities available . the information collected can be provided to who, who have the authority to lead the global surveillance of infectious diseases. who have had an integral role in infectious disease surveillance, as well as leading international surveillance networks, e.g. influenza surveillance. they also provide international coordination of epidemic responses in diseases that pose significant public health risks. examples of conventional routes to monitoring diseases are based upon existing resources, such as mortality and morbidity rates, prescription and hospital admission data.whilst these are valuable source of information for surveillance purposes, they do suffer from bias, resource insensitivity and costs . for example, in countries with less developed health services, morbidity might be higher than assumed due to people failing to report to a healthcare service due to lack of access. this combined with the fact that sometimes in epidemics the laboratory facilities can become easily overwhelmed -the consequence of such is that these cases are not reported. the 2009 swine flu epidemic caused by a h1n1 influenza virus spread rapidly to more than 214 countries in the space of a few months. whilst it was estimated that several million people were infected with over 18,400 confirmed laboratory deaths worldwide reported by august 2010 (world health organisation, 2010) , it is believed that this is a gross underestimation. reported studies in the literature have estimated through modelling techniques that there could have been as many as 10-15 times this amount, with up to 203,000 respiratory deaths (dawood et al., 2012; simonsen et al., 2013) . dawood et al. projected around 80 % of these deaths occurring in southeast asia and africa, the causes for underestimation have been attributed to poor reporting due to the overwhelming number of cases.the problems underlying infectious disease surveillance will only be exacerbated. current predictions have estimated a global population growth of 26 % from 7.7 billion 2019 to 9.7 billion in 2050, with 68 % of the global population expected to be urban (united nations department of economic and social affairs, 2019). with the current unprecedented rises in population size, there will undoubtedly be further challenges (but also opportunities) in rapid health surveillance and response.therefore there is a need for a surveillance technique that (i) provides comprehensive and objective data, (ii) gives results in real-time, (iii) is flexible, (iv) able to monitor multiple diseases, even those that are rare, (v) is scalable and cost effective (vi) could be applied in low resource settings. furthermore, the surveillance system needs to have comprehensive data collection systems regarding emergence of new diseases and re-emergence of old diseases, the threat of imported diseases or pathogens, and the emergence of multidrug or pan-drug resistant organisms. it has also been highlighted in the literature that monitoring clinics and laboratories for informing on public health is not sufficient, and there should also be an aspect of environmental monitoring of potential hazards (nsubuga et al., 2006) . therefore, a surveillance technique that could also encompass environmental exposure would be invaluable in providing comprehensive exposure status and disease outcomes. a new surveillance technique utilising water fingerprinting is under the development to provide objective and comprehensive evaluation of both public and environmental health status in real-time.wastewater-based epidemiology (wbe) is a new approach utilised to give comprehensive health information on communities. the concept is primarily based upon the extraction, detection and then subsequent analysis and interpretation of chemical and/or biological compounds. these compounds, often referred to as biomarkers, could be harmful chemicals such as food toxicants and/or specific human excretion products (e.g. metabolites or endogenously formed chemicals as a result of exposure to and/or disease) that can be linked to the community as they are held within geographically defined water catchment areas (watersheds) to which whole populations contribute. water sources that can be analysed are any that fall within the urban areas' catchment, and can include surface waters, domestic water sources and wastewaters. the results can then be used to give information on the community itself and its health, or environmental exposure. wastewater is a popular and critical medium used in water fingerprinting. often referred to as wastewater-based epidemiology (wbe), this technique can give an unbiased reflection on the community's health and lifestyle habits due to the rich source of biological and chemical information it contains (kasprzyk-hordern et al.,wastewater-based epidemiology (wbe) -the basics. wbe postulates that endogenous and exogenous urinary human biomarkers identified and quantified in wastewater can give a reflection of the population's health in (near)-real time ( figure 1 ). wastewater (untreated) is usually collected from wastewater treatment plants (wwtp) as wwtps serve communities located in well-defined geographical sewerage catchment areas. usually, one wwtp serves a town or a city. importantly, as a whole population contributes to wastewater collected by any wwtp, wastewater from this community can be considered as its pooled urine. a critical consideration in wbe are wastewater flow rates which are key to account for due to the wide variations in influent flows (e.g. wet weather causing dilution). the consequence is of such that when reporting upon the presence of a compound, it is typical to report as the daily loads in wastewater (mg/day). furthermore, to normalise and allow comparisons for cities in different geographic locations, with varying population size, the daily loads per capita may be reported instead (mg/day/1000 inhabitants). this process of back calculation of communitywide drug consumption or exposure to chemical factors can provide un-biased reflection of key aspects of public health. for example, the monitoring of pharmaceutical or illicit drugs in wastewater can detect subtle changes in trends in usage and consumption in a community.furthermore, not only could spatial and temporal trends be established but such data could be monitored in real time, allowing deviations from usual trends to be spotted early. this offers several advantages over biomonitoring techniques which focus on small target groups due to expenses and logistical challenges such as ethical considerations, as wbe is done on a population-wide scale, the anonymity of individuals is maintained. water fingerprinting can also offer more timely analysis than other traditional based public health approaches. this would allow public services to respond more rapidly and potential health interventions to be employed.wbe and international collaboration. the field of wbe is a rapidly growing one and has experienced enormous successes since the idea was first conceived by daughton in 2001 who hypothesised that the analysis of drug residues in wastewater could be linked back to population usage (daughton, 2001) . this was then first achieved in 2005 by zuccato who successfully extracted and quantified cocaine in both wastewater and surface water and to investigate cocaine usage in the community (zuccato et al., 2005) .a large number of international long-term monitoring initiative have since been established worldwide with the most active networks in europe (european monitoring centre for drugs and drug addiction, 2016; thomas et al., 2012) , australia lai et al., 2018 lai et al., , 2016 o'brien et al., 2019; benjamin j. tscharke et al., 2016) and in the usa (halden et al., 2019) . the successes of wbe that have been demonstrated on global scales have given rise to discussions on future outlooks for the technique (choi et al., 2018; daughton, 2018; kasprzyk-hordern et al., 2014; thomas and reid, 2011) . initially, work was entirely focused upon illicit drug usage, including heroin, cocaine and methamphetamines (boleda et al., 2007; castiglioni et al., 2006; kasprzyk-hordern et al., 2008; zuccato et al., 2008) but have since expanded to include a diverse range of other endogenous biomarkers, varying from ones linked to lifestyle choices such as alcohol consumption (boogaerts et al., 2016; reid et al., 2011; rodríguez-álvarez et al., 2014a) , tobacco (castiglioni et al., 2015; lai et al., 2017; rodríguez-álvarez et al., 2014b; ben j. tscharke et al., 2016) and psychoactive substances (kinyua et al., 2015; mardal and meyer, 2014; reid et al., 2014) . others have investigated general health through oxidative stress markers (ryu et al., 2016 (ryu et al., , 2015 .additionally, the analysis of metabolic urinary biomarkers of exposure in wastewater can reveal critical information upon community-wide exposure to external stressors accounted in everyday life. examples of which can be exposure to chemical compounds such as endocrine disrupters, compounds that are known to effect hormone regulation, but that are typically not regulated (testai et al., 2013) . chemicals found in personal care products and consumer products, including uv filters in sunscreen, plasticizers, flame retardants and pesticides are suspected or known endocrine disruptors. frameworks investigating community exposure to such compounds have been developed through analysis of exposure metabolites within wastewater, results of which have already provided comprehensive international populationwide exposure data for pesticides , flame retardants , carcinogens linked to tobacco , uv filters , mycotoxins (gracia-lor et al., 2020) and bpa (lopardo et al., 2019) .complexity of wastewater matrix. whilst conceptually wbe is very simple and clearly offers attractive advantages for the monitoring of public health, there are some challenges to be considered. for example, not only are the levels of biomarkers far more dilute in wastewater, especially in comparison to urine, but the wastewater matrix itself provides a complex environment to work in (daughton, 2012) . as previously mentioned, wastewater contains a diverse abundance of chemical and biological targets which can give incredibly detailed information about the population that contributes. however, a drawback to having such a large amount of information is in the successful extraction from the matrix itself and the subsequent analysis of specific targets can be difficult. extraction methods such as solid phase extraction and immunoassay techniques along with sophisticated analytical tools such as advanced mass spectrometry have allowed for the analysis of a wide number of compounds (petrie et al., 2014) .recent developments in sensing approaches could enable measurements on site, which would allow the system to provide information on public health in real time .estimation of population size. another challenge associated with wbe is the problem posed by dynamic populations (e.g. population fluctuations due to tourism and commuters) . typically the standard approach is for levels of certain endogenous biomarkers in humans, such as cortisol or cotinine, to be calculated as daily loads which have been normalised to the population. this enables inter-city comparison (chen et al., 2014) . however, there are difficulties in estimating the population size of individual wwtp catchments. this can result in unaccounted for, unique population fluctuations that, whilst having negligible impact on the levels of biomarkers in large populations (>100,000 people), they might contribute to higher uncertainties in smaller populations.there are several techniques that can be employed to reduce to the source of uncertainties associated with population size. investigating certain hydrochemical parameters which have well-established methods of analysis, such as chemical oxygen demand (cod), biological oxygen demand (bod) or ammonium (nh 4 + ) can aid in estimating populations contributing to a wwtp catchment at a particular time period (been et al., 2014; van nuijs et al., 2011) .these however can be influenced by the composition of wastewater. the other uncertainties associated with the technique briefly mentioned above with regards to sample collection and analytical variability amongst a couple of others, have all been extensively discussed in a number of reviews (castiglioni et al., 2013; ort et al., 2014 ort et al., , 2010 . however, score and the emdcca have demonstrated that with recognition of the limitations of the technique, that the development and adoption of a reliable, standardised method will give reliability and credibility to the studies and allow spatial and temporal comparisons to be made.uncertainties within population size will also pose problems for infectious disease surveillance within wastewater, as the presence of tourists or commuters within a catchment area could make it challenging to monitor the actual emergence of an infection within that community for example, it would be impossible to distinguish whether the presence of a pathogen in wastewater had stemmed from a visitor(s) passing though or from within the community itself.arguably however, the presence of a pathogen in wastewater, whether from a resident in the catchment area or not, still provides critical information as members within the population may have been unknowingly exposed to the infected individual. this could indicate towards potential disease emergence within the community, allowing valuable time for appropriate preparation and response to be put into place.endogenous and exogenous biomarkers in wastewater, when chosen carefully, can give key information with regards to health of a population. along with some of the limitations of wbe touched upon above, there are also certain criteria that must be fulfilled for a biomarker to be considered in wbe techniques. for example, the biomarker in question must mostly be excreted via urine and concentrations of the biomarker must be in ng l -1 for downstream detection of the biomarker in wastewater (chen et al., 2014) . another vital characteristic is that the biomarker needs to be stable, not only in the sewage system but also during the process of sampling and storage . biomarkers also need to be unique to human metabolism and ideally the metabolism process involving the biomarker would be well understood. this ensures that the biomarker in question has only originated from human sources, as opposed to exogenous ones (potential contamination of animals in the sewage system or from microbes present in wastewater) (daughton, 2012) . with regards to the sewage system, wastewater is home to an extensive range of complex microbial communities that are challenging to characterise and will vary geographically. as of such, there is a high risk of microbial degradation or transformation of chemical compounds. in fact, biological treatment in wastewater treatment plants, such as trickle bed filters, are home to these diverse microbial communities which play a key role for the breakdown of many organic compounds (kraigher et al., 2008) .wbe has already demonstrated successes in monitoring drug consumption, lifestyle choices and population-wide exposure. several studies have discussed the future of wbe and the expansion to include biomarkers linked to other aspects of public health, including diet, stress, and biological based monitoring linked with illness (choi et al., 2018; daughton, 2018; gracia-lor et al., 2017) . due to the wide array of endogenous chemical and biological urinary biomarkers linked with disease, there is clearly huge potential for wbe to be utilised to monitor infectious diseases and the spread of epidemics at the community level (table 2) . an example of a key biological marker are pathogenic dna/rna residues from bacteria, viruses and fungi. the detection in influent wastewater would suggest human sources and hence indicate what diseases are circulating within a population. whilst risk factors for emerging infectious diseases have highlighted resistant bacteria as a concern, viruses pose a significant threat due to their high mutation rates and ability to adapt to new host, e.g. humans.this is particularly in the case of rna viruses, where higher nucleotide substitution rates can result in this rapid adaption and spreading in new host populations (woolhouse and gowtage-sequeria, 2005) . the potential of wastewater to be used for viral surveillance has been well discussed in the literature (barras, 2018; o'brien and xagoraraki, 2019; wigginton et al., 2015) . wastewater surveillance has already demonstrated promising results with the potential for retrospective prediction of disease outbreaks of hepatitis a and norovirus . influenza in wastewater was also investigated during the h1n1 (swine) flu virus outbreak, whilst influenza a viruses were detected in sewage, the pandemic h1n1 virus was not detected . furthermore, environmental surveillance of polio in wastewater has been utilised since the 1980s, years before when the term "wastewater-based epidemiology" was coined, with finland (hovi et al., 2012) israel (roberts, 2013) and senegal (ndiaye et al., 2014) all successfully analysing sewage samples in order to assess polio circulating within populations. who have also released guidelines for employing environmental sampling to monitor polio in wastewater samples (world health organisation, 2003) .the complexity of a wastewater matrix is not only challenging for the extraction and quantification of chemical compounds, similar problems are apparent for biological biomarkers. composition of wastewater contains a diverse range of pcr inhibitors including fats, proteins and humic and fulvic acids, which can cause problems later during downstream processing during pcr. the availability of different commercial extraction kits for dna/rna has demonstrated sometimes variable efficiencies and consistencies when extracting from pcr inhibitor rich samples, including wastewater and sediments (mumy and findlay, 2004; walden et al., 2017) . this results in challenges when making meaningful comparisons across different studies and in establishing spatial and temporal trends. however, advancements of molecular biology techniques offer new routes for the analysis of genetic material, including digital pcr (dpcr) and next generation sequencing techniques. in dpcr, the absolute quantification of target genes is calculated using poisson distribution statistics via the partitioning of dna/rna samples into tens and thousands of reaction wells. due to this partitioning effect, pcr inhibitory substances have demonstrated to have less of an effect in environmental samples, including wastewater, when analysed via dpcr (rački et al., 2014) . critical evaluation of dpcr and its suitability for certain sample types have been discussed by salipante et al (salipante and jerome, 2020) .next generation sequencing is another promising technology, providing a wealth of information on the complex microbial communities in samples, including identification of the diverse range of pathogens and resistance genes present. in particular, analysis of the viruses and resistance genes present via metagenomics has been highlighted as providing potentially key information on novel pathogens as well as re-emerging infectious diseases and amr (aarestrup and woolhouse, 2020; fernandez-cassi et al., 2018) . whilst standardisation of protocols of metagenomics remain a challenge, the continued advancements in the technology combined with decreasing costs sequencing have the potential to revolutionise both pathogen and resistance surveillance in wastewater.protein based inflammation biomarkers represent a vital group of endogenous markers. urine proteomics has attracted much interest in the last decade as has been evidenced to contain an abundant source of proteins. urine for diagnosis purposes is desirable not only due to the noninvasive nature of testing but because of the previously untapped source of potential disease and health biomarkers (zhao et al., 2017) . some which could be sensitive to changes in the body and could be early indicators of disease. whilst only a handful of proteins are currently utilised in clinics, it has been previously highlighted that this is not a limitation for wbe, as purposes here are not for diagnostic analysis (daughton, 2018) . urinary inflammation biomarkers that are indicative of inflammation include c-reactive proteins (crp) and interleukins including il-6 and il-8, have been highlighted as promising candidates for use in wbe . urinary crp levels are routinely utilised in clinics and in human biomonitoring studies, e.g. to investigate renal function abnormalities within a population . other proteins that have previously been suggested for wbe include vitamin d binding proteins, which are prognostic biomarkers for kidney disease due to their significantly elevated levels occurring in the urine of infected individuals (daughton, 2018) .increased interest into urine proteomics for non-invasive clinical tests is a growing area and with it will bring greater understanding of the proteins present in urine. whilst it is widely considered that proteomics in wbe would offer invaluable new insight into public health of communities, the analysis of proteins in wastewater however is still underexplored . the extraction and analysis of these larger biomolecules from wastewater poses new analytical challenges due to the complexity of the matrix, and questions regarding stability of proteins in the sewage systems are yet to be investigated.biomarkers of intervention encompass pharmaceuticals used to treat infectious diseases or ones used to lessen the symptoms. as previously mentioned wbe has been successful at monitoring drug usage, and as many infectious diseases are seasonal, there are potentially interesting opportunities for trends to be established in wastewater. regarding antibiotics, a handful of studies have demonstrated seasonal patterns for several antibiotics, including clarithromycin, erythromycin and ciprofloxacin with higher loads typically observed over winter (coutu et al., 2013; golovko et al., 2014) . this is in line with the use of these antibiotics for respiratory infections where cases tend to peak in winter-early spring. in areas where prescription data is not widely available or antimicrobial medications can be bought over the counter with ease, wbe could provide a route for monitoring antimicrobial usage within a community which otherwise might go unobserved.with rising rates of amr, the importance of understanding consumption habits in a community is critical, one of the major advantages of wbe is the potential to distinguish differences between prescription and consumption of a pharmaceutical. investigating ratios of parent compounds to respective metabolites or ratios between compound enantiomers in wastewater can inform on whether levels have originated from human excretion or from direct disposal of a pharmaceutical into the sewage system (petrie et al., 2016) . furthermore the availability of pharmacokinetics data and excretion rates can allow back calculation to the estimated amounts of a pharmaceutical that a population has ingested (zuccato et al., 2008) . this ability to distinguish between prescribed, disposed and consumed is important as just because a pharmaceutical is prescribed does not necessarily mean it is used. delayed prescribing is a strategy by which a general practitioner (gp) will make a prescription available but will ask the patient to delay from using in order to see if symptoms improve first. the initiative has been evidenced to successfully reduce antibiotic usage in a handful of countries, including new zealand, norway and england (spurling et al., 2013) . the use of wbe could therefore give valuable insight into the amounts of antimicrobials a population has actually consumed.however, whilst the analysis of parent compounds to metabolites provides valuable community usage data, the analysis of antibiotic metabolites tends to be overlooked in wastewater analysis, with parent antibiotics typically focused on.with regards to resistance, further research is needed to understand how antibiotic usage in communities is impacting the bacterial communities in wwtps. it is well recognised that wwtps are hotspots for resistance but the long term effects of exposing microbes to subinhibitory concentrations of antibiotics in wastewater streams is not well understood (andersson and hughes, 2014; michael et al., 2013) . . when compared to antibiotics, the prescription pattern of antivirals can differ as they are often less commonly prescribed on a day-to-day basis. for example, antivirals like tamiflu® and relenza®, are stockpiled globally and are then deployed during pandemic periods which can result in high proportion of a community taking the drug in a short time window which is reflected in wastewater (singer et al., 2007) . during the h1n1 influenza virus pandemic in 2009, tamiflu® (oseltamivir phosphate) was heavily prescribed globally in response. it has been reported that oseltamivir carboxylate, a biologically active and persistent metabolite of oseltamivir phosphate, was observed in surface waters during peaks of the outbreak . this was due to increased loads of the metabolite in wastewater, which is widely known to not be readily removed by conventional wwtps.the monitoring of drugs like antivirals and their metabolites not only informs upon drug compliance and the progression of an outbreak at the community level, but like with antibiotics, could provide critical information with regards to resistance. the presence of these drugs or their metabolised forms in low levels in the environment could cause irreversible effects to the viral genome resulting in resistant effects. for example, it has been highlighted the guts of wildfowl could be potential oseltamivir carboxylate-resistance hotspots due to exposure to the metabolite in surface waters (singer et al., 2007) . the rapid spreading of the h1n1 virus and the ease of which viruses can become resistant to antivirals stress the importance of populationwide surveillance tools and again the importance of combining chemical analysis with biological. furthermore, whilst a number of antiviral drugs have been detected in water bodies, there is still a knowledge gap of understanding the environmental impacts their presence has in wastewater streams, especially as they tend to pass through wwtp unchanged (jain et al., 2013) .markers of antimicrobial resistance are another group of key biological biomarkers. the however, it is generally recognised that the relationship between antibiotic concentrations and resistance in wastewater is complex with further studies needed. furthermore, focus tends to be upon more common antibiotics resistances, such as sulphonamides, tetracyclines and quinolones, hence there is still a knowledge gap regarding other antimicrobial classes of amr genes, including those associated with antifungal resistance. the effects of seasonality upon args in wastewater is another underexplored area, though caucci et al. reported strong seasonal abundances of args within wastewater, with higher levels observed in autumn andwinter which coincided with increased antibiotic prescribing in those months (caucci et al., 2016) .further work is needed to consolidate the impacts of antimicrobial prescribing at the community level on the abundance of args in wastewater, particularly if this is to be utilised for epidemiology purposes. establishing this link is recognised as challenging as several factors will potentially influence the abundance of args in sewers other than the selective pressures from antimicrobials being prescribed. for example the environmental conditions in sewers has been shown to potentially impact arg abundance, including temperature, metal pollutants and changes in composition of microbial communities (jiao et al., 2018; novo et al., 2013; sun et al., 2016) .as with many other scientific innovations, wbe is not immune to misuse and misrepresentation. as wbe does not collect data on individuals, the ethical risks are low.however, it will be necessary to manage privacy issues and the potential for stigmatisation of certain societal groups. the ethical aspects of wbe for pharmaceuticals have been discussed elsewhere ((http://score-cost.eu/ethical-guidelines-for-wbe/)). it is generally accepted that populations over >10,000 is enough to give anonymity and will pose no risk to smaller groups of people. this is also relevant in the case of publications to reduce any risk of media misinterpreting the publication's finding.expanding wbe to include infectious diseases will pose new challenges to the ethical considerations, particularly with regards to disease outbreaks. with regards to pathogen monitoring in wastewater, population size will be important. it has been highlighted by who for the case of monitoring polio in wastewater that large populations may decrease sample sensitivity and therefore sampling from subgroups may be required (world health organisation, 2003) . as infectious diseases, such as polio, spread rapidly in urban areas, the sampling of subgroups might also provide faster interventions by public health authorities.however, sampling from smaller subgroups in cities could lead to stigmatism of vulnerable groups.furthermore, outbreaks and the subsequent handling of them will differ between developing and developed countries due to the availability of resources and the quality of health and regulatory infrastructures in place. however, any outbreak, regardless of geographic location are fragile situations. thus, care must be taken in the reporting of diseases being investigated within a community and social understanding of the situations will be crucial. for example, fear-trigged behaviours have been attributed as one of the major contributing factors to the spread of ebola in western africa (shultz et al., 2016) . these can be appropriately adapted to different social, economic and epidemiological circumstances. as wbe continues to expand in the direction of disease monitoring, ethics should be considered and developed alongside. ethics guidelines will need to be adaptable, and consider factors such geographic location, population and the biomarkers to be monitored to enable further development of this field.it is widely acknowledged that effective surveillance systems are key for the rapid intervention and control of infectious disease outbreaks. there is also a requirement for population-wide -non-existent biomarker discovery pipeline for both chemical and biological markers -lack of analytical tools for cost-effective, sensitive, selective and multi-residue analysis of wide-ranging biomarker groups spanning from genes through to proteins and whole microorganisms. (cadarette and wong, 2015) human biomonitoringassess an environmental exposure of a toxininformation received detailed and of high quality can assess suspected exposure of an individual if collected repeatedly can build up exposure pattern over time.small focus groupmight not be representative of a large population selection of control group is challenging lengthy ethical considerations, samples collected must be used for specific research projectfurther approval and consent needed for new analysis needham et al., 2007) wastewaterbased epidemiologyassess exposure to chemicals at the community levelcapable of spatial and temporal trends data in near-real time (potential for real time with biosensors) information given on whole population ethical considerations, does not require approval depending on size of urban area selection of biomarkers can be challenging biomarker stability in wastewater uncertainties related to contributing population and wastewater flows significant time-lag between data collection and analysis estimation of community-wide infectious disease spread and resistancet he ongoing outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), identified as the causative agent of the corona virus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , rapidly spreads to cause a global pandemic and poses a huge challenge for global public health. 1−3 sars-cov-2 can spread rapidly through direct human-to-human transmission resulting in high infectivity. 4 the indefinite latency and nonspecific symptoms of sars-cov-2 infection makes the pandemic situation more serious. 5−8 considering the seriously increasing number of infected cases and widening geographical spread of sars-cov-2, and when in absence of effective antiviral therapeutics and vaccines for covid-19, there is an urgent need for easy-to-use, high-throughput, timely, accessible, and on-site methods for rapidly and sensitively detecting sars-cov-2 infection at an early stage for responses against the ongoing coronavirus outbreak and prevent and control the pandemic. 9−11 reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) is the primary method for the diagnosis of sars-cov-2. 4,12−14 however, rt-pcr requires time-consuming and laborintensive rna preparation, a reverse transcription step, and professional operation, which decreases detection sensitivity and is difficult to achieve on-site detection. computed tomography (ct) imaging is an essential tool for fast diagnosis of sars-cov-2. 15, 16 while the specialized equipment of ct fails to meet a large scale of requirement, it may not provide the benefit for point-of-care diagnosis of covid-19. various enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa)-based methods have been developed for sars-cov-2 diagnosis. 17 for example, the extensively utilized colloidal gold-immunochromatographic assays 18 and lateral flow immunochromatographic assays (lfas) 19, 20 offer an immunoassay method for detecting covid-19, which show the advantages of simplicity, costeffectiveness, fast, and point-of-care testing. still, there are remaining limitations such as limited sensitivity and incapability of quantitative detection.microfluidics-based diagnostic systems have been extensively developed and applied in various fields. 21−23 microfluidic technologies are able to integrate sample preparation, reaction, and detection steps into a miniaturized chip. microfluidicsbased platform offers many advantages: (1) it enables rapid, laboratory-quality, sensitive detection at the point of need; (2) portability, high throughput, multiplex, and automatic; (3) it significantly saves the volume of reagents and reduces the testing price. 24 the determination of specific antibodies (such as immunoglobulin g/m, igg/m) and antigen is an easy, fast, reliable, and accessible strategy for the diagnosis of sars-cov-2 as well as efficient and large-scale screening of suspected cases at point-of-care settings. 25, 26 the detection of igg and igm in serum or whole blood has been demonstrated to be a reliable method for diagnosing covid-19 with high specificity and sensitivity. 18, 27 additionally, detecting sars-cov-2 antigen protein in nasopharyngeal swab samples has exhibited outstanding advantages in clinical testing. 26 to meet the challenge of the large epidemic, we describe the development of a point-of-care microfluidic platform integrating a homemade fluorescence detection analyzer ( figure 1a ), sars-cov-2 diagnostic microchips ( figure 1b) , and multiple immunoassays ( figure 1c ) for detecting three biomarkers (igg, igm, and antigen). the microchip fluorescence detector ( figure 1a ) measuring 28 cm × 22 cm × 14 cm and weighing 3.8 kg integrates centrifugation, fluorescence detection, and result display function, which is portable for use in the field. this proposed platform allowed analysis of three samples or biomarkers on the fluorescence detector simultaneously. the simple and low-cost microchip (length × width × height, 55 mm × 35 mm × 5.2 mm) ( figure 1b and figure s1 ) was designed and fabricated by assembling top and bottom plates (made of polycarbonate) that sandwich the middle layer containing the sample analysis channel (made of double-sided adhesive tape). the microchip is composed of a sample loading chamber, a waste reservoir, and a fluorescence immunoassay fluid channel comprising a capture region and test region. figure 1c describes the lab-on-a-chip fluorescence immunoassay for detecting three biomarkers of sars-cov-2. the combination of multiple biomarker detection offers outstanding performance such as improving the sensitivity and accuracy for sars-cov-2 diagnosis. the preparation of the immunoassay microchip for detecting igg, igm, and antigen of sars-cov-2 was achieved by matrix nanospotting, which is listed in the supporting information. the cost of a ready-touse immunoassay microchip is only about 5 yuan (0.71 dollar). when 10 μl of specimen (blood, serum, plasma, pharyngeal swabs, alveolar lavage fluid, or fecal suspension) is added into the loading chamber of the microchip followed by the addition of 70 μl of sample dilution buffer, the biomarker of sars-cov-2 (igg/igm/antigen) can specifically bind to the fluorescent microsphere (fms) labeled capture antibody. due to the large nanoscale of fms, the antigen−antibody complexes are easily migrated with the flow under the capillary effect. then the "antigen−antibody complexes" are immobilized on the fluorescence test region through a second "antigen−antibody" affinity interaction with sars-cov-2 antigen or detection antibody. if the specimen does not include sars-cov-2 biomarkers, no fms-labeled complexes bind on the test region. after 10 min, immunoassay chips are placed in the portable fluorescence analyzer followed by 10 s centrifugation to remove the residual liquid in the channel into the waste chamber. finally, the fluorescence detection results are read and obtained from the analyzer. the whole assay only takes less than 15 min. this robust microfluidic immunoassay system can provide a useful tool for sars-cov-2 diagnosis in public health laboratories as well as for timely screening potentially infected patients to monitor and prevent the epidemic owning to its capability of easy, fast, cost-effective, and point-of-care detection. moreover, this multiple detection system contributes to enhancing the accuracy and sensitivity of the detection.this sample-to-answer microfluidic immunoassay platform for multiple biomarkers detection was initially determined by clinical samples from confirmed covid-19 patients and healthy samples. all clinical specimens were collected and tested in shanghai east hospital (affiliated east hospital of tongji university, shanghai, china). figure 2a and 2b, respectively, show the fluorescence immunoassay detection results of igg in serum samples from 2 patients and 10 healthy people. we can observe that there is a significant difference between the infected patients and healthy people by comparing their final fluorescence value obtained from peak fluorescence intensity minus background fluorescence intensity, which was defined as the t value, and the t value could be automatically read from the analyzer ( figure 2c , p < 0.0001, using the mann−whitney no parametric test). figure 2d −f illustrates the similar detection results of igm in serum samples from 9 patients and 7 healthy people. the antigen testing results from nasopharyngeal swabs also exhibited an obvious distinction between 10 patients and 9 healthy people ( figure 2g−i) . these results proved the feasibility of the developed method. the cutoff values for igg, igm, and antigen detection were determined as 200 (t value), 200, and 100, respectively, according to these results. it was also found that the fluorescence values of serum samples from covid-19 patients ( figure 2b ,e) were significantly higher than the detection results of pharyngeal swab samples ( figure 2h ), which is probably because of the different levels of these biomarkers' concentrations between serum samples and pharyngeal swab "+" represents positive, 200−500; "++" represents medium positive, 500−1500; "+++" represents strong positive, >1500; "−" represents negative, <200). samples. these results indicated that it was more easy and sensitive to diagnose sars-cov-2 infection via serum samples than pharyngeal swab samples. the performance of the microfluidic diagnosis system was evaluated for monitoring the progression of sars-cov-2 infection by igg and igm testing. the testing results are summarized in table 1 results; only one false negative result of patient 2 was found for the igm test, which is probably because the igm level had not significantly increased on the 2nd day of infection. these results demonstrated that this immunoassay platform had a high sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of covid-19, which provides a rapid approach to adequately meet the urgent need for the ongoing global outbreak management of sars-cov-2.the proposed method was further evaluated by dividing the sars-cov-2 infection into three stages according to the patient's infection time. as shown in figure 3a , the t value for igg was increasing when the patients' infection time was changed from stage 1 (infected 1−7 days) to stage 3 (infected over 14 days). such a growth trend was also observed when detecting igm in serum from covid-19 patients ( figure 3b ). these findings further proved that the microchip immunoassay could not only accurately identify between sars-cov-2infected and uninfected cases but also roughly discriminate the severity of the patient's infection development with high sensitivity and reliability. the proposed microfluidic immunoassay exhibits the comparable superiority with the traditional colloidal gold-immunochromatographic assay method for sars-cov-2 detection, 18 such as easy-to-use, low cost, and point-of-care detection. moreover, our method offers the ability of sensitive, multiple, and quantitative detection based on fluorescence intensity (t value), which shows promising applications for covid-19 diagnosis. our method has been approved by the center for medical device evaluation (cmde) in china and obtained european ce certification.in conclusion, this study successfully developed a multiple detection tool for diagnosis of sars-cov-2, which integrated diagnostic microchips, a homemade portable fluorescence detector, and a microfluidic immunoassay approach. the multiple-testing platform was demonstrated to be easy-to-use, rapid, portable, and highly sensitive for point-of-care detection of sars-cov-2 within 15 min. the novel integrated diagnostic tool holds great promise for applications in sars-cov-2 pandemic monitoring and control. meanwhile, this sample-to-answer system is expected to be readily applicable for quantitative and sensitive detection of biomarkers of many diseases.the supporting information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.analchem.0c01635. figure s1 , scheme of microchip for fluorescence immunoassay; experimental section including materials, conjugation of fluorescent microspheres with capture antibodies, preparation of the immunoassay microchip, and immunoassays on a microchip (pdf)corresponding authorsbeing infected and 774 deaths (1 ) . the pneumonia and accompanying adult respiratory distress syndrome can be rapidly progressive and can lead to death (2, 3 ) . the most commonly used laboratory diagnostic tests for sars-cov infection are reverse transcription-pcr (rt-pcr) for respiratory, rectal, or stool samples and anti-sars-cov antibody serologic studies (4, 5 ) , but they do not appear to have a role in monitoring pneumonia. although serial chest radiographs are helpful for monitoring the progress of disease (6, 7 ) , more objective markers have not been well described. in this study, we analyzed the serum proteins in sars patients by a powerful proteomics technology, surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (seldi-tof ms) (8 -11 ) , or in short, protein chip array profiling, in an attempt to identify biomarkers that were differentially increased or decreased in sars patients and to subsequently investigate the possible roles of these biomarkers in disease monitoring.serum samples from 28 sars patients managed in the department of medicine, queen elizabeth hospital, hong kong, were studied. the diagnoses of all patients were confirmed by a positive rt-pcr test for sars-cov rna or anti-sars-cov antibody serologic test. the clinical pictures of this cohort of patients were similar to those reported in the literature. most patients (87%) had abnormal chest radiographs on admission, and some (13%) presented early such that high-resolution thoracic computer tomography (ct) scanning was required to confirm the presence of pulmonary involvement. patients were initially managed with broad-spectrum antibiotics and supportive therapy. after the diagnosis of clinical sars was made and if there was no response to antibiotic therapy, combination therapy with ribavirin (400 mg intravenously every 8 h) and systemic steroids [intravenous hydrocortisone (200 mg) every 6 -8 h or intravenous methylprednisolone (3 mg ⅐ kg ϫ1 ⅐ day ϫ1 )] was initiated. the latter would be continued in a tailing manner for a total of 21 days. intravenous pulse methylprednisolone, in a daily dose of 500 mg to 1 g for 2-3 days, would be initiated when the clinical condition, radiologic presentation, or oxygen saturation status deteriorated (at least for two of the three). the clinical characteristics, detailed management plan, and treatment regimen of this cohort of patients were described in a previous publication (2 ) .forty-four serum samples were available from 24 sars patients for initial expression differential mapping of serum proteins by protein chip array profiling to identify biomarkers that were differentially increased or decreased in the patients. in addition, 45 serial samples were available from four additional sars patients with comprehensive clinical follow-up. seventy-two sera from 51 patients suffering from infections by influenza a virus (12 sera from 6 patients), influenza b virus (8 sera from 4 patients), respiratory adenovirus (12 sera from 6 patients), respiratory syncytial virus (10 sera from 5 patients), hepatitis b virus (10 sera from 10 patients), mycobacterium tuberculosis (10 sera from 10 patients), and various other bacteria (with positive bacterial culture; 10 sera from 10 patients) plus 10 sera from 10 apparently healthy individuals who attended a familial nasopharyngeal cancer screening clinic but were shown to have no malignancy served as negative controls for this study. the sera were collected and aliquoted for various routine laboratory tests. remaining sera were kept frozen at ϫ70°c until protein chip array profiling analysis was performed.the severity and extent of pneumonia in the four sars patients with longitudinal follow-up were assessed by a radiologist, who was "blinded" to the clinical manifestations, using a serial chest radiographic score derived initially to assess computer tomography of the chest (6 ) . briefly, the frontal chest x-ray radiograph was divided into six lung zones (left upper zone, left middle zone, left lower zone, right upper zone, right middle zone, and right lower zone), with the upper zone representing the area above the carina (including the apex), the middle zone from the carina to the level of inferior pulmonary veins, and the lower zone from the lower margin of the middle zone to the lung base. the opacity in each lung zone was scored by a "coarse semiquantitative method" with a five-point scale of grades 0 -4 representing involved areas of 0%, 5-24%, 25-49%, 50 -74%, and 75-100%, respectively. the grading from each of the six lung zones was then added to provide a 0 -24 point summation scale.the proteins in the sars and control sera were first fractionated by use of anion-exchange q-hyper d ceramic resin (ciphergen biosystems) in 96-well silent screen filter plates (with a pore size of 0.45 m). briefly, the resin was prepared by washing with five bed volumes of 50 mmol/l tris-hcl (ph 9) three times and then equilibrated in the filter plate with 200 l/well of 50 mmol/l tris-hcl buffer containing 1 mol/l urea and 2.2 g/l chaps (1 mol/l urea buffer). sera were then removed from the ϫ70°c freezer and thawed, and 20 l of each serum was denatured by adding 30 l of 50 mmol/l tris-hcl buffer containing 9 mol/l urea and 20 g/l chaps with vortex-mixing for 20 min at 4°c. this sample mixture was then loaded in each well of the filter plate, and 50 l of 1 mol/l urea buffer was added. the plate was shaken on an orbital shaker for 30 min at 4°c and centrifuged, with a collection plate placed underneath, at 300g for 1 min to collect the flow-through fraction. we then added 100 l of 50 mmol/l tris-hcl buffer containing 1 g/l n-octyl-␤-d-glucopyranoside (ogp) at ph 9 (ph 9 washing buffer) to the plate and rinsed the resin under vigorous vortex-mixing on an orbital shaker for 10 min; the rinse was then collected by centrifugation and mixed together with the previously flow-through fraction. fractionation was then repeated similarly with a ph 7 washing buffer (100 mmol/l sodium phosphate containing 1 g/l ogp at ph 7), a ph 5 washing buffer (100 mmol/l sodium acetate containing 1 g/l ogp at ph 5), a ph 4 washing buffer (100 mmol/l sodium acetate containing 1 g/l ogp at ph 4), a ph 3 washing buffer (50 mmol/l sodium citrate containing 1 g/l ogp at ph 3), and finally an organic washing buffer (333 ml/l isopropanol, 167 ml/l acetonitrile, and 1 ml/l trifluoroacetic acid). the six resulting serum anionexchange fractions (f1-f6, representing the flow-through fraction at ph 9; the fractions at ph 7, ph 5, ph 4, and ph 3; and the organic fraction, respectively) were frozen at ϫ70°c until chip binding was initiated.the six serum fractions were then profiled on a copper(ii) immobilized metal affinity capture [imac cu(ii)] proteinchip ® array and a weak cation-exchange (cm10) proteinchip array according to the instruction manual from ciphergen biosystems incorporation. a pretreatment step is required for imac cu(ii) chips but not for cm10 chips. briefly, the imac cu(ii) chips were loaded on a bioprocessor, and to each spot of the chips was added 50 l of 100 mmol/l cuso 4 buffer. the chips were vortex-mixed vigorously and rinsed with distilled water, after which 50 l of 100 mmol/l sodium acetate buffer was added to the chips with strong vortex-mixing to remove the unbound copper. the chips were then rinsed with water and equilibrated with a chip binding buffer (100 mmol/l sodium phosphate buffer, ph 7, containing 0.5 mol/l nacl). we added 80 and 90 l of the chip binding buffer to each spot of the imac cu(ii) and cm10 chips, respectively; we then added 20 and 10 l of the serum fraction to the imac cu(ii) and cm10 chips, respectively, followed by vigorous vortex-mixing for 30 min at room temperature. the chips were then washed twice with 150 l of the chip binding buffer with vortexmixing for 5 min each. they were then washed twice with 200 l of distilled water. one microliter of an energyabsorbing molecule, sinapinic acid in 500 ml/l acetonitrile-5 ml/l trifluoroacetic acid, was applied twice to each spot, with the chip being air-dried for 10 min between applications. the chips were read in a protein biological system iic mass spectrometer reader (ciphergen biosystems incorporation), and the time-of-flight spectra were generated by, on average, 338 laser shots per sample. mass accuracy was calibrated externally by use of the all-in-1 peptide molecular mass standard (ciphergen biosystems incorporation). all controls were run concurrently and intermingled with the patients' samples on the same chip and on multiple chips.variability analyses were also performed to analyze spot-to-spot and chip-to-chip variations in the imac cu(ii) and cm10 chips. briefly, reference serum samples were repeatedly bound to four different spots on four different chips, using ion-exchange serum fractions 1, 3, and 6 (f1, f3, and f6) for imac cu(ii) chips and fractions 1 and 4 (f1 and f4) for cm10 chips. the pooled cvs for peaks with signal-to-noise ratios ͼ5 in the mass range of 2-200 kda were calculated.the protein chip profiling spectra from all serum samples were collected and analyzed by ciphergen proteinchip software 3.0.2 (12 ) . the mass range of 2-200 kda was analyzed with molecules from 0 to 2000 da being eliminated because artifacts produced by the energy-absorbing molecule and other chemical contaminants usually lie at this mass range. the peaks were baseline-subtracted, calibrated on mass accuracy, detected, and clustered automatically by the analysis software. in the biomarker wizard mode, the normalized peak height (or intensity) of each peak detected in sera from sars patients was compared with that in the control groups by a nonparametric two-sample mann-whitney u-test (13 ) to identify the peaks that were significantly increased or decreased in sars patients. briefly, this was done by operation in two passes with the first pass detecting major well-defined peaks that were different between the sars and control groups and the second pass defining the remaining small peaks that differed between the groups, using a criterion of a twofold or greater difference in peak height after data normalization in the two groups. the normalized peak intensities in the sars patients with longitudinal follow-up were also correlated with the chest x-ray opacity score and other clinical manifestations.for protein identification, we subjected fraction 1 from the ion-exchange filtrate of the sars sera to further purification by use of immobilized copper ion spin columns (ida-cu hypercel; ciphergen biosystems). the bound proteins were eluted by boiling in sample loading buffer for sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (sds-page). the eluted antigens were then resolved by sds-page in a 4 -12% gradient gel (nu-page; invitrogen), and a protein band at ϳ11.6 kda in the gel was excised (14 ) . this protein band was then subjected to overnight tryptic digestion in a reaction volume of 20 l of 50 mmol/l ammonium bicarbonate buffer, ph 8.0, containing 1 pmole of trypsin (15 ) . subsequently, 2 l of the digestion mixture was analyzed on a normal phase proteinchip array (np20). ␣-cyano-4hydroxycinnamic acid (ciphergen biosystems) was used to facilitate desorption/ionization of the peptides generated from the tryptic digest. the masses of the tryptic digested peptides were measured by the proteinchip reader and were used for initial protein identification from the profound database available on the internet clinical chemistry 51, no. 1, 2005 http://prowl.rockefeller.edu/. the identity of the protein was further confirmed by tandem mass spectrometry (ms/ms) fragmentation analysis of five major peptides (at molecular masses of 1455.8, 1550.8, 1611.9, 1640.9, and 1941.1 da) generated from the tryptic digest on a abi q-star tm quadrupole tandem mass spectrometer equipped with a ciphergen proteinchip interface (pci-1000) as described previously (16 ) . fragmentation of each peptide generated a set of ms/ms ion fingerprint, which was then entered into a mass spectrometry database search engine, mascot (http://www.matrixscience. com/), to find the closest match with known proteins as reported previously (17 ) . a probability-based mowse score ͼ33 thus generated indicates that the ms/ms ion profile matched with good homology a known protein in the database with a p value ͻ0.05, whereas a score of 90 represents matching with a known protein with almost absolute identity.more than 1000 biomarkers were resolved by protein chip array profiling of six fractions of anion-exchange filtrates from each sars patient's serum. fig. 1 shows the gel view of part of the profiling results for sars patients in conjunction with the control patients in the molecular size range of 2000 -15 000 da. three serum biomarker clusters (a, b, and c in fig. 1 ) with differential expression in sars patients vs the controls were observed, with the cluster at 11 695 da (cluster a) being increased in sars patients and the remaining two clusters at 9159 and 7784 da (clusters b and c) being decreased. analyzing the whole serum biomarker profile, we identified nine biomarkers (at molecular sizes of 4922, 5104, 5215, 5833, 10 867, 11 508, 11 695, 11 871, and 14 715 da, respectively) that were significantly increased and three (at molecular sizes of 7784, 8416, and 9159 da) that were significantly decreased in sars patients vs the control infection groups and apparently healthy individuals (table 1 ). further analysis of the distribution of the relative peak intensities of the biomarker at 11 695 da showed significant increases in sars patients against each individual control infection group or healthy individuals (fig. 2) .to investigate whether the protein chip profiling results were consistent and reproducible, we tested the ionexchange fractions from a reference serum on four different spots on the same chip (for spot-to-spot variability) and on the same spot on four different chips (chip-to-chip variability; see table 1 in the data supplement that accompanies the online version of this article at http:// www.clinchem.org/content/vol50/issue12/). the cvs of the mean intensities of various peaks on imac cu(ii) chips and cm10 chips were determined. the chip-to-chip cvs for imac cu(ii) chips varied from 1% to 16% for the small and large mass ranges, whereas the spot-to-spot cvs varied from 1% to 14%. cm10 chips had relatively higher variabilities, with chip-to-chip cvs of 9 -24% and spot-to-spot cvs of 8 -26%. however, these variabilities were within a reasonable range for us to compare the peak intensities between the sars and control groups and to correlate the peak intensities of a biomarker at 11 695 da with clinical manifestations and radiographic scores in sars patients.to characterize the nature of the biomarker at 11 695 da, we subjected the protein band at ϳ11.7 kda, as resolved by sds-page, to tryptic digestion to generate a series of peptide fragments (fig. 3a) . when we submitted these peptide fragments to the profound database search engine, it matched with 100% probability to human serum amyloid a protein (saa) as the first choice. saa had a matching probability of 1, with the second choice, a human hypothetical protein (xp_299056), having a probability of 8.9 ϫ 10 ϫ6 . to further confirm the identity of saa, we performed separate fragmentation analyses, in a tandem mass spectrometer, on each of the five peptides generated by the tryptic digestion of the 11.7-kda protein. fig. 3b is one ms/ms ion fingerprint generated from the peptide at 1550.8 da (fig. 3a) . when we entered the ion fingerprint from this peptide into a mass spectrometry search engine database, mascot, it gave a mowse score of 90, which indicated almost absolute identity with human saa, further confirming the tryptic mapping findings. ion fingerprints from the remaining four peptides also confirmed saa as the predominant protein (data not shown).with saa being identified as one of the predominantly increased biomarkers in sars patients, we correlated its concentrations with the clinical findings and serial chest radiographic scores in four sars patients as follows:cov infection was diagnosed, the radiographic score of the first patient under longitudinal follow-up started to increase from a value of 6 to a peak of 16 and then gradually decreased to 12, 9, and finally to 4, demonstrating a progressive recovery (fig. 1 in the online data supplement). the saa concentration by protein chip profiling showed an increase that peaked earlier than the radiographic score but then also gradually decreased along with the radiographic score to a nadir when the patient was discharged.the second patient had clinical sars symptoms with the sars-cov infection subsequently confirmed by rt-pcr. on treatment, her radiographic score remained high initially but then decreased with her progressive recovery (fig. 2 in the online data supplement). protein chip profiling also revealed that the saa concentration increased initially but soon decreased similarly to the radiographic score. the saa peak also preceded the score.the third patient had typical clinical sars symptoms with the viral disease confirmed by paired serum anti-sars-cov antibody tests performed twice. the clinical course after treatment was uneventful with a low radiographic score, which later decreased to zero. the saa concentration was low throughout the monitoring period (fig. 3 in the online data supplement). despite treatment, the pneumonic condition of the fourth patient remained severe, with high radiographic scores after 3 days of treatment. her saa concentrations began to increase as well and were further increased on diagnosis of superimposed bacterial infections (fig. 4 in the online data supplement). a subsequent decrease in the saa concentration was observed after initiation of antibiotic treatment, although it remained significantly increased thereafter. the patient still harbored the virus as indicated by positive rt-pcr from various sources. the radiographic score remained high until she later died of the disease.conventional cov usually causes mild and self-limiting cold-like symptoms but rarely severe lower respiratory tract infection (18 ) . in contrast, sars-cov can give rise to rapidly progressing pneumonia and can be associated with a significantly high mortality rate (2, 3 ) . most sars patients develop pulmonary infiltrates within 48 h of onset of disease (19 ) , usually in the form of focal and unilateral consolidation in the peripheral regions of the lung (20 ) . the consolidation usually clears quickly, but a small proportion of patients progress to bilateral consolidation with extensive pneumonic involvement and protracted clinical course (7 ) . serial chest radiographs are helpful in the diagnosis and monitoring of the clinical course (6, 7 ) , but their interpretation can be confounded by a lack of available experienced radiologists, by interobserver variability, and by the frequently suboptimal quality of portable films taken in isolation wards to avoid the spread of infections to other patients.sars-cov antibody is usually increased at a later stage of disease (21 ) and is therefore not a good marker for monitoring the extent of disease. with a high titer being predictive of the need for intensive care, it has been suggested that quantitative real-time rt-pcr to determine the viral load (22 ) may have prognostic value (23 ) . however, its use in monitoring the disease is probably limited or at least unclear because the lung damage in sars appears to be more related to immunopathologic consequences of host response than to virus replication (22 ) . it has also been suggested that lymphopenia or t-cell lymphopenia, a fairly common occurrence in sars patients (24, 25 ) , might potentially be a marker for disease activity. however, the presence of other superimposed viral or bacterial infections, as well as the effects of treatment with steroids and intravenous immunoglobulins, might also affect the lymphocyte counts, making them less ideal for monitoring the disease activity of sars.a high serum lactate dehydrogenase concentration has been reported to be associated with an adverse patient outcome (26 ) with concentrations peaking at the height of the disease and decreasing to within reference values on remission and after discharge (27 ) . because this enzyme can originate from many sources, such as the heart, skeletal muscles, erythrocytes, and liver, its increase might also be attributable to disease conditions in these organs or disease complications such as rhabdomyolysis (28 ) and hemolytic anemia after ribavirin treatment (27, 29 ) . hence, a change in lactate dehydrogenase activity might not be specific enough for monitoring the disease.modern mass spectrometry has revolutionized proteomics studies by enabling rapid resolution of ͼ1000 biomarkers from a single serum sample. a large number of samples can also be processed within a short period of time. seldi-tof ms, or protein chip profiling, has further advanced the technology by combining mass spectrometry with a surface-enhanced biochip, which allows uniform and reproducible binding and desorption of biomarkers so that quantitative comparison of individually resolved biomarkers in serially monitored patients is possible (8, 10 ) . using this profiling technology, we found at least 12 serum biomarkers that were differentially increased or decreased in sars patients. among them, an acute-phase protein, saa, was substantially increased in 44 sera from 24 sars patients, in contrast to 72 sera from 51 control patients with different viral or bacterial infec- tions. using a clinically useful chest radiographic score, we found that the saa concentration correlated well with the extent of pneumonia in four patients for whom serial serum samples were available. in the first two patients, this protein was increased, similar to the increase in radiographic score in the active phase of the disease within the first 2 weeks of symptom onset. the slightly earlier peaks in saa concentrations compared with the radiographic scores could perhaps indicate that saa might be an earlier marker in disease activity, although this requires further validation. in the third patient, who had a milder disease course and lesser extent of pneumonic involvement, saa concentrations remained relatively low throughout, indicating that this biomarker correlates well with the severity of disease.as an acute-phase protein synthesized by the liver, saa has been reported to be increased in infectious and arthritic diseases (30 -32 ) and malignancies (33 ) . the increase has been found to be more prominent in some bacterial infections than in non-sars-cov viral infections (30 ) . hence, it is not surprising that the fourth patient demonstrated an increase in saa concentration in the near-terminal part of her illness when there were superimposed bacterial infections, followed by a slight decrease after antibiotics were initiated. this increase was probably additional to the persistent sars-cov infection, as demonstrated by the persistently positive rt-pcr results for samples from various sources and her continuous severe radiologic abnormalities. such an increase in saa was, however, in contrast to the low concentrations of this protein in the tested control viral and bacterial infections (figs. 2 and 3) and probably was a result of the severity of multiple superimposed infections and septicemia in this patient. secondary severe bacterial infection, which can cause high mortality, is not uncommon in sars patients with pneumonia; therefore, increased saa concentrations in the presence of severe secondary infections in sars patients could be an advantage rather than a disadvantage if the aim is to monitor patients for severity of disease.apart from saa, other candidate acute-phase proteins, such as ␣ 1 -acid glycoprotein, ␣ 1 -antitrypsin, haptoglobulin, and c-reactive protein, exist in various mammals (34, 35 ) . saa was found to be more sensitive than c-reactive protein in detecting minor inflammatory stimuli in certain viral infections (30 ) and in noninvasive and early invasive bacterial infections (31 ) . a study of feline disease conditions also showed that saa was the earliest marker induced when compared with ␣ 1 -acid glycoprotein, haptoglobulin, and c-reactive protein (35 ) . this lends support to the possibility that saa might also manifest earlier than the radiographic score, although this remains to be confirmed in subsequent studies.despite various reports on the potential applications of seldi-tof ms for the diagnosis of various diseases, this technology has also been suggested to only detect highabundance proteins such as acute-phase reactants (36 -38 ) . as far as the sars-cov infection is concerned, the major mortality-causing symptom is pneumonia; therefore, the discovery of acute-phase proteins that are strongly associated with pneumonia-related inflammatory events is expected and entirely matches with the theme of this study in pneumonia monitoring. although the individual acute-phase proteins detected in this study may not be absolutely specific to sars-cov infection per se, our preliminary data showed that the seldi analysis showing a distinctive pattern of increase and decrease of these proteins and their variants can distinguish sars from other infectious respiratory diseases very well (data not shown).the precise mechanism for the increase of saa concentrations in sars patients remains to be investigated. pulmonary infiltrates and acute-phase diffuse alveolar damage were frequently found in the sars patients (39, 40 ) . it is also widely known that such infiltrates and diffuse alveolar damage can serve as stimuli for the production and secretion of a variety of inflammatory cytokines. sars patients have been shown to have markedly increased plasma concentrations of two inflammatory cytokines, interleukin-1 (il-1) and il-6 (41 ). knowing that il-1 and il-6 can rapidly induce 1000-fold increases in saa in a synergistic manner (42 ) , it thus perhaps explains the possible rapid induction of this acute-phase reactant at the time of sars cov infection. with the encouraging correlation of saa concentration with the extent of pneumonia and the possible correlation of increases or decreases in the remaining serum biomarkers with disease conditions as well, saa and probably the other biomarkers discussed could be used to monitor disease activity and response to treatment in sars patients.the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) 5 has affected 32 countries and regions. sars has infected more than 8000 people and killed more than 700 (1 ) . since the outbreak, many efforts have been made to understand the nature of the disease. the causative agent for sars was identified to be a human sars coronavirus (sars-cov) (2) (3) (4) . high fever, dry cough, myalgia, and lymphopenia were the most distinctive characteristic symptoms seen in patients with sars. the sars-cov has a rna genome of 30 kb encoding the replicase, spike glycoprotein, envelop protein, membrane protein, and nucleocapsid (2) (3) (4) . early diagnosis is necessary to prevent the spread of the disease through isolation of infected patients. diagnostic tests to detect the presence of either sars antibody or sars-cov rna have been developed (5, 6 ) . quantitative real-time viral rna reverse transcription-pcr assays allow the detection of sars-cov within the first week of illness, whereas antibody tests are reliable around 20 days after disease onset (5, 6 ) .recently, advances in proteomics have provided new strategies to identify biomarkers and therapeutic targets and to study the pathology of diseases. surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization (seldi) proteinchip technology is a proteomic tool that has been applied to the discovery of diagnostic proteomic fingerprints for various diseases, including cancer and infectious diseases (7) (8) (9) . recent studies have shown that this technology could also be used to identify potential biomarkers for early diagnosis of sars (7, 10, 11 ) . in these studies, the control cases were either healthy persons or persons with non-sars viral infections. unfortunately, the degree of similarity of the symptoms between the sars and control groups and the time point of blood collection were not considered in these studies. from the perspective of infectious disease diagnosis, one is not trying to differentiate healthy persons from infected patients, but rather is trying to identify the disease causing the symptoms in patients presenting with similar symptoms (12 ) .bearing in mind the above issues, in the present study we attempted to profile and compare the serum proteomes between sars patients and non-sars patients. the non-sars patients were those who had symptoms similar to those in sars patients. they were admitted to the same hospital as the sars patients and were later shown to be negative for sars-cov infection. furthermore, for both sars and non-sars patients, sera were collected within 1 week after fever onset.the sars group included 13 males and 26 females (mean age, 42 years; range, 21-88 years); the non-sars group included 18 males and 21 females (mean age, 44.4 years; range, 20 -88 years). the serum samples from both sars and non-sars groups represented the first time point after hospitalization (3-7 days after onset of fever); no medications, including steroids, ribavirin, traditional chinese medicine, or intravenous immunoglobulins, had been given to the above patients before blood collection. all of the sars cases were positive in the anti-sars-cov igg antibody serology test. anti-sars-cov igg antibody was detected by an indirect immunofluorescence assay using vero cells that were infected with a strain of cov (genbank accession no. ay278554) isolated from a patient with sars. both the sensitivity and the specificity of this serology test for sars were 100%.the serum sars-cov rna test was performed on 31 patients, and 22 of them (71%) showed detectable sars-cov rna in their serum. for the control group, the 39 non-sars patients (21 with bacterial pneumonia, 1 with aspiratory pneumonia, 2 with acute pulmonary edema, 2 with upper respiratory tract infection, 2 with influenza, 1 with acute bronchitis, 1 with bronchiectasis, 1 with secondary lung cancer, 1 with gastrointestinal bleeding, 1 with acute cholangitis, 1 with infectious mononucleosis, 1 with viral gastroenteritis, 1 with liver abscess, 1 with peritonitis and end stage renal failure, 1 with cellulites, and 1 with thalamic hemorrhage) were those who had symptoms similar to those for the sars patients. they were admitted to the same hospital as the sars patients and were later shown to be negative for sars-cov antibody by a serology test after at least 6 weeks of the onset of symptoms. all biochemical information was collected from the same blood samples. all samples were stored as aliquots at ϫ70°c until proteinchip array profiling analysis was performed.in the seldi proteinchip analysis, the serum samples from the diseased and control groups were randomized, and the investigator was blinded to their identity. the seldi proteinchip analysis was performed as described previously (8, 10, 13 ) . for each set of binding conditions, samples were analyzed in duplicate. serum samples (2 l) were denatured by addition of 4 l of u9 buffer (9 mol/l urea, 20 g/l chaps, 50 mmol/l tris-hcl, ph 9.0) and incubated on ice for 20 min. denatured serum samples were diluted with 34 l of t4 (50 mmol/l sodium acetate, 1 ml/l triton x-100, ph 4.0) or t9 (10 mmol/l tris, 1 ml/l triton x-100, ph 9.0) binding buffer, respectively, to give a final dilution of 20-fold. cm10 proteinchip arrays (ciphergen biosystems) were used in this study. after dilution, 5 l of the diluted sample was applied to a preequilibrated proteinchip array in duplicate in a bioprocessor and incubated with shaking for 90 min at room temperature. after incubation, the proteinchip arrays were washed 5 times with the same binding buffer and rinsed twice with deionized water. after air-drying, sinapinic acid matrix in 500 ml/l acetonitrile-5 ml/l trifluoroacetic acid was added to each array. the proteinchip arrays were read on the proteinchip pbs ii reader of a proteinchip biomarker system (ciphergen biosystems) to determine the masses and intensities of all peaks over the range m/z 1000 to 250 000. for each box (12 pieces containing 96 assay spots) of proteinchip arrays, 1 array (8 assay spots) was used for calibration. mixtures of peptide/protein calibrators ltd.] were added to all 8 assay spots of the calibration array. intensities of peaks between m/z 1000 and 20 000 were obtained at a laser setting of 183 and a optimized range of m/z 1000 to 20 000; intensities of peaks between m/z 20 000 and 250 000 were obtained at a laser setting of 188 and a optimized range of m/z 20 000 to 150 000. the spectra were smoothed, baseline-subtracted, and externally calibrated. the common peaks among the seldi mass spectra were identified and quantified by use of biomarker wizard software (ciphergen biosystems). the peak intensities were normalized with the total ion current and, subsequently, with the total peak intensities. before data mining, the normalized peak intensities of the duplicate measurements were averaged and log 2 -trans-formed. the intraassay cvs of the normalized intensities of various peaks were ͻ15%.to identify proteomic features associated only with disease, we used 2 criteria: (a) the normalized peak intensities had to be significantly higher/lower in sars patients than in non-sars individuals; and (b) the normalized peak intensities had to correlate with 2 or more clinical/ biochemical variables, indicating their biological meaningfulness.the significance analysis of microarray (sam) algorithm (stanford university) (8, 10, 13 ) was used to identify proteomic features with concentrations significantly different between the sars and non-sars patient groups. during sam analysis, "two classed, unpaired data" were selected as the data type, and 5000 permutations were performed. the false significant discovery rate was set to zero to avoid the identification of falsely significant proteomic features caused by multiple comparisons. correlations between the differential proteomic features and various clinical/biochemical features were examined by the spearman rank-order correlation test.the significant differential proteomic features correlated with various clinical/biochemical correlations were subjected to two-way hierarchical clustering analysis, as described previously (8 ) . before clustering analysis, the data of each proteomic feature were subjected to zeromean unit-variance normalization. the processed proteomic data and the serum samples were subjected to two-way hierarchical clustering analysis by the cluster and treeview (14 ) . spearman rank correlation was used to calculate the distance, and complete linkage clustering was performed.for protein identification, proteins corresponding to the sedli peaks were purified by cation-exchange chromatography with the use of cm10 ceramic beads (biosepra) under binding conditions similar to those for cm10 proteinchip arrays. briefly, pooled serum samples were first denatured with u9 buffer and diluted with t4 or t9 sample binding buffer, respectively. after incubation for 120 min and subsequent washing, the bound proteins were eluted from the cm10 ceramic beads with 1 mol/l nacl solution. c 18 ziptips were used to desalt the eluted proteins according to the manufacturer's instructions (millipore). the desalted protein preparations were spotted on the gold-coated proteinchip arrays and examined with the proteinchip reader to confirm that the purified proteins had the same masses as the targeted sedli proteomic features. after confirmation, the purified proteins were resolved by 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis in the absence of reducing agents. proteins on gels were visualized by either colloidal blue (invitrogen tm ) or silver staining (ge healthcare). the gel images were then digitized with a densitometer and analyzed by the pdquest gel analysis software (ver. 7.3.0; bio-rad). protein spots with masses matched with the differential proteomic features were excised and subjected to mass spectrometric (ms) analysis.protein spots of interests were removed from the gel and subjected to trypsin digestion as described previously (15 ) . the trypsin digests were then extracted and subjected to tandem ms (ms/ms) analysis in the abi 4700 system (applied biosystems). trypsin peaks, possible keratin contamination, and matrix cluster peaks were excluded from subsequent collision-induced dissociation. the ms/ms spectra were then processed with data explorer software (ver. 4.4; applied biosystems). the spectra were subjected to gaussian smoothing with a filter width of 5 points, and the baselines were corrected with default settings. peaks were detected based on a signalto-noise threshold of 15. the fragment masses and intensities of each ms/ms mass spectrum were subjected to an online mascot ms/ms ion search (http://www.matrixscience.com/) to obtain the protein identities. for the search parameters, the maximum allowed missed cleavage in trypsin digestion was 1; partial oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine/threonine/tyrosine, and iodoacetamide modification of cysteine residues were selected. the error tolerance values of the parent peptides and the ms/ms ion masses were 0.1 and 0.3 da, respectively. a protein identification result was considered significant when the ms/ms ion profile matched a known protein in the ncbinr (2005/06/01) database with a p value ͻ0.05. for each identified protein, an accession number in the uniprot protein database (ver. 48.0) was reported when available.more than 800 common proteomic features were identified and compared between the sars and non-sars patient groups. using sam at a median false discovery rate of zero, we identified 107 proteomic features that were significantly differentially expressed between the 2 groups. fifty-two were increased and 55 were decreased in the sars group.to avoid identification of falsely significant proteomic features caused by systematic bias, we considered only 20 differential proteomic features ( fig. 1 and table 1 ) that were significantly correlated with at least 2 biochemical/ clinical variables as sars-specific (table 2 ). these potential biomarkers were found to be significantly associated with sars-cov viral load (2 correlated with sars-cov rna), acute-phase reaction [ differentiation of sars by two-way hierarchical clustering analysis of serum proteomic fingerprintsin the dendrogram (fig. 2) , majority of sars cases (95%) were grouped under 4 clusters. there were significantly more cases with poor prognosis [required treatment in the intensive care unit (icu) and/or supplemental oxygen during treatment] in sars clusters 2 and 3.the areas under the roc curves for most of the sarsspecific proteomic features were between 0.733 and 0.995. the 2 biomarkers at m/z 28 119 and 5908 gave the largest roc curve areas. for the biomarker at m/z 28 119, the roc curve area was 0.987 (95% confidence interval, 0.966 -1.007; fig. 3a ). at 97% specificity, the sensitivity was 97%. for the biomarker at m/z 5908, the roc curve area of 1/peak intensity was 0.995 (95% confidence interval, 0.985-1.004; fig. 3b ). at 95% specificity, the sensitivity was 100%.attempts were made to purify and identify the 2 biomarkers with the highest diagnostic values and the 2 biomarkers correlated with viral load. the cm10 ceramic beads captured proteomic features similar to those of the cm10 proteinchip array. the proteins eluted from the cm10 ceramic beads were separated and concentrated as protein spots by 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis. we successfully identified the protein spots with masses corresponding to the proteomic features with m/z values of 5908, 24 505, and 28 119, which were internal fragment of fibrinogen ␣-e chain, immunoglobulin light chain, and n-terminal fragment of complement c3c ␣-chain, respectively (fig. 4 ).this study demonstrates that the seldi proteinchip technology can identify serum proteins or protein fragments that are differentially regulated in adult sars patients. to avoid identification of falsely significant differential proteomic features (16 ), we used a datamining strategy similar to that used in our previous studies (10, 13 ) . we considered only the differential proteomic features that were correlated with at least 2 biochemical/clinical features considered sars-specific. this strategy was adopted to ensure that the identified diseasespecific proteomic features had biological meaning and were not the product of systematic bias. we successfully identified potential biomarkers reflecting various physiologic or pathologic responses of the body to sars infection, including acute-phase reaction (7, 17 ) , lung damage (18 -20 ) , impairment of liver function (21) (22) (23) , neutrophil activation (24 -26 ) , and viral load (5, 10, 27, 28 ) . the most sensitive marker, the proteomic feature at m/z 5908, which was negatively correlated with neutrophil count and with the largest chest radiographic changes, was found to be an internal fragment of fibrinogen ␣-e chain. on the one hand, we previously reported that a high neutrophil count was a risk factor associated with clinical deterioration in sars (26 ) . on the other hand, intravascular fibrin deposition has been observed in sars patients (29 ) . vascular fibrin thrombi are often associated with pulmonary infarcts. specific interactions between neutrophils and fibrin thrombi are well recognized (30 ) . in addition, neutrophils produce a neutral peptide-generating protease that can cleave fibrinogen into peptide fragments (31 ) . it is possible that fibrinogen and/or its fragments are involved in the pathophysiologic mechanism linking neutrophil activation and lung damage.the next most sensitive biomarker is the proteomic feature at m/z 28 119. this feature was identified as the n-terminal fragment of complement c3c ␣-chain. complement 3 (c3), which is composed of an ␣ chain (m r 115 000) and a ␤ chain (m r 75 000), is the central molecule in complement systems comprising the classic, alternative, or lectin pathways. on activation and subsequent inactivation of c3, several physiologic protein fragments, such as c3c, are produced. when examined by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, c3c separates into a ␤-chain (m r 75 000) and 2 fragments of ␣-chain (m r 27 000 n-terminal fragment and m r 43 000 c-terminal fragment) (32 ) . the presence of free c3c ␣-chain n-terminal fragment in the blood circulation might be the result of degradation of c3c. in the sars patients, the concentration of this c3c fragment was positively correlated with crp, suggesting its positive association with the acute-phase reaction and with the activation of the complement system. it is worth nothing that this c3c fragment contains a binding domain for complement receptor type 1 (33 ) . activation of complement receptor type 1 enhances phagocytosis of the neutrophils (34 ) and activates b-cell differentiation (35, 36 ) .to date, information about the activation of the complement pathway in sars patients has been limited. liao et al. (17 ) reported that there was no significant difference in c3 concentrations between sars and control patients. another group demonstrated that sars-cov could trigger complement activation through the lectin pathway (37 ) . the biological relevance of c3 in sars remains unknown.the proteomic feature at m/z 24 505, which was increased in sars patients and was positively correlated with viral load, was found to be immunoglobulin light chain. this finding is consistent with our recent finding of anti-sars-cov igg in 93% of sars cases at the time of sampling. igg was first detected on day 4 of illness (38 ) . higher igg concentrations were detected in patients with poor outcome (i.e., requiring supplemental oxygen for hypoxia or treatment in the icu).aside from using individual differential proteomic features as biomarkers, one could combine all of the differential features to form a sars-specific fingerprint. the sars-specific fingerprint not only could differentiate sars from non-sars diseases with similar symptoms, but also could be useful in identifying patients with poor prognosis. the prognostic capability could be explained by the fact that the identified differential proteomic features were correlated with clinical and biochemical features having prognostic values, including viral load (27, 28 ) , neutrophil counts (26 ), ld (26, 39 -41 ) , and age (40, 41 ) . previously, 2 research teams, using the seldi protein-chip technology, reported potential biomarkers in the sera of adult sars patients (7, 11 ) . in the present study, the intensity of the proteomic feature at m/z 7769 was significantly lower in sars patients (mann-whitney test, p ͻ0.001); in their study, yip et al. (7 ) also reported that it is significantly lower in sars patients (mann-whitney test, p ϭ 4.9 ϫ 10 ϫ8 ). except for this proteomic feature, the sars-associated proteomic features in these other studies were different from our findings. these differences might be attributable to different selection criteria for the controls. in the previous studies, the control cases were either healthy persons or persons with viral infections from other clinics. the extent of similarities of symptoms between the sars and control groups and the time point of blood collection were not considered. in the present study, the control group comprised suspected sars patients who were admitted to the same hospital as the sars patients but were later shown to be negative for sars-cov infection. the symptoms in the sars and control groups and the time point of blood collection were very similar. the biomarkers identified in the present higher neutrophil count (r ϭ 0.045; p ϭ 0.005); ld (r ϭ 0.495; p ϭ 0.003); total protein (r ϭ ϫ0.325; p ϭ 0.046); albumin (r ϭ ϫ0.332; p ϭ 0.042) 4469higher ld (r ϭ 0.417; p ϭ 0.013); crp (r ϭ 0.513; p ϭ 0.003); total protein (r ϭ ϫ0.383; p ϭ 0.018); albumin (r ϭ ϫ0.451; p ϭ 0.004) 4482higher neutrophil count (r ϭ 0.353; p ϭ 0.032); ld (r ϭ 0.463; p ϭ 0.005); crp (r ϭ 0.600; ͻ0.0005); total protein (r ϭ ϫ0.358; p ϭ 0.027); albumin (r ϭ ϫ0.339; p ϭ 0.037) 4680lower viral load (r ϭ ϫ0.374; p ϭ 0.042); bilirubin (r ϭ ϫ0.403; p ϭ 0.012) 5908lower neutrophil count (r ϭ ϫ0.39; p ϭ 0.017); total leukocyte count (r ϭ ϫ0.373; p ϭ 0.023); largest change in chest x-ray (r ϭ ϫ0.377; p ϭ 0.04) 6634lower crp (r ϭ ϫ0.384; p ϭ 0.033); total protein (r ϭ 0.402; p ϭ 0.012); albumin (r ϭ 0.388; p ϭ 0.016) 7769lower bilirubin count (r ϭ ϫ0.405; p ϭ 0.012); ld (r ϭ ϫ0.374; p ϭ 0.027) 8606higher neutrophil count (r ϭ 0.364; p ϭ 0.027); ld (r ϭ 0.539; p ϭ 0.001); crp (r ϭ 0.425; p ϭ 0.017); age (r ϭ 0.321; p ϭ 0.049); total protein (r ϭ ϫ0.432; p ϭ 0.007); albumin (r ϭ ϫ0.446; p ϭ 0.017) 8619higher neutrophil count (r ϭ 0.394; p ϭ 0.016); ld (r ϭ 0.511; p ϭ 0.002); crp (r ϭ 0.445; p ϭ 0.012); age (r ϭ 0.362; p ϭ 0.026); total protein (r ϭ ϫ0.437; p ϭ 0.006); albumin (r ϭ ϫ0.440; p ϭ 0.006) 8635higher neutrophil count (r ϭ 0.408; p ϭ 0.012); ld (r ϭ 0.509; p ϭ 0.002); crp (r ϭ 0.484; p ϭ 0.006); total protein (r ϭ ϫ0.472; p ϭ 0.003); albumin (r ϭ ϫ0.459; p ϭ 0.004) 8814higher neutrophil count (r ϭ 0.391; p ϭ 0.017); ld (r ϭ 0.510; p ϭ 0.002); albumin (r ϭ ϫ0.335; p ϭ 0.04) 8831higher neutrophil count (r ϭ 0.339; p ϭ 0.040); ld (r ϭ 0.483; p ϭ 0.003); crp (r ϭ 0.379; p ϭ 0.036); total protein (r ϭ ϫ0.333; p ϭ 0.041); albumin (r ϭ ϫ0.360; p ϭ 0.027) 8865higher neutrophil count (r ϭ 0.383; p ϭ 0.019); total leukocyte count (r ϭ 0.330; p ϭ 0.046) 8937higher ld (r ϭ 0.448; p ϭ 0.007); crp (r ϭ 0.521; p ϭ 0.003); total protein (r ϭ ϫ0.415; p ϭ 0.010); albumin (r ϭ ϫ0.459; p ϭ 0.004) 8956lower ld (r ϭ 0.465; p ϭ 0.005); crp (r ϭ 0.623; ͻ0.0005); total protein (r ϭ ϫ0.459; p ϭ 0.004); albumin (r ϭ ϫ0.500; p ϭ 0.001) 17 878higher neutrophil count (r ϭ 0.584; ͻ0.0005); total leukocyte count (r ϭ 0.373; p ϭ 0.023); ld (r ϭ 0.694; ͻ0.0005); crp (r ϭ 0.502; p ϭ 0.004); total protein (r ϭ ϫ0.434; p ϭ 0.006); albumin (r ϭ ϫ0.481; p ϭ 0.002) 24 505higher viral load (r ϭ 0.467; p ϭ 0.0009); total protein (r ϭ ϫ0.481; p ϭ 0.002); albumin (r ϭ ϫ0.488; p ϭ 0.002) 28 119higher ld (r ϭ 0.375; p ϭ 0.038); crp (r ϭ 0.375; p ϭ 0.038); total protein (r ϭ ϫ0.375; p ϭ 0.020); albumin (r ϭ ϫ0.416; p ϭ 0.009) 88 637lower total protein (r ϭ 0.348; p ϭ 0.032); initial change in chest x-ray (r ϭ ϫ0.394; p ϭ 0.031) a correlations between various biochemical/clinical features and proteomic features were calculated by spearman rank-order correlation test as stated in thestudy may thus have an advantage in an actual diagnostic setting compared with those identified in the previous studies.the difference in the findings reported by yip et al. (7 ) and the present study could be also attributable to the use of different profiling methodologies. in their study, yip et al. (7 ) used a comprehensive profiling approach. after being denatured with urea and detergent, the serum proteins were first fractionated with anion-exchange beads to give 6 fractions, which were later analyzed with copper proteinchip arrays and weak cation-exchange cm10 proteinchip arrays. use of the comprehensive profiling approach would increase the chance of identification of more potential protein markers (8 ) . in the present study, we analyzed the serum proteins directly after purification with only cm10 proteinchip arrays at 2 different binding conditions (ph 4 and ph 9). we chose the cm10 proteinchip arrays (previously called wcx2) fig. 2 . two-way hierarchical clustering analysis (complete linkage) of the serum proteomic features among the sars cases (case number starting with s) and non-sars control cases (case numbers not starting with s).the intensity of the red or green color indicates that the relative protein concentration is higher than or lower than the mean value, respectively. the column labels indicate the individual cases; the row labels indicate the differential proteomic features found in the serum samples. i, case required care in the icu; o, case required supplemental oxygen. because kang et al. (11 ) showed that this chip type gives the best profiling result when analyzing serum samples from sars patients by a direct binding approach (11 ) . although the direct binding approach might lead to the discovery of fewer biomarkers, such direct binding assays have higher potential to be modified for use as a clinical assay that can be used even when the protein identities of the disease-specific seldi peaks are not known.the most commonly used assays for detecting sars are based on the detection of viral rna (6 ) or antibodies against the sars-cov (5 ). detection of viral rna is useful in the early phase of the disease, whereas the serology test for antibodies against sars-cov is useful from 21 days onward. the current study has demonstrated that within the first week after onset of fever, similar to viral rna concentration, the serum proteome contains both diagnostic and prognostic information. the seldi proteinchip assay could be used for first-line detection of sars, followed by the quantitative viral rna assay for confirmation. once the disease is confirmed, the treatment strategy could be adjusted according to the prognosis based on the seldi proteinchip profiling result and the viral rna concentration.in conclusion, we have demonstrated that disease-specific proteomic fingerprints are present in the sera of adult sars patients. they could be used to identify sars cases during the early stage of the disease with high specificity and sensitivity. these markers may provide information about the patient's physiologic status as well as prognostic information. the 2 proteomic features having the highest diagnostic value were the n-terminal fragment of complement c3c ␣-chain and an internal fragment of fibrinogen ␣-e chain. the proteomic feature (m/z 24 505) positively correlated with viral load was identified as immunoglobulin light chain.the infectious disease caused by the new severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus‐2 (sars‐cov‐2), covid‐19, broke out in wuhan, china, and spread to almost every country in the world. millions of people have been infected, many have died, and everyday life has changed completely. the disease is accompanied by range of different symptoms (figure 1). rapidly accumulating data show that prognosis for patients with covid‐19 is good in those with mild disease, but severe cases show relatively asymptomatic early progression followed by rapid worsening after symptom onset, culminating in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and significant disease manifestations (figure 2). the presence of sars‐cov‐2 has been detected in multiple organs on autopsy, including the pharynx, lungs, heart, liver, brain and kidneys, highlighting the multiorgan tropism of this virus. 1  early clinical experience suggested that older age and the presence of a number of comorbidities, including hypertension, cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus and chronic respiratory disease increased the risk of death in patients with covid‐19. 2 ,  3  in addition, the renin‐angiotensin aldosterone (ras) system (specifically the angiotensin‐converting enzyme 2 [ace2] protein) has been identified as playing an important role in facilitating entry of coronaviruses, including sars‐cov‐2, into target cells, especially in the lungs. 4 ,  5  therefore, it has been suggested that angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) and ace inhibitors, which affect ace2 expression, may influence the susceptibility to and severity of infection with sars‐cov‐2. 6 ,  7 ,  8 ,  9 ,  10 ,  11  hypertension is very common, affecting an estimated 1.39 billion individuals worldwide, 12  and the prevalence of hypertension increases with age (affecting approximately 70% of older adults). 13  in addition, ras inhibitors such as ace inhibitors and arbs are recommended and widely used for the treatment of hypertension. 14 ,  15 ,  16  however, hypertension is not a single clinical entity, but it instead manifests as a number of different phenotypes. in asians, the disease is characterized by salt sensitivity, high rates of masked hypertension, exaggerated morning bp surge, and nocturnal hypertension. 17  nearly half of all patients with hypertension worldwide (44%) live in south or east asia. 18  the hope asia network was established in 2016 and is a member of the world hypertension league. 19 ,  20  the mission of the hope asia network is to improve the management of hypertension and organ protection toward achieving “zero” cardiovascular events in asia. 19 ,  20  this has become even more relevant in the current pandemic, with high rates of infection in several asian countries.this guidance from the hope asia network summarizes the latest findings on covid‐19 and hypertension, including evidence‐based recommendations for the management of hypertension during the current pandemic.on march 20, 2020, the italian institute of health announced that there had been 3200 covid‐19 deaths in italy. 21  the patients who died had an average age of 78.5 years (median 80 years, range 31‐103 years) and 98.7% had at least one comorbidity. 21  hypertension was a common comorbidity in italian cases, affecting 73.8% of patients, 52% of whom were taking arbs or ace inhibitors. 21  however, there are number of factors that could potentially confound a possible relationship between hypertension and severe covid‐19 (table 1). 22 ,  23 ,  24 ,  25 ,  26 ,  27  the first is age: both severe covid‐19 and hypertension are common in the elderly. in addition, the identified risk factors (table 1) are generally associated with aging and/or vascular disorders, both of which are common in patients with hypertension. therefore, the risk of developing severe covid‐19 is more likely to be due to underlying vascular endothelial dysfunction and/or organ damage than high blood pressure (bp) per se. ace2 receptors are expressed by endothelial cells, 28  and post‐mortem examinations have detected the presence of viral infection in endothelial cells. 29  the spike protein on the surface of sars‐cov‐2 binds to the extracellular domain of transmembrane ace2, with s protein priming by transmembrane serine protease 2 (tmprss2), to gain entry to host cells (figure 3). 4 ,  5 ,  30  ace2 plays a regulatory role in the ras, converting angiotensin i (ang i) into angiotensin 1‐9 (ang 1‐9) or angiotensin ii (ang ii) into angiotensin 1‐7 (ang 1‐7). 31 ,  32  currently, available data reflect a possible role for ace2 in heart failure, myocardial infarction, hypertension, and the cardiovascular complications of diabetes mellitus, and preclinical investigations suggest that activation of ace2 might have the potential to protect against hypertension and cardiovascular disease. 31 ,  33 ,  34 ,  35  in addition, angiotensin 1‐7 appears to counteract the negative effects of ang ii, attenuating inflammation, suppressing vascular permeability and having vasorelaxant effects. 36 ,  37 ,  38  furthermore, ace2 in the lungs and the renin‐angiotensin system has been shown to play a role in the pulmonary manifestations of coronavirus infection. 39  interaction of ang ii with angiotensin type 1 receptors (at1r) activates a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 17 (adam17) on the cell membrane via phosphorylation. 40  in turn, adam17 cleaves the precursors of tumor necrosis factor‐α (tnfα) and interleukin (il)‐6 receptor‐α (il‐6rα) in the cell membrane to release tnfα and soluble il‐6rα. 41  tnfα activates the nuclear transcription factor system nf‐κb to induce the production of various inflammatory cytokines, including il‐6 (figure 4). 42  this represents a potential mechanism for the cytokine storm seen in some patients with covid‐19 and highlights the potential for agents blocking cytokine pathways (especially the il‐6‐stat3 axis) in managing covid‐19‐related cytokine storm. 43  the fact that the sars‐cov‐2 virus uses ace2 as a mechanism to enter and infect cells meant that there was concern that cells with high ace2 expression would be most susceptible to infection with sars‐cov‐2. given that arb and ace inhibitors have been shown experimentally to increase expression of ace2 on cell membranes, 28 ,  44  there was much discussion about the potential for higher infection rates and more severe disease in patients being treated with these agents.despite the theoretical possibility that use of ras inhibitors increases the risk of infection with sars‐cov‐2 and the severity of covid‐19 illness, analyses including patients from the current pandemic indicate that this does not seem to be the case (table 2).the effect of hypertension or therapy with ace inhibitors or arbs has been evaluated in at least three published studies to date (table 2). 45 ,  46 ,  47  reynolds et al looked at history of antihypertensive usage in 12 594 patients undergoing covid‐19 testing in new york, usa. 47  they did not find any association between the use of ace inhibitors, arbs, beta‐blockers, calcium channel blockers or thiazide diuretics and the likelihood of a positive or negative result on covid‐19 testing. 47  also in the united states, mehta and colleagues failed to find any significant association between the use of ace inhibitors or arbs and covid‐19 test positivity. 46  similar findings were reported in a population case‐control study from italy. 45  data from four studies published by early may 2020 also failed to find a significant association between ras inhibitor use and worse outcomes in patients with covid‐19 (table 2). 48 ,  49 ,  50  in one retrospective case series, the proportion of patients using ace inhibitors or arbs did not differ significantly between those with severe vs non‐severe covid‐19, or between survivors and non‐survivors. 48  however, the in‐hospital covid‐19 mortality rate was higher in patients with vs without hypertension (21% vs 11%). 48  in the other studies, death rates for patients taking ace inhibitors and/or arbs were actually lower than those in patients not receiving these antihypertensive therapies. 49 ,  50  one of the studies from china reported that levels of the inflammatory markers high sensitivity c‐reactive protein and procalcitonin were significantly lower in patients with hypertension who were vs were not receiving ace inhibitors or arbs. 49  there are two possible mechanisms of cardiovascular damage in covid‐19. the first is direct viral infection of myocardial and vascular cells, and the other is a systemic inflammatory reaction (or cytokine storm) (figure 5). myocardial injury at the time of admission or due to disease progression is a strong indicator of poor prognosis in patients with covid‐19. troponin is a highly sensitive and well‐known marker of myocardial injury.a systematic review and meta‐analysis of data published between 1 december 2019 and 27 march 2020 including 4189 patients from 28 studies showed a significant trend for higher levels of cardiac biomarkers in patients with more severe covid‐19. 51  on meta‐regression analysis, the only factor significantly associated with higher levels of cardiac injury biomarkers was the presence of hypertension (p = .03). in addition, more severe covid‐19 markedly increased the risk of acute cardiac injury (risk ratio vs mild disease 5.99, 95% confidence interval [ci] 3.04‐11.80; p < .001). in turn, the risk of covid‐19‐related death was significantly increased in the presence of acute cardiac injury (risk ratio 3.85, 95% ci 2.13‐6.96). 51  another analysis also reported that patients with severe covid‐19 had significantly higher levels of troponin than those without severe disease (standardized mean difference 25.6 ng/l, 95% ci 6.8‐44.5 ng/l). 52  early data from wuhan, china, showed that 12% of patients admitted to hospital with covid‐19 had acute cardiac injury. 53  subsequent analyses investigated associations between underlying cardiovascular disease or myocardial injury and mortality in hospitalized patients with covid‐19 (n = 187). 23  patients with vs without myocardial injury (defined as elevated troponin levels) were significantly older (74 vs 60 years; p < .001) and more likely to have hypertension (59.8% vs 23.4%; p < .001). 23 ,  25  during hospitalization, those with myocardial injury had higher rates of ards (58.5% vs 14.7%; p < .001), acute renal injury (8.5% vs 0.3%; p < .001) and death (51.2% vs 4.5%; p < .001). the appearance of myocardial injury increased the risk of death by 4.26‐fold compared to patients without myocardial damage, independent of cardiac function based on ecg and echocardiography findings (figure 6). 23 ,  25  d‐dimer is a biomarker that reflects activation of coagulation and fibrinolysis. 54  d‐dimer levels of >2 µg/ml were an independent predictor of in‐hospital death in patients hospitalized with covid‐19 in wuhan, china (hazard ratio 51.5, 95% ci 12.9‐206.7; p < .001). 55  the 2 µg/ml cutoff had 92% sensitivity and 83% specificity for predicting in‐hospital mortality and therefore might be a useful biomarker for predicting outcome and informing treatment decisions in patients with covid‐19. the cumulative rate of thromboembolic events in patients admitted to hospital in milan, italy with covid‐19 (n = 388) was 21% (28% of those in intensive care and 7% for those not in intensive care) despite use of thromboprophylaxis in all patients admitted to the intensive care unit and three‐quarters of those treated on a general ward. 56  about half of all thromboembolic events occurred within 24 hours of hospitalization, and 2% of patients developed dic. 56  a consensus statement on the prevention and treatment of venous thromboembolism‐associated covid‐19 infection has been published. 57  this recommends that patients with covid‐19 undergo assessment for the risk of venous thromboembolism and bleeding and are monitored regularly to facilitate the diagnosis and treatment of venous thromboembolism, and the use of strategies (pharmacologic and/or mechanical) to prevent venous thromboembolism. 57  key points regarding the clinical management of covid‐19, particularly in patients with hypertension, based on evidence published before may 5, 2020, are shown in table 4.data that have been rapidly compiled during the pandemic to date indicate that there are a number of factors and biomarkers that can be used to identify patients with covid‐19 who are at high risk of more severe disease and adverse outcomes, including death. age seems to be the most important risk factor, especially for covid‐19‐related death, and hypertension is the most common comorbidity in covid‐19‐positive deceased patients. 21  other comorbidities such as cardiovascular diseases, smoking, chronic lung disease, chronic kidney disease, and a suppressed immune system also increase the risks associated with covid‐19 infection, especially when multiple comorbidities exist in the same patient. 21  thorough history taking and baseline assessments are therefore important. another important screening tool is oxygen saturation, which indicates severe disease if ≤94% on admission. 3 ,  58  the relevance of ability to tolerate hypoxia was highlighted in an analysis from china showing that covid‐19 patients of high‐altitude origin had a lower mortality risk than those from lower altitudes. 59  determination of relevant biomarkers, especially troponin and d‐dimer provides an indication of myocardial injury and thrombotic risk, and can help inform appropriate treatment strategies.for non‐hospitalized patients with covid‐19, ongoing management of comorbid conditions is essential to minimize risk. this includes lifestyle factors such as diet and sleep, along with maintaining regular medications (eg, antihypertensives and antidiabetics). patients with hypertension on current therapy with ace inhibitors or arbs can continue treatment without any negative effects on covid‐19 outcomes. ras inhibitors are particularly beneficial in patients who have heart failure or renal disease because they have a positive effect on prognosis. for older patients with hypertension and no other comorbidities and risk factors, calcium channel antagonists might be a good option for antihypertensive therapy. maintaining good glycaemic control is also important because this might help reduce the risk of infection with sars‐cov‐2 and the severity of covid‐19. 60  in addition, regular monitoring of home bp will help to ensure the achievement and maintenance of bp targets in patients with hypertension.lockdown requirements could impact on the ability of individuals to get regular exercise. regular exercise is important for maintaining health status 61  and to counteract the negative consequences of cardiovascular, metabolic, and respiratory diseases. 62  even if unable to get outside, continuing some form of home‐based exercise would be beneficial, especially in older adults. 63  maintaining regular exercise could help to ensure that the current viral pandemic does not contribute to the worldwide obesity epidemic, which in turn increases the rate of cardiovascular and metabolic comorbidities. 64  ensuring that the world population is not burdened by high rates of noncommunicable diseases might help lessen the impact of future pandemics given that patients with comorbidities tend to fare poorly during an infectious disease pandemic. 64  another potential benefit of physical activity is its ability to stimulate immune function, 65  something that is highly relevant during a global pandemic.health care professionals should also be aware of the potential non‐infectious impacts of covid‐19. for example, non‐infected individuals might be at risk of developing stress‐related physical health conditions (such as gastrointestinal disturbances and cardiovascular disease) and psychological disturbances (such as anxiety and depression).strict lockdown and social distancing rules are being enforced in many countries to slow the spread of the novel coronavirus. in addition, a large proportion of “elective” or “non‐essential” procedures have been postponed or canceled to allow health care systems to cope with the influx of infectious disease cases. this has created a requirement for a large proportion of health consultations to be conducted remotely. telemedicine strategies are ideally suited to facilitating patient management in the absence of face‐to‐face consultations, and the value of this approach (which has otherwise been slow to be widely used in clinical practice) has become clear. 66 ,  67  one of the hidden “blessings” of the covid‐19 pandemic may be the widespread adoption of telemedicine approaches to improve patient management.out‐of‐office bp monitoring is a recommended approach for the diagnosis and management of hypertension. 14 ,  15 ,  16 ,  68 ,  69 ,  70 ,  71 ,  72 ,  73 ,  74 ,  75  therefore, this field of medicine is better placed than many to be able to continue to effectively manage patients during a global pandemic.new information and communication technology‐based home bp monitoring devices that perform automatic, fixed‐interval bp measurement during sleep and store or transmit the data could facilitate a novel approach to patient management. 76  validated wearable technologies for evaluation of home bp 77 ,  78  might also be useful for patient monitoring and management during the covid‐19 outbreak. telemedicine‐based strategies for managing bp were implemented and used effectively during the aftermath of the great east japan earthquake and tsunami in march 2011, 79  highlighting their potential for use during the covid‐19 pandemic to ensure that patients with hypertension have well‐controlled bp. this has the potential to help mitigate the negative effects of hypertension on prognosis in patients with covid‐19.patients with hypertension are at increased risk of morbidity and mortality if they become infected with sars‐cov‐2, although this is confounded by other factors such as age and vascular disorders. however, all usual antihypertensive therapy including ras inhibitors should continue. physicians need to take a holistic approach to patient management due the wide range of possible complications, and biomarkers can provide important prognostic information. overall, multidisciplinary management of covid‐19 based on a rapidly growing body of evidence will help ensure the best possible outcomes for patients, including those with risk factors such as hypertension.all authors report no potential conflicts of interest in relation to this article.the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) causes coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , which was declared a global pandemic by the world health organization (who) on the 11 th of march 2020. as the number of infected cases and death tolls rise, health care systems around the world are facing a monumental challenge. covid-19 affects the respiratory tract, but the course of the ensuing disease is highly individual, ranging from asymptomatic to severe or fatal disease (1) . laboratory data are eminent in the handling of viral infections and, including viral pneumonia (2, 3) . biomarkers are thus relevant for clinical decision-making. covid-19 is, however, a novel disease, and even though an overview has addressed this topic (4) , the amount of studies on covid-19 soars, and the evidence is quickly expanding. given the developing situation with coronavirus, clinicians urgently need evidence synthesis to produce guidance for handling patients with covid-19. in this systematic review and meta-analysis, we investigate which laboratory tests are associated with severe disease in covid-19 infection.the review is registered at prospero, (registration number crd42020176387). a search was performed on pubmed (medline), scopus, and web of science on the 22 nd of march 2020. the search criteria were "covid-19" or "2019 novel coronavirus" or "sars-cov2" published after november 2019. there were no language limitations. we included all studies about patients admitted to hospital with covid-19 infections. studies on outpatients were thus not included. two reviewers screened titles and abstracts independently using the review manager covidence (www.covidence.org). a third reviewer resolved disagreements. all investigators screened full text publications and a minimum of two investigators screened each study. if disagreement persisted, a third investigator screened the study and the decision was reached by a majority vote. we excluded reviews, editorials, viewpoints, articles on prevention and surveillance, case reports containing less than three patients, studies where patients were not hospitalized or hospitalized due to other conditions than covid-19, and studies with no full text available or if only the abstract was written in english. further, we excluded studies that did not report any laboratory results, if the covid-19 diagnosis was not confirmed with real time-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), and if studies did not report on patient outcome. we reviewed the reference list of each article for identifying other potential eligible documents.two independent reviewers collected and evaluated data regarding patient demographics, laboratory data, and patient outcome (see supplementary table 1 for data extracted). a third reviewer solved disagreements. for studies reporting data for severe disease and non-severe disease, we extracted data of sample sizes, mean values and standard deviations (sd) of the biomarkers. we made an a priori list of routine laboratory tests: white blood cell count (wbc), neutrophil count, lymphocyte count, platelet count, haemoglobin, c-reactive protein (crp), procalcitonin (pct), aspartate aminotransferase (ast), alanine aminotransferase (alt), lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), and creatinine. all laboratory tests reported as frequently as the analyses on the a priori list were also included in the meta-analysis. for the qualitative synthesis, we extracted information about laboratory variables, clinical characteristics, and study design. clinical outcomes of interest was disease severity and, for the meta-analysis, studies reporting on groups based on disease severity. disease severity as defined in the publications was used. in the qualitative synthesis, outcome was disease severity, which comprised of one or more of the following: intensive care treatment, mechanical intervention, or death.all studies meeting the eligibility criteria were assessed for their methodological quality using the quadas-2 tool (5). quality assessment was based on patient selection, reporting of laboratory tests, method of defining and applying outcome, and timing of laboratory tests (supplementary text 1).two investigators conducted the quality assessment independently. disagreements were discussed and persisting disagreements settled by a third investigator. each study was given a score, which was used in the sensitivity analysis of the meta-analysis. the score ranged from 0 -14, where 14 was considered excellent.for the meta-analysis, the statistical analysis was performed with revman 5.3.5 software (the nordic cochrane centre, the cochrane collaboration, copenhagen, denmark) and grahpad prism 7.0 (graphpad software, san diego, ca, usa). we included all studies meeting the criteria, which reported data for calculation of mean differences (mds) between groups based on severity of disease, if possible to adjust to same scale. otherwise, standardised mean differences (smds) were determined. for all estimates, 95% confidence intervals (95% cis) were determined. graphically, we displayed data using forest plots. heterogeneity was identified using i 2 . the i 2 in meta-analysis describes the percentage of variation across the included studies which is caused by heterogeneity rather than chance. thus significant heterogeneity was defined i 2 <50% (6). a mantel-haenszel method was used as random effect method.we generated funnel plots to assess potential publication bias, and compared results from a fixedeffects meta-analysis against those from a random-effects meta-analysis. sensitivity analyses were performed by 1) removing each trial in turn from a meta-analysis to establish the extent to which they contributed to heterogeneity and to the overall result; 2) by exclusion of studies with paediatric populations and 3) by exclusion of studies with a score on ≤5 in quadas-2.the search identified 1,699 studies; after removing duplicates, 1,382 title and abstracts were screened, and 250 full-text articles were assessed for eligibility. screening and full-text assessment was based on the pre-defined exclusion criteria. of the 250 studies, we included 45 studies (7-42), of which 21 (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) were eligible for meta-analysis ( figure 1 ). out of the 45 studies, one was conducted in the usa (25) , two in singapore (7, 23); the remainder were from china (supplementary table 1 ). studies comprised mainly cohort studies, but nine were either case series (11, 25, 32, 33) , case-control studies (10, 22, 42) , or intervention studies (27). the average sample size was 104, ranging from 4 to 1099 participants. out of 4,438 patients in total, 208 were children (< 18 years). the age of participants ranged from 1 day to 95 years, with 19 studies including only adults (≥ 18 years) and seven studies including solely children (< 18 years). the percentage of male patients varied from 33% to 85%.reporting of co-morbidities differed, and was either not disclosed or unclear in 11 studies. in the remainder, the percentage of patients with co-morbidities ranged from 0 -86%. radiological abnormalities were observed in 33 -100% of patients, but unclear or undisclosed in 14 studies (supplementary table 1) .disease severity was reported as outcome in 20/45 studies, of which one had calculated odds ratios for severe disease (30) . two studies reported data that enabled establishment of groups based on severity and calculation of mean and sds for laboratory variables. definitions of disease severity varied between studies. overall, 298 deaths were reported, which corresponds to 6.7% of the patients described, and 18 of the 45 studies reported on mortality (9-11, 16-22, 25, 27, 30, 31, 35, 37, 42) . the mortality rate in children was 0.4% (1 child) (37) . however, 30 studies ended follow-up whilst a varying part of patients (7-94%) were still admitted to hospital (supplementary table 1 ), which means that the overall mortality of the admitted patients with covid-19 may have been higher.details on all included studies are displayed in supplementary table 1.biomarkers included in the meta-analysis were lymphocyte count (n = 18 studies), wbc (n = 17), platelet count (n = 14), neutrophil count (n = 12), ldh (n = 12), alt (n = 12), creatinine (n = 12), crp (n = 11), ast (n = 11), d-dimer (n = 11), pct (n = 10), prothrombin time (n = 9), and haemoglobin (n = 9). for d-dimer, the units did not enable conversion for direct comparisons and smds were used for reporting. the effect size estimates were not significantly altered when changing from random effects to fixed effect estimates. exclusion of single studies did not affect the effect size estimates significantly either. estimates were unaffected by exclusion of the study from sun et al.(13) comprising a paediatric population and by exclusion of studies that scored low in the quadas-2 assessment (supplementary text 1 and supplementary table 3 ). significant heterogeneity was observed for most studies for all parameters, which is illustrated in the forest plots (supplementary figure 1) . publication bias was present for some biomarkers, as indicated through asymmetrical funnel plots (supplementary figure 2) . removal of studies that fell outside of the funnel plot did not alter findings.wbc was higher in patients with severe disease by 1. (30) reported that univariate odds ratio (or) was 1.28 (95% ci 1.08-1.52, p = 0.004) for icu (intensive care unit) admission per 1 x 10 9 /l increase in wbc. thirty-nine studies evaluated wbc. whilst 18 studies found subsets of patients with high wbc, low wbc was also present, and 17 studies found wbc < 3.5-4 x10 9 /l in 9-54% of patients (7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 18, 19, 24, 27, 31-33, 35, 39, 41, 42) .a lower lymphocyte count was of -0.32 x10 9 /l (md, 95% ci -0.42 -0.21, p < 0.0001, i 2 = 77%) was associated with severe disease. congruently, chen et al (30) reported that for lymphocytes univariate or was 0.24 x 10 9 /l (95% ci 0.08-0.75, p = 0.01) for icu admission. lymphocyte count was determined in 37 studies. in all studies where the lymphocyte count was compared with reference intervals (n = 27), a subset of lymphopenic patients were found.in severe cases, neutrophil count was 1.49 x10 9 /l higher (md, 95% ci 0.64 -2.35, p < 0.0001, i 2 = 85 %) than in non-severe cases. there was large variation among studies. eleven studies reported high neutrophil count in more than 25% of the patients, albeit with varying cut-offs (≥5.8 to >7.5 x10 9 /l) (11, 13, 21, 26, 28, (31) (32) (33) (39) (40) (41) .lower platelet count -22.4 x10 9 /l (md, 95% ci -35.3 --9.5), p < 0.0001, i 2 = 59%) was associated with severe disease. out of the 23 studies reporting on platelet count, nine studies stated that a platelet count < 150 x 10 9 /l was observed in up to 36% of patients with covid-19 infection (9, 11, 13, 18, 21, 27, 31, 41) .patients with severe disease had lower haemoglobin, -4.1 g/l (md, 95% ci -6.42 -(-1.78), p <0,0001, i 2 = 8%). six studies (13, 31, 33, 36, 39, 40) described low haemoglobin in patients with covid-19, whilst four studies found that all patients had haemoglobin within the reference interval (25, 26, 28, 37) . comparison with reference intervals was, however, not possible in all studies.higher crp, 49.2 mg/l (md, 95 % ci 31.2 -67.1, p < 0.0001, i 2 = 85%), was associated with severe disease. in accordance, chen et al (30) found that for crp the or was 1.04 (95% ci 1.02-1.05, p < 0.001) for icu admission. crp was reported in 30 studies, and all studies congruently reported that the majority of patients have increased crp.there was no association between procalcitonin and disease severity (md 0.03 ng/ml, 95% ci 0.00-0.06, p = 0.09, i 2 = 89%). procalcitonin was determined in 22 studies. the results are, however, very heterogeneous with increased procalcitonin observed in < 1% to 80% of the patients.high d-dimer was associated with severe disease (smd 0.58, 95% ci 0.37 -0.78, p < 0.0001, i 2 = 56%). d-dimer was assessed in 21 studies. fifteen studies reported that 14 -50% of patients had elevated d-dimer (9, 11, 13, 18, 21, 24, 26, 28, 31, 32, 36, 37, (39) (40) (41) . we found no significant correlation between creatinine and disease severity in covid-19 (md, 3.42 µm, 95% ci -0.87 -7.72, p = 0.12, i 2 = 34%). twenty-one studies reported on creatinine. nine studies described that up to 10% of patients had increased creatinine (9, 11, 18, 21, 27, 31, 39) , and three studies reported that up to 40% of patients had levels above the reference interval (13, 28, 41) . six studies found a subgroup of patients with low creatinine (11, 13, 26, 31, 36, 41) .patients with severe disease had high ldh, 196 u/l (md, 95% ci 131 -260, p < 0.0001, i 2 = 77%).chen et al (30) reported that for ldh, the or was 1.02 (95% ci 1.00-1.02, p < 0.05) for icu admission. with the exception of lu et al. (37) , studies (n = 21) reported high ldh levels in patients, and one study described 98% of patients with ldh levels above the reference interval (21).a small difference was found in ast when comparing severe and non-severe patients, as ast was 8.5 u/l higher (md, 95% ci 3.0 -14.0, p = 0.003, i 2 = 67%) in patients with severe disease. for alt, no association with severe disease was found (md 3.5 u/l, 95% ci -2.6 -9.7, p = 0.26, i 2 = 72%). this persisted if excluding the study of zhou et al (18) , which only measured alt. in chen et al (30) , neither ast, nor alt were associated with icu admission. overall, several studies found increased ast (9-11, 18, 19, 21, 26, 27, 31, 36, 37, 39-42) and alt (9, 11, 13, 18, 19, 21, 25-27, 31, 36, 37, 39-42) in a subset of patients, ranging from 3.8 -80% of patients.several other laboratory tests were evaluated in patients with covid-19 (see supplementary table   1 and 2 for details on all the parameters mentioned by the included studies). thus, some patients with covid-19 showed increased ferritin and erythrocyte sedimentation range, whilst most patients had bilirubin within the reference range. in accordance with impaired coagulation, as assessed with ddimer and prothrombin time, the literature suggests that activated partial thromboplastin time is prolonged in patients with covid-19 (21, 28, 31, 40, 41) . elevated fibrinogen was also observed in some publications (17, 28, 32) . ck-mb was reported by seven studies (11, 13, 20, 21, 26, 31, 39) , and one study found the cardiac biomarker elevated in up to 50% of patients with covid-19 (26) .creatine kinase was elevated in a subset of patients from in 12 out of the 17 studies that investigated this parameter (9, 11, 13, 18, 24, 27, 31, 42) . five studies reported on findings regarding the acidbase balance, and found decreased pao2 in a large part of patients with covid-19 infection (12, 13, 27, 32, 41) .the 45 studies included were assessed using the quadas-2 tool; figure 3 shows the summary of the quadas-2 evaluation of the 21 studies included in the meta-analysis (see supplementary table   3 for details on all studies). for patient selection, most studies (86%) consecutively included patients with covid-19 infection, and both risk of bias and applicability concern generally was low.regarding the risk of bias for laboratory tests, 33% of the studies either did not report reference intervals, specified cut-offs for the laboratory parameters, or stated timing of the laboratory tests (i.e.if the laboratory test were analyses at hospital admission or during admission). as the index test results were interpreted without the knowledge of the reference standard in 95% of the included studies (i.e. blood samples were analysed at admission), the risk of bias was primarily due to lack of clearly stated reference intervals or cut-off. a high applicability concern was found in 24% of studies, as blinding status and threshold values used were not stated or defined. in terms of outcome evaluation, most studies stated outcome and/ or disease severity a priori, and risk of bias was overall low. for applicability concern, some studies did not clearly define outcome and/ or definitions of disease severity, and interpretations of outcome in terms of laboratory analysis was unclear in 9% and high in 14%. risk of bias was highest in timing and flow (43%), due to missing data. adjustments for other prognostic factors and survival analysis to obtain hazard ratios were not used in any of the studies.regarding publication bias, we found significant heterogeneity for wbc and crp, but publication bias was low for the remaining analytes (see supplemental figure 2 ).this review summarizes the laboratory findings of patients with laboratory confirmed covid-19 from 45 studies. severe disease was associated with higher wbc, higher crp, higher d-dimer, higher ldh, higher ast and lower lymphocyte count, lower platelet count, and lower haemoglobin at admission. we found no association between neither creatinine nor procalcitonin and disease severity. the findings are robust, as the associations were consistent in all sensitivity analysis. thus, exclusion of studies that fell outside the funnel plots, studies with a poor quadas-2 assessment, or a study with a paediatric population (13) did not alter the conclusions.interpretation of the patient's clinical features and laboratory results at admission are essential for implementing and adjusting an appropriate treatment. in this aspect, the typical pattern of laboratory results may, in times of a pandemic, aid in faster patient management and risk stratification of the individual patient.moderately increased crp, white blood cell count, and neutrophil count with normal or only slightly elevated procalcitonin were among the laboratory findings in hospitalized patients with covid-19.this observation is in accordance with typical findings in viral infection and thus, it does not itself exclude other infective viral agents (44) . a recent systematic review showed that in managing community-acquired pneumonia, procalcitonin does not enable clinicians to immediately determine whether the infection is bacterial or viral and thus if antibiotics should be administered or withheld (45) . the current evidence in covid-19 does not seem to alter this conclusion.for patients with covid-19, the exact cause of death is still somewhat unclear, but both hypoxia and multiorgan dysfunction are presumed causes (21) . organ dysfunction, including acute kidney injury, has been reported for a significant proportion of patients with critical covid-19 disease (46) . in the presented studies, we found no association between markers of kidney function (creatinine at admission) and disease severity during hospitalization, in spite of several studies describing some patients having creatinine above the reference interval. similarly, there was only little association between markers of liver function (alt, ast, and prothrombin time) at time of admission and severe disease course. while this may be due to erroneous classification of severe disease, it could also reflect that deterioration often occurs during disease exacerbation, which was illustrated by zhou et al. (18) , who found significantly increased d-dimer and ldh over time in non-survivors. another interesting finding is that higher d-dimer at time of admission is present in patients developing severe disease. tang et al (17) thus found that 71% of non-survivors versus < 1% of survivors met the criteria of disseminated intravascular coagulation during their hospital stay, making disseminated intravascular coagulation a likely contributor to cause of death. few studies described patients with high creatine kinase or elevated ck-mb. thus, muscular affection is a possibly a part of the disease manifestation and might cause cardiac insufficiency (47) . the four studies reporting on troponin (8, 11, 18, 20) , found increased troponin to be associated with icu admission and death, supporting cardiac insufficiency as a causality of death in some patients. whilst several other biomarkers were evaluated in the included studies, the present findings do not allow for any conclusions as to their use in covid-19.a strength of the included studies is that patients had laboratory confirmed sars-cov-2, and most included patients consecutively. the majority of studies furthermore reported laboratory analysis from the patients at admission. limitations are that several studies had a weak or unclear definition of disease severity and did not disclose time course from admission to end of follow up. the studies did not include prognostic effect estimates such as hazard ratios or risk ratios. only the study be chen et al. (30) evaluated odds ratios, and adjustments for confounders were lacking. the studies available at the time this review was conducted did thus not allow for longitudinal data to be included in the meta-analysis, as the studies were mainly descriptive and did not provide survival analyses. the studies do, however, provide essential information regarding the laboratory data at admission as a tool for risk stratification of patients with covid-19. another limitation is that most of the studies were published before an outcome was reached for all the patients included, which may induce classification bias. the study populations were heterogeneous in terms of age and comorbidities. as children generally have been found to be mildly affected by covid-19 (48) , and have reference intervals that differ from adults (49) , studies with mixed populations may abrogate an association between laboratory results and outcome as reported by the studies. however, exclusion of the paediatric study did not alter results.the current data did not allow for molecular and serologic tests to be included. in depth analysis of both molecular and serologic findings regarding covid-19 disease severity is, however, relevant, to ensure both an enhanced understanding of covd-19 disease mechanisms, as well as determining the use of these tests as prognostic markers.the current evidence indicates that there is a specific laboratory pattern at admission for patients with severe covid-19 disease course, which can be applied both for triaging of and treatment decision for patients. based on the present findings, patients with a severe covid-19 disease course are likely to have a distinct pattern in terms of the results of routine laboratory tests. this favours a systematic approach with the use of multiple relevant routine tests, rather than a single specific biomarker.further research regarding the use of laboratory tests as prognostic biomarkers of covid-19 disease severity and outcome is needed. such research needs to be consistent and homogeneous in terms of disease severity definition and evaluate adjusted prognostic effect estimates.author contributions: all authors confirmed they have contributed to the intellectual content of this paper and have met the following 4 requirements: (a) significant contributions to the conception and design, acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of data; (b) drafting or revising the article for intellectual content; (c) final approval of the published article; and (d) agreement to be accountable for all aspects of the article thus ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the article are appropriately investigated and resolved.a. alnor, statistical analysis, administrative support, provision of study material or patients; p.j. vinholt, statistical analysis. figure 1 flow diagram of study selection. quadas-2 risk of bias and applicability assessment. quadas-2 risk of bias and applicability concern for the studies included in the meta-analysis (n = 21), showing the author's evaluation of each domain as percentages of included studies. green, red and orange colour indicates low, unclear or high risk or applicability concern, respectively. full quadas-2 for all studies is available in supplementary table 3. recently, the novel pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus 28 (sars-cov-2) has rapidly spread worldwide and become a pandemic, despite 29 city-wide quarantines and travel bans in many countries [1] . by april 15, 2020, integral components of public health include strengthening the supervision of 36 infectious diseases, realizing early warning and preventing infectious disease 37 pandemics, especially emerging infectious diseases. there are many technologies to 38 surveil the spatial-temporal characteristics of infectious diseases, such as sentinel 39 surveillance, clinical-based surveillance, questionnaires or surveys, hospital admission 40 data, mortality and morbidity rates, which hold great significance for infectious 41 disease surveillance [4] . however, most of these approaches depend on acquired data 42 and information, such as incidence and mortality rates, prescription data and 43 hospitalization information, and herein, most of these systems are passive monitoring 44 forms. therefore, these techniques are subject to bias, resource insensitivity, detection 45 blindness and high cost [5] . taking countries with limited health services as an 46 example, the incidence rate may be higher than the assumed value due to a lack of 47 access to health services [6] . there are blind areas for epidemic monitoring using 48 traditional techniques. because infectious disease testing is not available to everyone, 49 potential patients and asymptomatic patients cannot be effectively counted and 50 monitored, leading to an unknown extent of the spread. for example, it has been reported 51 that approximately 60% of asymptomatic or mild sars-cov-2 infections may lead to a 52 second outbreak [7] . sometimes in serious epidemics, laboratory facilities are easily 53 overburdened, and many cases are not reported. in addition, with the acceleration of 54 global urbanization and the unprecedented growth in population, higher requirements 55 are proposed for rapid health monitoring and response, which undoubtedly poses a 56 challenge to the existing infectious disease monitoring and management system. 57 therefore, novel monitoring and management approaches are needed for the 58 prevention and early warning of infectious diseases. these technologies should be 59 flexible, cost effective and scalable and should provide comprehensive and objective 60 data in real time. meanwhile, they also need to monitor multiple diseases, even rare 61 diseases, in limited resource settings. considering the current insufficient clinical and 62 laboratory information [8] , it is valuable to provide a novel surveillance and early 63 warning techniques to compensate for the shortcomings of traditional tools/methods 64 and to provide comprehensive and timely population exposure and disease results.recently, wastewater-based epidemiology (wbe), which can provide objective and 66 comprehensive real-time assessments of public and environmental health status, has 67 developed rapidly.as an effective health assessment approach, wbe has great potential for the 69 prevention and early warning of infectious disease outbreaks for public health. therefore, we first briefly introduce the principle of wbe and its wide application. to key aspects of infectious disease information. in addition, not only can the 122 spatial-temporal trends be determined but this information can also be monitored in in addition, the ultimate goal of wbe is to achieve on-site monitoring and provide 207 real-time data, which is also a guarantee of using wbe to provide early warning 208 timeliness of infectious disease outbreaks. analytical tools are required for simple, 209 rapid, cost-effective, sensitive, selective and multi-target analysis. the latest 210 developments in sensor methods make field measurements possible so that the system 211 can provide real-time infectious disease and public health information (see figure 2 ). 212 we also propose tracing covid sources using an inexpensive and efficient 213 paper-based biosensor [43] . at present, the research in this area is relatively weak, and only a few scientists have performed related studies [21] . this is an important 215 challenge for wbe with a wide application of early warning of infectious diseases, 216 and many more scientists should focus on this technical limitation in the future. biomarker concentration must also be within a certain range to detect biomarkers in 226 wastewater downstream [44] . another important feature is that biomarkers must be 227 stable, not only in wastewater systems but also during sampling and storage [45] . 228 therefore, it is important to find suitable biomarkers for specific infectious diseases it is generally believed that an effective monitoring system is the key to quickly severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2funding: this contemporary review did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies 36 in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. 37in december 2019, covid-19 was first described in wuhan, china, in patients complaining 57 of flu-like symptoms. 1 the virus was isolated and identified as a new strain of coronavirus, 58 now named sars-cov-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2). mortality 59 rate of covid-19 is estimated to be below 1%, 2 mainly due to the severe acute respiratory 60 syndrome and multi-organ dysfunction. cardiovascular complications of covid-19 received 61 less medical attention; nevertheless, the first cases of myocarditis in covid- 19 patients have 62 been reported. [3] [4] [5] [6] moreover, myocarditis was recognized as the cause of death in some 63 covid-19 patients. 7 pathology is usually focal within the myocardium, but there is a risk of 64 arrhythmia, as well as progression to fulminant heart failure and cardiogenic shock. this 65 article outlines the possible pathophysiology of covid-19-related myocarditis, its clinical 66 presentation, as well as the associated arrhythmias. the criteria for screening and 67 management of myocarditis relating to covid-19 are also proposed. myocarditis is an inflammatory disease of the heart characterized by inflammatory infiltrates 72 and myocardial injury without an ischemic cause. 8 the most commonly identifiable cause of 73 myocarditis in the united states other developed countries is viral. 9 , 10 esfandiarei and 74mcmanus 8 proposed that the pathophysiology of viral myocarditis is a combination of direct 75 cell injury and t-lymphocytes-mediated cytotoxicity which can be augmented by the 76 cytokine storm syndrome. interleukin-6 (il-6) appears to be the central mediator of cytokine 77 storm where it orchestrates the pro-inflammatory responses from immune cells including the 78 t-lymphocytes. 11 this causes t-lymphocyte activation and a further release of inflammatory 79 cytokines which stimulate more t-lymphocytes, leading to a positive feedback loop of 80 immune activation and myocardial damage. cardiotropism of the t-lymphocytes is thought 81 to arise from the interaction between the heart-produced hepatocyte growth factor (hgf) and 82 c-met, a hgf receptor on naïve t-lymphocytes. 12 despite being a minor cause of all viral myocarditis cases, human coronaviruses have been 86 linked to myocarditis in patients of all age groups. [13] [14] [15] the viral rnas of mers-cov and 87 sars-cov, which are close relatives of sars-cov-2, were found in the heart tissues of 88 infected animals, suggesting that these coronaviruses possess cardiotropism. 16 possible pathophysiology of sars-cov-2-related myocarditis 100 sars-cov-2 gains entry into the human cells by binding its spike protein to a membrane 101 protein, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). 20 however, the spike protein must first 102 be cleaved at the s1/s2 and subsequently at the s2' sites to enable binding to the ace2. 103cleavage at the s1/s2 site appears to be mediated by tmprss2, a serine protein. 20 the 104 ace2 can be found on the ciliated columnar epithelial cells of the respiratory tract, type ii 105 pneumocytes as well as cardiomyocytes. 21, 22 therefore, it is plausible that sars-cov-2 106infects the human heart, especially when there is heart failure since ace2 is upregulated, 23 107 although the presence of viral receptors does not always predict tropism. 24 108there are at least 6 known accessory proteins which can be transcribed by the sars-cov-2 110 genome. 25 it remains to be determined whether any of the accessory proteins do provide 111 infectivity advantage as in mers-cov and sars-cov. it is unclear how prevalent myocarditis is among covid-19 patients. this is partly because 117 the early reports often lacked the specific diagnostic modalities to assess myocarditis. some 118 argued that up to 7% of the covid-19-related deaths were attributable to myocarditis; 26 119 however, this was assumed and not based on a confirmatory diagnosis of myocarditis and 120 may be an overestimate. on the other hand, many laboratories are rationing tests and first 121 screening for known pathogens resulting in flu-like symptoms. if a positive pathogen is 122 identified, then testing for sars-cov-2 is not performed. this is erroneous and likely to 123 miss the true frequency of sars-cov-2 infection as it assumes mutual exclusivity of sars-124cov-2. one report has identified 24.5% of covid-19 patients to have co-infection with 125 other viruses. 27 hence, it is possible that many cases of covid-19-related myocarditis were 126 missed due to a lack of sars-cov-2 diagnosis. 127certain ethnic groups may be disproportionately affected by sars-cov-2. covid-19 death 129 rates were shown to be higher among the african-american population than other ethnicities 130 in many american states. 28 whilst this may partially be explained by the higher 131 cardiovascular risk factors or genetic predisposition to poorer cardiac outcomes, 29 hubei, china reported a 7.3% incidence of heart palpitations among its 137 patients. 30 140moreover, wang et al. 31 reported that arrhythmia was a cause of icu transfer in 44.4% of 141 covid-19 patients. caution is encouraged when interpreting these data as the sample size 142 tends to be small and hence prone to overestimation. the exact nature of the arrhythmias was 143 also not usually reported, rendering it difficult to assess whether they are secondary to other 144 conditions such as electrolyte imbalance or pre-existing arrhythmias. the actual prevalence 145 of arrhythmias in covid-19 patients; therefore, remains unknown. nevertheless, 146 arrhythmias could occur in the context of myocarditis. peretto et al. 32 reported in a recent 147 study that 78.7% of myocarditis patients exhibited some forms of ventricular arrhythmias. 148the characteristics of arrhythmias also differ between the active and healed myocarditis, 32 149 suggesting that the pathophysiology is dependent on the stage of myocardial injury. shown that pro-inflammatory cytokines, e.g. il-6, might cause the displacement of 159 plakoglobin, a desmosomal protein, from the cardiomyocyte membrane. 35 this could be 160 arrhythmogenic as inadequate cell-to-cell adherence is postulated to damage the cell 161 membrane, leading to cardiac cell death and fibrofatty replacement. 36 moreover, reduced 162 surface expression of desmosomal proteins is a known etiology of arrhythmogenic 163 cardiomyopathies. 36 substantial evidence has now suggested an increase in serum il-6 in 164 covid-19 patients, especially in those with severe presentations. 37 it is, therefore, plausible 165 that sars-cov-2 infection precipitates arrhythmias in patients with a genetic predisposition. of tachycardia and acute-onset heart failure with cardiogenic shock. [3] [4] [5] in these severe cases, 176 patients may also present with signs of right-sided heart failure, including raised jugular 177 venous pressure, peripheral edema and right upper quadrant pain. 10 the most emergent 178 presentation is fulminant myocarditis, defined by ventricular dysfunction and heart failure 179 within 2-3 weeks of contracting the virus. 8 the early signs of fulminant myocarditis usually 180 resemble those of sepsis; i.e., a patient often presents febrile with low pulse pressure, cold or 181 mottled periphery and sinus tachycardia. 10 sepsis-related cardiomyopathy: a case series study showed that 67% of critically-ill 220 covid-19 patients required vasopressor and that 33% developed cardiomyopathy. 40 this 221 raises suspicion of sepsis-related cardiomyopathy, a disease characterized by reversible 222 myocardial dysfunction. the myocardial injury is thought to arise from raised nitric oxide 223 production which suppresses the cardiomyocyte's response to calcium and downregulates the 224 heart's 1-adrenergic receptors. 41 the three cardinal signs of sepsis-related cardiomyopathy takotsubo cardiomyopathy is usually preceded by an emotional or physical stressor. 42 of 233 note, a case report described a covid-19 patient who initially presented as having reverse 234 an effective alternative, especially when the patient is to undertake the high-resolution ct 255 scan of the chest for assessment of the acute respiratory distress syndrome (figure 3j) . 256contrast-enhanced cardiac ct will add very little scanning time, and it is particularly useful 257 in this situation to perform a test rapidly with minimal requirement for breath-holding. 44 without the cmr or contrast-enhanced ct results, it is arduous to distinguish myocarditis 259 from other differential diagnoses. and rna-dna extraction performed to test for the presence of viral genomes. 45 regarding 266the contagious spread risk, should coronary angiography be deemed necessary, it is 267 reasonable to perform the right heart procedures and/or emb concomitantly as these will add 268 minimal risk, whilst adding 15-minutes to the procedure time. it also serves as an opportunity 269 for accurate diagnosis and provides tissues for the development of specific biomarkers which 270 could be useful for developing a diagnostic test for sars-cov-2 myocarditis. in the tragic 271 situation where a patient is deceased, we suggest that an autopsy be performed and include 272 the heart as this provides an opportunity to observe its gross and microscopic pathology, are not undergoing clinical testing such as an ecg or cardiac imaging. as the emphasis is to 282 evaluate and admit patients with severe lower respiratory tract symptoms, many patients with 283 possible myocarditis will never be evaluated. some of these may survive the acute event but 284 may be at risk of subsequent arrhythmias. in a study of patients with active and healed 285 myocarditis, monomorphic ventricular tachycardia and regular ventricular arrhythmias were 286 more frequent in healed than acute myocarditis. 32 involves mechanical circulatory support such as extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, 297 ventricular assist device, or intra-aortic balloon pump. the esc did not endorse the use of 298 intravenous immunoglobulin due to a lack of supporting evidence, 9 and discouraged the use 299 of corticosteroids in active-infection myocarditis, citing the ineffectiveness of corticosteroids 300 in a randomized-controlled trial. 46 case reports of coronavirus-related myocarditis provide a glimpse into the efficacy of some 303 of the aforementioned treatments. supplemental table 1 is a summary of 9 case reports on 304 patients with coronavirus-related myocarditis. mechanical circulatory support was deployed 305 in 2/7 cases (where treatment modalities were reported). 3, 47 presumably, in a more 306 hemodynamically stable case, medical treatment consisting of inotropes or vasopressors was 307 sufficient to mitigate the ventricular systolic dysfunction. 4, 13, 48 in some cases, 308 immunomodulatory treatments were given; zeng et al. (2020) 3 in covid-19. currently, chloroquine is under a phase iib clinical trial to assess its efficacy 332 in treating covid-19 patients with severe respiratory syndrome. 52 both chloroquine and its 333 derivative, hydroxychloroquine, may cause qtc interval prolongation; however, their effects 334 appear to be modest. 51 nevertheless, (hydroxy)chloroquine requires metabolism by the 335 cyp3a4 enzyme 53 whose inhibition might raise the drug's plasma concentration, rapid identification of infectious agents (viruses, bacteria, and fungi) is critical for the diagnosis and effective treatment of diseases. the monitoring of biohazards in the environment and the detection of pathogens in foodstuffs are also crucial to protect human health. various procedures have traditionally been used to collect, isolate, and identify pathogens from different specimens and samples. in general, culture methods using differential and selective media are employed for isolation and identification. the identification is based on microscopic observation, colonial morphology, and phenotypic characteristics on isolation medium. further, biochemical, serological, and molecular biology methods are employed for the definitive identification of microbial isolates. these established methods are often timeconsuming and labor-intensive. for instance, cultivation on differential media and selective media might take days to weeks. differentiation of clinical microorganisms to the species level might require as many as 20 biochemical tests. consequently, the need for alternative procedures that allow the rapid and reliable identification of microorganisms is increasing. mass spectrometry (ms) is a powerful tool in biological research, and represents an attractive alternative to classical biochemical methods, especially for the accurate identification and classification of microbial species (anhalt & fenselau, 1975; cain, lubman, & weber, 1994; lay, 2001; demirev & fenselau, 2008a) .there are challenges associated with identification of various types of pathogens from wide range of samples. viruses are ultramicroscopic and they must be cultivated within a susceptible cell. unlike bacterial proteomes, viral proteomes are relatively small. therefore, available biomarkers might be limited. the cell wall of gram-positive bacteria is more difficult to disrupt than that of gram-negative bacteria. because of the resistance of spores, methods to identify them require germination and cultivation of the resulting vegetative cells. microbiological analysis of a variety of samples generally requires specific approaches, as a first step, to isolate and culture the microorganisms. liquid samples such as milk and body fluids might be directly cultured in media. solid samples such as food are blended and diluted before culturing. airborne pathogens should be sampled with an air sampler before further analysis.the applicability of ms to the analysis of complex biomolecules has been greatly improved by the introduction of two softionization techniques-electrospray ionization (esi) and matrixassisted laser desorption/ionization (maldi) ms. these two soft-ionization methods ionize large molecules with little or no fragmentation, and therefore have been applied to analyze various biomolecules such as carbohydrates, proteins and peptides, dna and rna, and synthetic polymers. maldi and esi have both been effectively used for the accurate analysis of peptides and the determination of peptide sequences to identify and characterize proteins in microorganisms (yao, demirev, & fenselau, 2002; dworzanski et al., 2004) . these methods can be easily implemented in a straightforward diagnostic procedure to identify reliably the genus, species and, in some cases, subspecies of bacteria.microbial samples can be analyzed with ms by using a culture or a non-culture approach. figure 1 presents an overview of ms-based approaches to identify and characterize microorganisms. in culture approaches, potential biomarkers are analyzed directly with maldi-ms or extracted/digested, separated by chromatography, and identified with ms. in non-culture approaches, cell enrichment (with affinity methods) is performed with physical, chemical, or biochemical interactions with target cells, followed by ms analysis. the coupling of air sampling and polymerase chain reaction (pcr) amplification to ms has also been developed to detect microorganisms. finally, unknown microorganisms are identified with a database search and/or a computer algorithm.mass spectrometry (ms) analysis of microorganisms present in complex biological samples obtained from food, water, and clinical specimens must often be preceded by purification and concentration. affinity extraction can effectively clean up, enrich, and probe analytes of interest from complex biological mixtures. nanostructures have many characteristics that favor their use as selective extraction agents, and their small size makes them inherently effective as concentration agents. the field of nanotechnology has seen explosive growth in recent years, primarily because of the availability of new strategies for the synthesis of nanomaterials and new tools for characterization and manipulation (curtis & wilkinson, 2001; levy et al., 2002) . generally, biological molecules such as proteins/enzymes, antigens/antibodies, and dna/oligonucleotides have been immobilized on the surfaces of nanoparticles with supports of organic/inorganic and polymer matrices. exploiting the unique electronic, optical, and magnetic properties of nanomaterials, bioconjugated nanomaterials provide a novel platform for the development of nanobiotechnology to identify microorganisms (gu et al., 2003a) . sample concentration techniques that are based on nanotechnology have potential applications to detect pathogens in complex samples.the complexity of microbial biomarkers might be reduced with various chromatography-based methods. however, sample preparation and fractionation tend to slow down measurements. efficient separation approaches should be considered to achieve a fast and high-throughput analysis. various techniques, such as liquid chromatography (lc), capillary electrophoresis (ce), two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2dge), protein precipitation, membrane-based methods (dialysis, ultrafiltration), supercritical fluid extraction, and solid-phase microextraction have been developed for sample pretreatment (wang & hanash, 2005; bodzon-kulakowska et al., 2007) . this article focuses only on sample fractionation methods that are used to identify microorganisms. ms analysis of various classes of biomolecules (peptides, proteins, nucleic acids, oligosaccharides, and lipids) with hyphenated ms techniques, including gas chromatography (gc), ce, and lc, are described. the direct analysis of pathogens with maldi-ms has several advantages, such as rapidity and simplicity. this review also describes direct methods, such as bioaerosol mass spectrometry (bams) and affinity methods, such as surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization (seldi).various research groups have developed ambient ionization techniques, including desorption electrospray ionization (desi) (takats et al., 2004) , direct analysis in real time (dart) (cody, laramee, & durst, 2005) , and electrospray-assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry (eldi) (shiea et al., 2005) . some of these techniques have been applied to examine bacterial samples without prior sample preparation, and enabled researchers to collect fingerprint-spectra of bacteria in less than a minute with a mass spectrometer (takats et al., 2004) . the review will briefly describe recent progress in microbial analysis with desi, dart, and other techniques, such as inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (icp-ms) and secondary ion mass spectrometry (sims).genotypic methods such as pcr and nucleotide sequence analysis might be used as diagnostic tools to identify pathogens. pcr methods are particularly promising because of their high specificity and sensitivity. although pcr methods are quite useful to identify microbial species, they cannot be used for classification, especially when the microbial identities are unknown. the combination of pcr and ms is an even more powerful tool for microbial identification; in some cases, it yields additional information that cannot be obtained from either technique alone (sampath et al., 2007b) . the esi-based detection of pcr products and maldi-based resequencing provide detailed genomic information that is useful in the rapid identification of microorganisms (sauer & kliem, 2010) . lc-esi-ms has been successfully used to make mass measurements of bacterial pcr amplicons (mayr et al., 2005) . ion-pair reversed-phase highperformance lc with monolithic capillary columns has been employed for the rapid and efficient on-line purification of dna fragments amplified by pcr because it can be fully automated with a high throughput (oberacher et al., 2000; berger et al., 2002) .the utility of ms as an analytical tool for pathogens depends on the availability of a variety of ms methods and instruments that each provides particular pieces of information regarding the identity of the sample. the complexity of the relevant experimental data has led to the development of many dedicated algorithms to extract and interpret useful information. the review will also introduce methods of data analysis, including library searches and statistical approaches, to differentiate among pathogens and conclude with selected examples of applications of microbial analysis. the review is intended to cover most current ms techniques of microbial analysis. clearly, although not all of the recently published literature will be referred to, representative studies will be described.microbial biomarkers might be suppressed by the ions that are formed from complex matrices during ms analysis. various affinity probes have been used to concentrate and purify the bacteria of interest. fenselau and co-workers described the detection of bacteria from complex biological mixtures using affinity capture coupled with maldi-ms. they proposed an affinity method to trap traces of bacterial cells from complex biological mixtures with a lectin-immobilized substrate. this technique offers a broad range with less-selective recovery because many bacteria have lectin on their cell surfaces (bundy & fenselau, 1999; bundy & fenselau, 2001; afonso & fenselau, 2003) . recently, affinity surfaces modified with immunoglobulin g (igg) or small peptides that were selected from phage libraries were used to isolate protein a from staphylococcus aureus. the structure of protein a was identified with maldi-ms (johnson et al., 2009) . over the past decade, a number of biomedical applications of magnetic micro-and nanoparticles of various sizes, shapes, and compositions have emerged (berry & curtis, 2003) . immunomagnetic separation has been widely used to reduce the detection time/suppression effect, and to improve detection sensitivity. magnetic particles conjugated with a specific antibody can selectively separate a target pathogen from complex samples (ochoa & harrington, 2005) . voorhees et al. proposed an approach that used affinity-capture techniques, such as immunomagnetic separation, to concentrate and isolate bacteria from complex sample solutions, which was followed with a maldi-ms analysis (madonna et al., 2001; madonna, van cuyk, & voorhees, 2003a) . the method involved microsized magnetic beads immobilized with affinity-purified antibodies. the immuno-captured bacterium was further infected with a bacteriophage (a lytic virus). phage amplification occurred within the living bacterial cell and induced cell lysis. many phage progeny released into the sample medium and detection of the phage capsid proteins from the medium indicated the presence of the bacterium. the detectable concentration was improved to $5.0 â 10 4 cells/ml and the analysis could be finished within 2 hr. because many antibodies and bacteriophages are commercially available, the approach has the potential to analyze speciesor even strain-specific bacteria and to improve their detection limit.the rapid and sensitive detection of microorganisms at low concentrations is a challenging task. functionalized magnetic nanoparticles very efficiently concentrate pathogens from large sample volumes into much smaller volumes. a minimum capture efficiency of 94% for e. coli o157:h7 at concentrations from 1.6 â 10 1 to 7.2 â 10 7 colony forming unit (cfu)/ml with magnetic nanoparticle-anti-e. coli conjugates has been reported (varshney et al., 2005) . various carbohydrates have been recognized as receptors for the attachment of pathogens to epithelial cells of e. coli (sharon, 2006) . for example, mannose-encapsulated gold nanoparticles have been used to observe the specific binding to a fimh protein of bacterial type 1 pili e. coli (lin et al., 2002) . the covalent binding between nanoparticles and targets is easily achieved with the self-assembly of thiolated molecules on the nanoparticles (thiol-metal interactions). gu et al. developed a strategy that used vancomycin-conjugated fe-pt nanoparticles to capture and detect pathogens such as vancomycin-resistant enterococci and other gram-positive bacteria or -negative bacteria at exceptionally low concentrations (gu et al., 2003a (gu et al., ,b, 2006 . they used optical and scanning electron microscopy to observe the captured bacteria. the thiol-metal binding protocol enabled the detection of bacteria from the samples within 1 hr, and had a detection limit of 10 cfu/ml (gu et al., 2003a) .several research groups have investigated nanoparticles as extraction/concentration agents for coupling with ms. figure 2 shows the experimental procedure for the selective extraction and concentration of microorganisms with functionalized magnetic nanoparticles, followed by detection with maldi-ms. after functionalized magnetic nanoparticles are added to an eppendorf tube that contains microbial cells, the suspension is incubated under gentle vortexing. the magnetic nanoparticles interact with the pathogens, and efficiently attach to them. the nanoparticle-microbial cell conjugates are isolated by magnetic separation, and are deposited on a maldi target for ms analysis. chen's research group used functionalized nanoparticles to probe pathogenic bacteria . they proposed a simple method to fabricate igg functionalized gold nanoparticles as useful probes of the electrostatic interactions between igg and pathogens (ho et al., 2004) . the igg-modified magnetic nanoparticles, which bind selectively to igg-binding sites on the cell walls of pathogens, serve as affinity probes to capture targeted bacteria from sample solutions. the optimal detectable cell concentration of bacteria in aqueous sample solutions (staphylococcus saprophyticus and s. aureus, 0.5 ml) and in urine samples (s. saprophyticus, 0.5 ml) was $3 â 10 5 and $3 â 10 7 cfu/ml, respectively (ho et al., 2004) . the same group used the igg-fe 3 o 4 @tio 2 magnetic nanoparticles as identification of pathogens by mass spectrometry & photokilling agents that exhibit antimicrobial activity against pathogenic bacteria under uv irradiation . they also employed vancomycin-modified magnetic nanoparticles for the selective isolation of gram-positive pathogens (s. saprophyticus, s. aureus, and e. faecalis) from sample solutions. the optimal detectable concentration of s. saprophyticus and s. aureus spiked in a urine sample was $7 â 10 4 cfu/ml . recently, pigeon ovalbumin-bound fe 3 o 4 @al 2 o 3 magnetic nanoparticles have been used as affinity probes to trap selectively uropathogenic p fimbriated e. coli from bacteria-spiked urine samples (liu et al., 2008) and pseudomonas aeruginosa ) from clinical urine samples through disaccharide-protein interactions. they have been able to detect peptide signal from 250 ml of samples at a concentration as low as 4 â 10 4 cells/ml, corresponding to 10 2 cells deposited on the maldi plate. guo and coworkers utilized anion-exchange/cation-exchange magnetic nanoparticles as affinity probes to separate bacteria from water . the positively charged nanoparticles interacted with bacteria (generally carrying negative charges). this approach was used to analyze various bacteria spiked in tap water and reservoir water with a detection limit of 1 â 10 3 cfu/ml in 2 hr. although most of the above affinity methods employ maldi-ms for microbial analysis, lc-esi-ms should be in principle as feasible as maldi-ms.the most important advantage of affinity-based nanotechnology is its ability to concentrate and purify microbial cells from complex samples such as urine. microorganisms might be identified directly with maldi-ms without microbial culturing. direct maldi analysis of microorganisms in urine samples would be hindered by the high amounts of salts without the affinity-enrichment step (liu et al., 2008) . notably, different cell counting methods are used among various labs and absolute cell number or cfu per volume are reported in literatures. although cfu reflects the viable cell number, absolute cell number is likely higher than those indicated by the cfu value. limits of detection given in these two units should be compared carefully.when a large set of digested peptides that are obtained from a complex microorganism are analyzed, maldi-ms yields spectra that are too complicated to be interpreted. moreover, maldi-ms is relatively difficult to couple on-line with sample pretreatment and separation methods, and cannot easily be automated. esi-ms, however, allows on-line detection to be combined with sample purification, concentration, and separation techniques, such as microdialysis, solid phase extraction, lc, and ce. thus, esi-ms is effective to analyze complex systems. goodacre, heald, and kell (1999) applied esi-ms to characterize strains of intact gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. the bacteria were suspended in 50% acetonitrile/water (1%, v/v, formic acid) for positive esi and the samples were analyzed in 50% isopropanol/water for negative esi. this approach produces the information-rich spectra, in both the positive and negative ion modes, from whole bacterial suspensions, but requires the cells to be suspended in solvent before analysis. further, xiang et al. (2000) employed esi-ms/ms to identify bacteria by analyzing cell lysates. vaidyanathan et al. also investigated the effectiveness of direct esi-ms of bacterial cell lysates/extracts without prior chromatographic separation (vaidyanathan, kell, & goodacre, 2002; vaidyanathan et al., 2001; vaidyanathan, o'hagan, & goodacre, 2006) . this approach yields informative mass spectra from microbial cells and crude cell extracts that are used in microbial characterizations.the combination of ms with lc is one of the most important analytical methods to separate and identify a wide variety of biological samples (banoub et al., 2005) . lc-ms is rapidly being developed as a tool in proteomics to deal with the inherent complexity of a biological system, and to complement conventional approaches that are based on 2dge (delahunty & yates, 2005) . furthermore, lc-ms has greatly facilitated the determination of the molecular weights of proteins from complicated mixtures. krishnamurthy et al. (1999) used lc-esi-ms to identify protein biomarkers specific to individual organisms present in crude bacterial mixtures. lyophilized intact bacterial cells were suspended in 0.1% aqueous tfa (containing 0-20% acetonitrile) to lyse the cells and release cellular proteins or metabolites specific to an individual microorganism. biomarker proteins and peptides were separated with reversed-phase hplc and a chromatogram of biomarker signals was used to distinguish bacteria. however, this work was limited by the complexity of the data generated from esi. a solution to this problem was reported by williams and colleagues with an automated data handling algorithm that provided sequential scanning, centroiding, and deconvolution of multiply charged proteins present in successive scans of the lc-ms analysis (williams, leopold, & musser, 2002) . this approach has proven useful for identifying protein biomarkers of vibrio parahaemolyticus (williams et al., 2004) . the same group demonstrated a method in which lc-ms was used to identify unique proteins that can be sequenced, identified, and reverse engineered into pcr primers that are specific to a desired phenotypic trait, thermal tolerance (williams et al., 2005) . because the genome for enterobacter sakazakii was not sequenced by that time, this methodology provided a unique, independent means to identify genetic differences among closely related strains of this species, without the need for any prior sequencing of the genome. recently, everley et al. discovered reproducible intact protein biomarkers with an lc-esi-ms approach to differentiate and correctly identify unknown pathogens at the species (everley et al., 2008) and strain level (everley et al., 2009 ). the organism bacillus anthracis was identified with the ms/ms analysis of an antigenic protein biomarker ea1 isolated with affinity chromatography and a monoclonal antibody (krishnamurthy et al., 2006) . multi-dimensional protein identification has been used to identify b. anthracis strains (krishnamurthy et al., 2007) . ho and hsu (2002) investigated with lc-esi-ms the effect of variations in the protein patterns obtained from e. coli in bacterial identification.botulinum toxin (btx) and tetanus toxin (ttx) both belong to a family of potent bacterial neurotoxins, and might be used as biological warfare agents. van baar et al. noted that protein toxins can be unambiguously identified with ms, and they exploited this fact in analyses of tetanus (van baar et al., 2002b) and botulinum (van baar et al., 2002a (van baar et al., , 2004 toxins. lc-ms/ms of selected precursor ions from trypsin digest fragments yielded specific sequence data for the identification of the protein toxins. the authors showed that accurate strain assignments were possible when genetic sequences were available.mass spectrometry (ms) analysis of bacterial proteins or digests of protein extracts (zhou et al., 2001) , followed by statistical matching of protein/peptide masses that were detected in an unknown sample to those in a proteome database, has been developed as a useful tool for bacterial identification tao et al., 2004) . figure 3 schematically depicts a proteomic approach to identify microorganisms based on ms/ms analysis. microbial proteins are extracted from a cell lysate and digested. the peptide digests are lc-separated, and are analyzed with ms/ms. the ms/ms spectra are checked against a proteome database to identify the proteins, and to deduce the source of the microorganism. demirev et al. (1999) was the first to propose this method. mathematical methods might be applied to evaluate the search results. hu et al. proposed a method that used lcselective proteotypic peptide analysis (lc-spa) to identify the bacterial species in a complex mixture. many pathogens were simultaneously identified from a series of selective ms/ms analyses of marker peptides in the appropriate elution time windows for the specific peptides. the sequest application was used to check all of the tandem mass spectra of the peptides against the ncbinr protein database. this method successfully identified eight pathogens present in a microbial mixture (lo, hu, & ho, 2006) . dworzanski et al. (2004) developed a method to identify microorganisms or protein toxins based on the lc-ms/ ms analysis of peptides derived from bacterial proteins. in their research, product-ion mass spectra of peptides that were generated from a microbial protein digest were checked against the prototype proteome database (87 bacterial genomes) with sequest, and the results of the search of the database were subjected to discriminant function analysis. instead of matching peptide sequences to a microbial source in the database, dworzanski et al. (2006) employed multivariate statistical methods, such as principal component analysis (pca) and cluster analysis, to determine the peptide-sequence similarities between the unknown species and a database of bacteria, grouped by their established taxonomic position. they classified bacterial species into corresponding taxons based on similarities. more recently, the same group reported on the classification/identification and genotyping of b. anthracis, b. cereus, and b. thuringiensis strains based on the lc-ms/ms analysis of whole-cell protein digests (dworzanski et al., 2010) .lipid biomarkers have also been used extensively to characterize complex microorganisms from various environments with lc-ms or ms/ms analysis (jelinek et al., 2006; zhang et al., 2007) . the collision-induced dissociation of lipid biomarkers produces arrays of fragment ions that reveal structural information about bacteria (moe et al., 2005) . similarly, polar phospholipids can be used as a biomarker of bacterial presence. mazzella et al. (2004) separated and identified with lc-ms most of the phospholipid species (phosphatidylglycerol, phosphatidylinositol, diphosphatidylglycerol, and a unique lipid compound, acyl phosphatidylglycerol) of a gram-positive bacterium (corynebacterium species strain 8). the same group proposed fragmentation pathways and identified the diagnostic ions of two common bacterial phospholipid classes, phosphatidylglycerol and phosphatidylethanolamine. they used lc-ms and ms/ ms methods to determine the structures of intact phospholipids from the two bacterial strains pseudomonas nautica ip 617 and marinobacter hydrocarbonoclasticus, cultured on either ammonium acetate or crude oil (mazzella et al., 2005) .white et al. have developed a rapid method to extract and detect the bacterial biomarker 2,6-dipicolinic acid, from gram-negative bacteria. specific lipid components can also provide insights into the viability and potential infectivity of the pathogens detected in the samples (white et al., 2002) . bacteriohopanoids or bacteriohopanepolyols (bhps) are good biomarkers for bacteria separation and identification. many bacterial species are known to produce various bhps with specific modifications in the side-chain and ring-structure. intact bhps have been directly detected from bacterial isolates with lc-ms/ ms (talbot et al., 2003a,b; talbot, rohmer, & farrimond, 2007a,b) . although lipid markers have been proven to be useful for microbial identification, the dependence of lipid profiles on growth conditions might complicate identification results.capillary electrophoresis allows the rapid and efficient separation of biological molecules with the least consumption of sample and reagents. ce coupled to ms has been established as a method for the fast separation and identification of microorganisms (kolch et al., 2005) . a limited number of articles have described the use of ce-ms to identify microorganisms (chong et al., 2000; hu, tsai, & ho, 2005; lo, hu, & ho, 2006; hu et al., 2007; petr et al., 2009 ). hu et al. applied ce-ms/ms to selected proteotypic peptide ions to obtain partial sequences of protein biomarkers. proteotypic peptides refer to those experimentally observable peptides that identify specific proteins. their proposed approach is a highly selective and sensitive analytical method to characterize the pathogens from microbial mixtures (hu, tsai, & ho, 2005) . they performed a preliminary analysis with ce-ms/ms of the proteolytic digests of cell extracts from pure pathogens, and carried out subsequent database searches to select abundant peptide ions that were specific to the pathogens of interest. minor bacterial species present in the complex mixture at even 1% relative abundance were identified with high confidence. they also applied this method to identify pathogens present in a saliva sample that had been spiked with bacterial mixtures. further, the speed of data analysis was greatly improved because only selected markers, instead of whole-protein digests, were analyzed. ce-ms/ms analysis of proteolytic digests of microbial cell extracts has been combined with sequest searching and a new empirical scoring system to identify bacterial species in microbial mixtures (hu et al., 2007) . the search results for 19 samples of bacterial mixtures revealed that the empirical z-scoring function improved the identification of bacteria in the mixtures. petr et al. (2009) combined ce separation with the off-line ms identification of microorganisms. they separated the model microorganisms e. coli and saccharomyces cerevisiae, and cultivated them after the fractions were collected. after cultivation, desi-ms was used for further identification.matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-mass spectrometry (maldi-ms) allows the fast and accurate identification and subtyping of bacterial species (seng et al., 2009; stevenson, drake, & murray, 2010) , fungi (marinach-patrice et al., 2009 , 2010 santos et al., 2010) , and viruses franco et al., 2010) . currently, most published studies of the direct mass spectrometric analysis of microorganisms are based on maldi techniques (demirev & fenselau, 2008a,b) . direct bacterial profiling with maldi-tofms is based mainly on a comparison of specific mass spectra of the proteins, peptides, and other cellular components that are obtained from microbial cells. one of the first studies using this approach was based on the protein profiles of microorganisms (cain, lubman, & weber, 1994) . although sample preparation is crucial to maldi analysis of microbial markers, there is no universal sample preparation and measurement protocol. many methods have been described since the method for direct maldi analysis of bacteria was proposed. the experimental parameters studied include cultivation conditions, matrices, solvents, cell-lysis, and matrix-spotting methods. microbial cells are generally obtained from a purified liquid culture or a single colony. samples are analyzed by direct deposition of intact cells on the sample plate or using various ways of biomarker extraction. the maldi matrices that most often used are a-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (hcca), ferulic acid (fa), and sinapinic acid (sa). hcca provides better signal-to-noise ratio than fa and sa. fa is suitable for the detection of high-mass ions above 15 kda. a uv laser is often used as an irradiation source. ir-maldi is rarely used to analyze microorganisms because of its somewhat lower sensitivity compared to uv-maldi. although 5 â 10 3 -10 4 intact cells deposited on the maldi plate were sufficient to obtain useful biomarker signals, the detected biomarkers were low-mass ions (less than 1,000 da). it has been reported that 10 6 cells yielded the most good-quality and reproducible spectra for protein fingerprinting (mazzeo et al., 2006) . current protein fingerprinting methods still require culturing of the microbial cells to obtain detectable signals. analysis of non-culturable microorganism remains a challenge.recent studies on maldi analysis of microorganisms have been focused on development of standardized analytical protocols (vargha et al., 2006; ilina et al., 2009 ) and high throughput analysis of pathogenic bacteria (donohue et al., 2006; rajakaruna et al., 2009) . perhaps a universal protocol for sample preparation and analysis will not be obtained, due to the complex nature of maldi experiments. careful control of the sample preparation and measurement parameters is the key to the success of the fingerprinting approaches. the maldi-ms fingerprinting approach has been applied to analyze bacillus spores (dickinson et al., 2004) , campylobacter (mandrell et al., 2005) , salmonella (leuschner, beresford-jones, & robinson, 2004) , aeromonas (donohue et al., 2006) , clostridium (grosse-herrenthey et al., 2008) , streptococcus (williamson et al., 2008) , non-fermenting bacteria (pseudomonas cepacia) (mellmann et al., 2008) , staphylococcus (rajakaruna et al., 2009) , neisseria , and helicobacter (ilina et al., 2010) . the approach has such advantages as being able to detect intact biomarkers, simplicity of sample preparation, broad-band identification, and high throughput.matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (maldi) mass spectra might vary with growth media and growth stage wunschel et al., 2005) . the intra-and inter-laboratory reproducibility of whole-cell ms, and the effect of culture media on the spectral profiles, have been investigated (walker et al., 2002) . williams et al. (2003) discussed the experimental factors that affect the quality and reproducibility of bacterial analysis with maldi-tofms.the cell walls of gram-positive bacteria are usually more difficult to analyze with maldi-ms than those of gram-negative bacteria. therefore, analysis of gram-positive bacteria yields spectra with fewer peaks, lower intensities, and a smaller mass range than the spectra of gram-negative bacteria. several methods have been suggested to overcome these difficulties, including disruption of the cell wall with enzymatic or chemical cleavage (smole et al., 2002; williams et al., 2003) . smole et al. (2002) developed a method to prepare samples of whole-cell gram-positive bacteria for analysis. they found that lysozyme treatment of gram-positive bacteria increased the spectral range to levels close to those of gram-negative bacteria from the enterobacteriaceae family. not only were intact cells analyzed, but also four cell-lysis methods-mechanical, enzymatic, chemical, and heat treatment-were compared (smole et al., 2002; williams et al., 2003) and optimized to increase the complexity of the biomarker profile to develop bacterial species-specific fingerprints. vargha et al. (2006) optimized the experimental parameters of maldi-tofms analysis to differentiate among arthrobacter isolates at the strain level. liu et al. evaluated a universal sample-preparation protocol to analyze gram-positive bacteria (b. anthracis and s. aureus) and gram-negative bacteria (yersinia pestis, e. coli, and b. cepacia) that have high extracellular polysaccharide contents. in their study, three samplepreparation methods (direct analysis, solvent treatment, and enzyme treatment) were tested for the direct analysis of bacteria with maldi-tofms .b. anthracis is the etiological agent of anthrax in humans/ animals, and is recognized to be a potential biological-threat agent that could be used in biological warfare or by terrorists (demirev & fenselau, 2008b; lasch et al., 2009) . numerous lowmolecular-weight proteins can be readily extracted from the spores of b. anthracis and related species. many of these proteins have been identified as small acid-soluble spore proteins (sasps) with various solvents including 10% tfa, 30% acetonitrile and 40% formic acid, 50% acetic acid, and acetonitrile-5% tfa (70:30, vol/vol) (hathout et al., 2003; dickinson et al., 2004; castanha et al., 2007; fenselau et al., 2007) , whereas others have been identified as cyclic lipopeptides (madonna et al., 2003b) . coxiella burnetii, the causative agent of q fever, has been identified from its proteins, extracted with acetonitrile and trichloroacetic acid (hernychova et al., 2008) , and characterized with maldi-tofms.several groups have focused on identifying fungal cells (valentine et al., 2002) and fungal spores (li, liu, & chen, 2000; kemptner et al., 2009a,b) with maldi-tofms. welham et al. (2000) presented the first article on the use of maldi-tofms with different matrices to characterize various fungal spores. maldi-ms has been used to desorb protein biomarkers from intact fungi, and to generate highly reproducible mass spectra for penicillium species (hettick et al., 2008b) , 12 species of aspergillus, and five strains of a. flavus (hettick et al., 2008a) . these results indicate that maldi-tofms data might be used to identify fungi unambiguously at the species and strain levels. qian et al. (2008) investigated maldi-tof mass signatures for the accurate identification and differentiation of pathogenic candida species (c. albicans, c. glabrata, c. krusei, c. kefyr), aspergillus species (a. terreus, a. fumigatus, a. syndowii), and other yeast genera (cryptococcus neoformans, s. cerevisiae, and rhodotorula spp.). marinach-patrice et al. (2009) identified 62 clinical fusarium isolates of nine fusarium species with partial tef1 gene sequencing and maldi-tof analysis. recently, marklein et al. (2009) demonstrated the identification of more than 250 clinical yeasts and yeast-like fungi (candida, cryptococcus, saccharomyces, trichosporon, geotrichum, pichia, and blastoschizomyces spp.) with maldi-tofms. cyclic lipopeptides are potential biomarker molecules that can differentiate some microorganisms at the species and even at the subspecies levels (jegorov et al., 2006; price et al., 2007) .the challenge in the above approach is that culture conditions and instrumental parameters can significantly influence the spectral reproducibility. because of the complexity of mass spectral data, many statistical algorithms have been developed to match acquired spectra to reference spectra, or to generate fingerprints for microbial differentiation. the linear correlation of analyzed spectra and library spectra has been performed to differentiate among protein profiles from bacillus spores (dickinson et al., 2004) . a fingerprint-selection algorithm that is similar to a statistical test of significance has been used to extract key biomarkers from spectra. the constructed fingerprint identification of pathogens by mass spectrometry & library has been used to identify bacterial samples from three different laboratories . keys et al. (2004) compiled a maldi mass spectral database of over 100 genera and 350 species to characterize bacteria that are associated with human infectious diseases. species-or subspecies-specific markers in the spectra were sometimes difficult to identify because the number of overlapping signals increased with the number of strains in the database. many multivariate analytical (mva) techniques, including pca, cluster analysis, and factor analysis, have been applied to analyze the protein profiles of bacterial samples (chen, lu, & harrington, 2008) . mva is based on multivariate statistics, and involves the analysis of several statistical variables (m/z herein) simultaneously. parisi et al. (2008) demonstrated the pca classification of two pathogens and the linear discriminant analysis of maldi-ms spectra. hsieh et al. (2008) identified six human pathogens with cluster analysis and genetic algorithms. ilina et al. (2009) reported on the direct bacterial profiling of two human pathogens, n. meningitidis and n. gonorrboeae. cluster analysis successfully separated mass spectra of pathogenic and non-pathogenic neisseria isolates. discussion of various mathematic methods used in data analysis has been described elsewhere (ho & reddy, 2010) .the top-down proteomics method identifies intact proteins without the need for prior proteolytic digestion of the sample. the method has been used successfully for microbial proteomics in the analysis of bacillus spores. demirev et al. presented results obtained with a top-down proteomics approach that exploited maldi-tof/tofms of protein biomarkers to identify directly and rapidly individual bacillus spore species, whether they are present alone or in a mixture wynne et al., 2009) . a major advantage of this method is that the ms/ms spectra of biomarkers are obtained without the need for biomarker prefractionation, digestion, separation, or cleanup. the maldi tandem mass spectra of intact biomarkers are fairly reproducible, and library fingerprint matching of such tandem mass spectra can be exploited to identify intact microorganisms. top-down proteomics has been applied to distinguish the pathogenic e. coli strain from the non-pathogenic strain (fagerquist et al., 2010) . figure 4 displays an ms/ms spectrum of a protein marker at m/z 7705.6. the protein was identified from its sequence-specific fragment ions by checking against a database of theoretical fragment ions derived from bacterial proteomes. the protein sequences associated with the identified pathogenic strain and the non-pathogenic strain differ by only one amino acid (1 da). the 1 da difference in protein mass would be difficult to detect with protein fingerprinting.in bottom-up proteomics, proteins from lysed cells are cleaved to form peptides, which are fragmented in a ms/ms experiment. the identification of peptides supports the identification of proteins, which confirms the identification of microorganisms fenselau et al., 2007; . the protein/peptide identification approach overcomes the challenges of identifying components of mixtures of microorganisms . warscheid et al. found that proteolytic digests are generated in situ from sasps to enable microorganisms to be identified with microsequencing and a database search (english et al., 2003; . sasps are reliable biomarkers for spore-forming microorganisms, such as bacillus and clostridium species, and allow the identification and figure 4. tandem mass spectrum of a protein marker observed at m/z 7705.6, obtained from the extracted cell lysate of a pathogenic e. coli o157:h7 strain. many of the fragment ions correspond to backbone cleavage adjacent to aspartic acid (d) and/or glutamic acid (e) residues. the identified protein sequence and the sequence of the nonpathogenic e. coli k-12 strain are shown with the spectrum. the two sequences differ by only one amino acid (in bold; aspartic acid vs. asparagine) and, therefore, by only 1 da in molecular weight. the top-down proteomics approach can distinguish e. coli o157:h7 from e. coli k-12. reprinted and modified with permission from fagerquist et al. (2010) , copyright 2010 american chemical society. differentiation of closely related species (hathout et al., 2003; . the same group obtained the complete sequences of the three most-abundant sasps from b. globigii with ms. they used a combination of ms/ms, chemical derivatization, ladder sequencing, and checking against a database to determine peptide sequences and to construct entire protein sequences (whiteaker et al., 2004) . unfortunately, several of the identified peptides are common to more than one species of bacillus, and make difficult the determination of their origin . this difficulty applies particularly when closely related members of the cereus group (b. anthracis, b. cereus, b. mycoides, and b. thuringiensis) are involved. furthermore, the determined major sasps of b. globigii and b. stearothermophilus are almost identical (whiteaker et al., 2004) . focusing directly on the identification of species-unique peptide sequences with maldi-ms and ms/ms analysis can help to achieve more rapid and automatable species differentiation. pribil et al. (2005) used the direct scanning of speciesunique sasp tryptic peptides and modified sasp extraction procedures to discriminate between b. anthracis and b. cereus with either ms or ms/ms analysis. in protein-/peptide-identification approaches, spectral reproducibility is not critical as long as the observed spectra of the product ions are consistent with the protein/peptides sequences in the database. positive identification will be hindered if the protein database of the analyzed microorganism does not exist, unless the protein/peptide databases can be constructed from experimental data (yao, demirev, & fenselau, 2002) .currently, proteins are the most used and accessible biomarkers for microbial identification because of their high-abundances and gene-related characteristics. maldi analysis of biomarkers other than proteins has also been reported. ishida et al. applied an on-probe sample pretreatment protocol for the maldi-ms measurement of phospholipids in growing bacterial colonies, obtained directly from culture dishes. they successfully observed a series of ions derived from phospholipids in gramnegative bacteria (enterobacteriaceae family) (ishida et al., 2002) . however, the spectra of gram-positive bacteria did not include any lipid-related peaks, presumably because these bacteria have a thicker peptidoglycan layer. therefore, ishida et al. (2005) developed a new method for the direct detection of phospholipids in gram-positive bacteria (b. subtilis) with maldi-ms combined with on-probe sample pretreatment with trifluoroacetic acid as an additional reagent. they also characterized the phospholipids in whole bacteria with solid-sampling maldi-ms (ohtani & ishida, 2007) . with maldi-ftms, jones et al. (2003) investigated e. coli lipids in the low-mass region (m/z 100-1,000). they identified two major components, phosphatidyl ethanolamine and triglycerides, that are generally found in prokaryotic membranes. the same group described methods for the lipid analysis of s. cerevisiae with conventional maldi-ftms .lipopolysaccharides (lpss), broadly known as endotoxins, are essential components of the outer membrane of all gramnegative bacteria. bacterial lpss are dimeric molecules that comprise a polysaccharide moiety linked to a lipid core, termed lipid a, which is anchored within the cell membrane. therisod, labas, and caroff (2001) reported a method for the direct selective extraction and separation of lpss from bacterial cells with thin-layer chromatography followed by maldi-ms analysis. this method can be used for the direct ms analysis of heterogeneous lps and lipid a preparations (e. coli lipid a and bordetella lpss were used). tirsoaga et al. (2007) characterized the lipids a from three citrobacter and two bordetella strains with a procedure that involved direct extraction from cells followed by maldi-ms. this method is especially convenient when only small amounts of bacteria, lps, or lipid a are available. schilling et al. (2007) investigated low-abundance lipid a species from lps, obtained from francisella tularensis, f. novicida, and f. philomiragia grown in vitro with a maldi-linear ion-trap mass spectrometer.bioaerosol mass spectrometry (bams) has been used to identify bacteria, spores, and viruses without consuming any reagent (fergenson et al., 2004; adams et al., 2008; russell, 2009 ). the first attempt at species-level identification with reagentless bams was that of fergenson et al. this technique has been used to distinguish aerosolized spores of b. thuringiensis and b. atrophaeus from a variety of background mixtures of powders, soil, and fungal spores, by matching the mass spectra with fingerprints of pure samples (fergenson et al., 2004) . a pulse laser at 226 nm was used to desorb and ionize chemicals from the aerosolized particles. they demonstrated that chemical components of the two bacillus spore species were consistently and easily laser desorbed and detected in seconds. furthermore, bams has been applied to detect mycobacterium tuberculosis, m. smegmatis , and the biochemical and morphological changes of b. atrophaeus cells during the sporulation process (tobias et al., 2006) . although no sample preparation such as matrix addition was required, the reagentless bams mass spectra of microbial cells were limited to signals under m/z 300. low-mass biomarkers for b. atrophaeus have also been identified with isotope incorporation and bams srivastava et al., 2005) .stowers et al. reported on the real-time and high-mass detection of individual airborne pathogens with maldi aerosol tofms (stowers et al., 2000; van wuijckhuijse et al., 2005) . aerosol maldi-ms can help detect high-mass biomolecules and identify bacteria or other biological microparticles from their fingerprints. in aerosol maldi, the matrix is introduced via either condensation or deposition on a matrix-coated target (noble & prather, 2000) . aerosol maldi differs from classical maldi in a number of important ways (the differences include optimal laser fluence, matrix-to-analyte molar ratio, and choice of matrix.), and not just in the analytes (mcjimpsey et al., 2008) . stowers et al. described the analysis of biological aerosol particles with maldi-tofms, and applied this method to b. subtilis spores. they observed a single biomarker ion at ca. m/z 1225 that was attributed to a peptidoglycan (stowers et al., 2000) . a new aerosol tofms instrument, which is used with laser-induced fluorescence selection and maldi, has been developed for the real-time analysis of single bioaerosol particles. maldi ionization is triggered when fluorescent emission from microorganisms is observed. the instrument can be used to measure the molecular masses of biomarker ions of bacteria and aerosolized proteinaceous materials up to 20 kda identification of pathogens by mass spectrometry & (van wuijckhuijse et al., 2005) . in more recent studies, kleefsman et al. used single-particle maldi to detect e. coli (kleefsman et al., 2008) and erwinia herbicola cells (kleefsman et al., 2007) . they stated that the instrument efficiency could be improved by the selective ionization of biological particles, following the observation of single-particle fluorescence (stowers et al., 2006; kleefsman et al., 2007) . although useful spectra of a few thousands of particles containing bacteria such as e. herbicola have been obtained (kleefsman et al., 2007) , improvements in detection limit are still required for the analysis of real-world samples.surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization (seldi), a modified version of maldi-tofms, has been successfully used for biomarker discovery and protein fingerprinting of bacterial species (barzaghi et al., 2004; lancashire et al., 2005; lundquist et al., 2005; schmid et al., 2005; al dahouk et al., 2006) . hutchens et al. first described the original concept of seldi . seldi-ms provided protein expression patterns from hundreds of samples in a single experiment (thulasiraman et al., 2000; diamond et al., 2003; barzaghi et al., 2004) . it is an affinity-based ms method in which proteins are selectively adsorbed onto a chemically or biochemically modified surface. seo, kim, and chai (2004) studied the protein-expression profile in human macrophages that were infected by b. anthracis spores with seldi-tofms. lundquist et al. (2005) demonstrated that seldi-tofms can generate unique and reproducible protein profiles for f. tularensis subspecies, to allow its subspecies to be distinguished from each other. similarly, seibold et al. (2007) identified single strains of the subspecies f. tularensis with seldi-ms. huang and co-workers proposed a method based on seldi-ms to identify klebsiella pneumoniae and other related microorganisms by directly analyzing bacterial colonies without any protein extraction .because seldi might yield many ion signals per bacterial sample, computer algorithms used in maldi protein fingerprinting are also employed to identify useful biomarkers for bacterial identification. seibold et al. (2007) differentiated single strains within the subspecies f. tularensis by combining seldi-tofms with cluster analysis and pca. the artificial neural network (ann) algorithm has been combined with seldi-ms to identify n. meningitides schmid et al., 2005) and neisseria gonorrhoeae . schmid et al. analyzed over 350 strains of n. gonorrhoeae, other neisseriae, and closely related species such as kingella denitrificans and moraxella osloensis. they performed comparative 16s rdna sequence analysis and standard biochemical tests to establish the identity of the strains prior to seldi-ms analysis . ann is an algorithm for machine learning, and represents a mathematical method that is not based on multivariate statistics. in the ann method, the relative abundances at all m/z values are input to the input layer of the model. the model is trained, tested, and validated with bacterial samples. this approach has been applied to a blind dataset of 188 samples, and correctly identified 184 out of 188 samples . yates et al. analyzed the volatile compounds of pathogens with quadrupole ms. radial-basis function neural networks successfully identified the unknown bacterial samples . seldi-ms allows more selective analysis of protein profiles than does direct maldi-ms. useful markers might be selectively extracted and analyzed. the surface capacity of a seldi probe plays an important role in the detection of markers. the capacity depends on the number of interacting groups and even the size of the markers. the markers that the seldi surface captures are usually the abundant ones possessing specific interacting functional groups. further, the ionization efficiencies of various molecules also determine the molecules detected in a mass spectrum. in microbial analysis, because seldi is generally used to obtain proteomic fingerprints from microbial samples, the fingerprint data are useful as long as they are reproducible. however, just as for maldi analysis, spectral reproducibility remains a key challenge in this approach.ambient mass spectrometric methods such as desi (takats et al., 2004) and dart (cody, laramee, & durst, 2005) have recently been applied to examine microbial samples with little or no sample preparation in an attempt accurately and rapidly to type closely related strains of bacteria. dart-ms has been successfully applied to the analysis of fatty-acid methyl ester profiles from bacterial cells (pierce et al., 2007) . the ionization process involves an interaction between electronically excited atoms or vibronically excited molecules and the analytes that are obtained by the thermal hydrolysis and methylation of bacterial lipids. takats et al. used the desi method to identify microorganisms by spraying microbial samples with electrosprayed solvent droplets. this technique has been used to differentiate among several bacteria species based on their desi-mass spectral profiles (meetani et al., 2007; song et al., 2009 ). the bacteria include e. coli, s. aureus, enterococcus sp., bordetella bronchiseptica, b. thuringiensis, b. subtilis, and salmonella typhimurium. highquality mass spectra have been obtained in positive-and negative-ion modes when whole bacteria were subjected to desi (meetani et al., 2007) . the same approach has also been applied to the phospholipid profiling of intact bacteria (song et al., 2007) . recently, song et al. (2009) applied desi-ms to the analysis of untreated b. subtilis in an in vivo experiment.pyrolysis mass spectrometry (py-ms) analyzes microorganisms from their pyrolysate fingerprint after decomposition of their biochemical components by heating to high temperature (wilkes et al., 2005) . in curie point pyrolysis, pure microbial cultures are dried in a suitable alloy foil and heated rapidly to the curie point of the foil. the pyrolysates are immediately swept into a mass spectrometer and identified based on their m/z ratio. then, the fingerprint or chemical profile of the pyrolysis mass spectrum is analyzed by suitable mathematic methods to differentiate pathogens. the first automated curie-point py-ms was developed by meuzelaar et al. specifically for fingerprinting complex non-volatile biological samples such as bacteria (meuzelaar & kistemaker, 1973; meuzelaar et al., 1976) . the mass spectra of pyrolysates are usually complicated because many large biomolecules decompose into small fragments.the cell envelopes of many bacteria have been analyzed, and various separation methods, such as hplc, gc, and thin layer chromatography, have been developed for use with py-ms. so far, however, only py-gc-ms has been commercially developed into a microbial identification system. py-gc and py-gc-ms techniques allow for rapid volatilization, separation, and identification of pyrolysis products sobeih, baron, & gonzalez-rodriguez, 2008) . in py-gc and py-gc-ms, high-resolution gas-chromatographic separation is carried out in a capillary column, and mass spectrometric identification can be improved with either soft-ionization methods or tandem ms (sobeih, baron, & gonzalez-rodriguez, 2008) .pyrolysis products that derive from carbohydrates (abbas-hawks, voorhees, & miketova, 2006) , lipids (voorhees et al., 2006b) , nucleic acids (abbas-hawks, voorhees, & miketova, 2006) , proteins (voorhees, abbas-hawks, & miketova, 2006a) , and other components, such as dipicolinic or poly(3-hydroxyalkanoic) acids, have been utilized to differentiate bacteria. goodacre et al. (2000) detected the dipicolinic acid biomarker in 36 bacillus species with py-ms. an ion-mobility spectrometer (ims) has been employed as a detector in the py-gc analysis of bacteria in the on-site monitoring of transient plumes of aerosols that contain b. subtilis . dworzanski et al. (2005) reported on the use of the py-gc-ims system to identify gram-negative pantoea agglomerans and gram-positive b. anthracis strain texas and b. atrophaeus. they identified pyridine-2-carboxamide (2-picolinamide) from the cell walls of gram-positive bacteria. they characterized the envelopes of gram-negative bacteria by the presence of a second membrane, with the outer leaflet composed mainly of lps molecules anchored with a lipid a moiety. these biomarkers include pyrolysis products of the 3-hydroxymyristate fatty-acid residues, such as 1-tridecene, dodecanal, and methylundecylketone. the same group detected and classified deliberately released bioaerosols (gram-positive and -negative bacteria) in outdoor-field scenarios. they identified 2-pyridinecarboxamide in bacillus samples, including b. anthracis, whose origin was traced to the peptidoglycan macromolecule in the cell wall. py-gc-ms analyses of gram-negative e. coli revealed significant amounts of 3-hydroxymyristic acid derivatives and degradation products . voorhees et al. used high-resolution py-ms to identify different gram-type whole-cell microorganisms. twelve bacterial species were analyzed in triplicate. grampositive bacteria (b. cereus, b. subtilis, b. anthracis, e. faecalis, s. epidermidis, and s. pyogenes) were identified mainly by their carbohydrate biomarker peaks, whereas gram-negative bacteria (e. aerogenes, proteus mirabilis, p. aeruginosa, serratia marcescens, brucella neotomae, and f. tularensis) yielded mainly lipid-biomarker peaks (miketova et al., 2003) . in many of the studies referred to above, multivariate statistics were used to analyze the pyrolysis mass spectra. for instance, pca has been applied to differentiate salmonella and vibrio species from their pyrolysis mass spectra (wilkes et al., 2006) .pyrolysis methods, such as thermally assisted hydrolysis and methylation (thm) in the presence of tetramethylammonium hydroxide [tmah; (ch 3 ) 4 noh], have been widely used in the direct analysis of fatty-acid components of lipids in whole-bacterial cells (david, tienpont, & sandra, 2008; cha et al., 2009) . recently, phospholipids were directly identified on whole cells of e. coli with thm-gc in the presence of tmah and maldi-ms, with on-probe sample pretreatment without the need for any tedious sample preparation (ishida et al., 2006) .inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (icp-ms) has been used in the chemical characterization of trace and ultratrace elements in biological materials, such as bacteria, fungi, and viruses gikunju et al., 2004; jackson, ranville, & neal, 2005; li, armstrong, & houk, 2005; beauchemin, 2006) . knowledge of the amounts of these trace elements and their speciation is important to understand the toxicological behavior of organisms. icp-ms has several attractive features for trace element studies, including rapid multielement analysis and very good detection limits of bacteria in suspension (gikunju et al., 2004) . the detection and identification of b. subtilis spores, b. subtilis vegetative cells, and b. thuringiensis with an inorganic-chemical fingerprint obtained with direct injection icp-ms might be useful to detect biologicalwarfare agents (gikunju et al., 2004) . this method reveals unique chemical signatures that reflect the processing history of each bacillus organism.cliff et al. demonstrated the use of tof secondary-ion mass spectrometry (sims) to identify b. subtilis spores that were grown in various media, based on their elemental signatures. the tof-sims signatures consist of 16 elemental intensities (cliff et al., 2005) . thompson et al. used tof-sims to distinguish between spores and vegetative bacterial cells of b. megaterium. the differentiation was based on the surfacelipid profiles (thompson et al., 2004) .nucleic acid-based techniques for microbial analysis rely on the genetic conservation within a species and genetic variability among species. although conventional biochemical analysis remains an important method in clinical microbiology laboratories, nucleic acid-based methods have become popular in diagnostic microbiology. genotyping methods to analyze nucleic acids might involve hybridization, primer extension, ligation, and cleavage, or a combination thereof (monis & giglio, 2006; mothershed & whitney, 2006; klouche & schroder, 2008) . the device to read out the measurements can be a gel reader, a plate reader, or an array reader, among others. maldi-ms is considered to be an alternative tool to sequence dna. however, some technical problems, such as adduct formation and limited sequence length, have led to the use of ms primarily to analyze dna fragment profiles or single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps). esi-ms can detect large and multiply charged pcr products (mayr et al., 2005) . therefore, accurate masses of the pcr products, obtained with high-resolution esi-ms, have been used to determine their base compositions . generally, the mass spectra of nucleic acid products or their fragments are matched with theoretical ones in nucleic acid sequence databases to identify the species. the advantage and disadvantages of genotyping methods have been reviewed elsewhere (sobrino, brion, & carracedo, 2005) . pcr-amplification methods are able to detect a few tens of microbial cells and might be applied to the analysis of non-culturable microorganisms. the major procedures for microbial analysis include cell lysis, dna extraction, amplification, and pcr-product analysis. the sample identification of pathogens by mass spectrometry & workup time may be less than that for conventional culturing methods. notably, some procedures are labor-intensive and the pcr techniques might require additional steps to remove potential inhibitors from samples. the major advantage of using a mass spectrometer as a read-out device, in addition to the speed of analysis, is its ability to measure masses of oligonucleotides. the molecular mass that is directly related to the nucleotide composition is more accurate than other sequence-related parameters such as migration times.because the 16 s rrna gene is universally distributed and highly conserved, it has been widely used to differentiate microbial species. restriction-fragment patterns are obtained from digestion of the pcr products with restriction enzymes. the reduced size of the digested pcr products also favors ionization and mass analysis. maldi-ms has been successfully applied to differentiate microbial species by profiling the restriction digests of dna (taranenko et al., 2002) . this method can detect hepatitis b and c viruses (hbvand hcv) in human-serum samples (hong et al., 2004; kim et al., 2005; oh et al., 2008) . it has been used to analyze as few as 100 copies of hepatitis b virus gene per milliliter of serum and differentiated among wild-type and variant viruses (ho et al., 2004) . the limitation of these approaches in accurate microbial identification is the resolution of length heterogeneities of marker genes among species. von wintzingerode et al. (2002) developed a method of microbial identification with the base-specific cleavage of pcr products. amplification of 16s rdna marker sequences was followed by enzyme-mediated fragmentation at t-specific sites. the basespecific cleavage yielded useful species-specific fragments, and allowed differentiation of several cultured bordetella species and as-yet-uncultured bacteria. another comparative-sequencing method, multilocus sequence typing (mlst), was used to analyze n. meningitides by comparing the maldi spectra of mlst loci to reference sequences in the public mlst database (honisch et al., 2007) . this method is based on pcr of several housekeeping genes. the variations in the sequences of multiple loci that are derived from base-specific rna cleavage support the identification of pathogens.the homogeneous base-specific cleavage of pcr-amplified and transcribed 16s rrna gene was analyzed with maldi-ms to identify mycobacteria at the species level (lefmann et al., 2004) . the maldi-ms analysis of rna is superior to that of dna because rna that is transcribed from dna is more stable. the 2 0 oh group on the sugar ring reduces n-glycosylic bond fragmentation (tang, zhu, & smith, 1997; tost & gut, 2006) .single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) represent single base changes that occur at a specific position in a genome. the maldi mass spectra obtained from eight snps in the precore/ basal core promoter of hbv were used to differentiate wild-type and mutant samples (lau et al., 2007) . the pcr extension of primers that were designed to be annealed at the polymorphic site yielded distinguishable genotype-specific snps, even though their mass differences were in a narrow range of 9-24 da. an snp within the fumc gene was found to differentiate between the hypervirulent et-15 strain and other et-37 complex strains of n. meningitidis (lowe, diggle, & clarke, 2004) . ilina et al. (2005) employed a similar maldi-ms approach to genotype hcv from hcv-positive blood sera or plasma. they designed three oligonucleotide primers to detect two sets of genotypespecific snps. the proposed method was an accurate and efficient method for hcv genotyping based on minisequencing. although the occurrence of novel mutations limits the use of genotypic methods based on single nucleotide differences between strains, genotypic assays with base-specific cleavage strategies detect new strains.a method called triangulation identification for the genetic evaluation of risks (tiger), to analyze microbial mixtures, has been proposed . the bacterium b. anthracis, the poxyviridae family, alphaviruses , acinetobacter species , adenovirus (russell et al., 2006) , campylobacter species (hannis et al., 2008) , and the enterobacteriaceae family (baldwin et al., 2009) were successfully identified with this approach. it uses high-resolution esi-ft-icr/-tof ms to analyze multiple pcr products to allow the base compositions (a, t, g, and c, base counts) obtained from multiple primer pairs to be accurately deduced. figure 5 shows the process. the first step involves extraction of all nucleic acids that are present in a sample. aliquots of the nucleic-acid solution are amplified with various primers. the pcr primers target universally distributed and highly conserved regions of microbial genes (such as 16s and 23s dna). the second step is to use ms to measure accurately the masses of the pcr products in a size range of around 100 bp (and a mass of ca. 30 kda). these base compositions are employed to ''triangulate'' the identities of most pathogens. additional primers that are targeted to variable regions of specific microbial genomes are used in the highresolution genotyping of specific species. to deduce the base compositions based on the mass of pcr products, use of mass spectrometers with high mass accuracy is a must.this pcr-esi-ms approach has also been used to detect and type the strains of s. aureus isolates wolk et al., 2009 ), a diverse collection of human and avian influenza viruses (sampath et al., 2007b) , orthopoxviruses , and more recently, ehrlichia species from patients suspected of having ehrlichiosis (eshoo et al., 2010) .mass spectrometry (ms) is poised to take an increasingly important role in clinical chemistry (ho & reddy, 2010; marvin, roberts, & fay, 2003) , environmental monitoring, and biodefense (demirev & fenselau, 2008b) . because mass analyzers provide flexibility, sensitivity, specificity, and rich information (qualitative/quantitative), various ms-based methods have been used for accurate microbial identification. as mentioned above, each method has its strength and weaknesses. maldi-ms is a rapid, sensitive, simple method. therefore, it is very suitable for direct biomarker profiling of microorganisms. however, experimental parameters should be carefully controlled to obtain reproducible spectra. maldi-ms/ms (top-down or bottom-up approaches) might avoid the reproducibility problems by analyzing sequence information of specific biomarkers. lc (ce)-ms/ms separates and analyzes biomarkers such as proteins or peptides belonging to a microorganism and provides accuracy and selectivity. although the speed of analysis is reduced, microbial mixtures can be analyzed without culture isolation. pcr-ms provides the best detection limit and might indentify non-culturable microorganisms. however, designing primers requires knowledge of target nucleic acid sequences and the sample workup steps can be labor-intensive. in general, the ms-based approaches require less time for microbial analysis than most conventional methods. this section provides some examples of ms application.direct maldi-tofms analysis of intact bacteria cells might differentiate different bacterial species or subspecies in many clinical-microbiology laboratories (carbonnelle et al., 2007; eigner et al., 2009; reich et al., 2009) . degand et al. (2008) identified non-fermenting bacilli that were recovered from cystic-fibrosis patients with protein fingerprinting. maldi-ms protein profiles obtained have been used to differentiate methicillin-resistant s. aureus (mrsa) and methicillin-susceptible s. aureus (mssa), which are responsible for various hospital-acquired infections (edwards-jones et al., 2000; du et al., 2002) . the strain-specific maldi-tofms differentiation has been demonstrated with intact cells from 20 staphylococcal isolates, to rapidly distinguish between the mrsa and mssa and, therefore, to support the proper treatment of s. aureus infections in light of their resistance to antibiotics (edwards-jones et al., 2000) . the direct maldi-ms analysis of bacterial colonies has been used for the routine identification of 1,660 bacterial isolates collected from clinical specimens. identification was quick; 95.4% of isolates were correctly identified with maldi-tofms; 84.1% were identified at the species level, and 11.3% were identified at the genus level. the average delay and cost of maldi-ms identification for routine use in clinics have been evaluated in detail (seng et al., 2009 ). the delay was less than 10 min, and excluded the cultivation time in agar media. fenselau et al. (2008) detected beta-lactamase in antibioticresistant strain b. cereus spores with maldi-tofms. this protein marker might be used for the rapid preliminary detection of the resistance of b. cereus spores to antibiotics. demirev et al. (2001) obtained positive-and negative-ion spectra of proteins that were desorbed from helicobacter pylori 26995 cells, a strain of bacteria that has been implicated in the development of gastrointestinal ulcers. seventeen clinical and two laboratory strains of h. pylori have been analyzed from the direct protein-fingerprinting method for quick species identification (ilina et al., 2010) . maldi-tofms has also been used to detect and identify legionella species (which cause legionellosis disease) (pennanec et al., 2010) and human pathogens such as bacteroides fragilis, which is frequently misidentified with phenotypical identification procedures (nagy et al., 2009) . seldi-tof ms has been used to analyze 273 strains of staphylococci and other species isolated in a clinical-microbiology laboratory . the authors demonstrated that seldi-tofms protein profiles of microorganisms include protein peaks that can be used to identify bacteria. laser desorption ionization (ldi) ms has been applied to the detection of plasmodium falciparum in blood samples from pregnant women (nyunt et al., 2005) . p. falciparum is a malaria-causing protozoan. ldi of hemozoin inside the parasites generated heme ion and figure 5. pcr-ms approach-tiger: aliquots of nucleic acids present in a sample are deposited into wells of a micro-titer plate to begin pcr. each well contains a pair of broad-range primers that target a selected domain of microorganisms. pcr products are desalted and electrosprayed into a high-resolution mass spectrometer to determine their base compositions. the combined base compositions from multiple pcr reactions (multiple primer sets) support the identification of microorganisms in a sample. [color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com] identification of pathogens by mass spectrometry & its fragment ions. ms detection of these marker ions represents malaria infection demirev, 2004; scholl et al., 2004) . tuberculosis (tb) is an infectious disease that is caused by the gram-positive bacteria m. tuberculosis. m. tuberculosis is often associated with the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (aids), which has led to the increased prevalence of pulmonary tb worldwide. recently, gc-ms analysis of derivatized fatty acids obtained from microbial cells has been used for the rapid diagnosis of pulmonary tb in clinical-microbiology laboratories (stopforth et al., 2005; cha et al., 2009) . gc-ms has also been used for the fast and accurate identification of m. tuberculosis in cultures and sputum samples that were collected from patients who were suspected to be suffering from tb (cha et al., 2009; kaal et al., 2009) . the results show that tuberculosis stearic acid was detected only in the sputum specimens from patients who were clinically diagnosed with tb. hu et al. applied selective ce-ms/ms to identify specific pathogens in clinical specimens that had been collected from pus, wound, sputum, and urine samples. the bacteria in these clinical specimens were cultivated directly, without prior isolation of a pure colony, before the selective ms/ms analyses were performed. the total time taken to perform the analysis, including fast protein digestion and ms analysis, was 30 min, and the cultivation time was 6 hr. the identified pathogens included many species such as p. aeruginosa, s. aureus, and s. agalactiae .polymerase chain reaction-mass spectrometry (pcr-ms) has been used to detect/identify infectious pathogens (fox, 2006; sampath et al., 2007a; eshoo et al., 2010; fabris, 2010) . the detection of snps with a maldi-ms-based minisequencing method has been used to identify hepatitis b virus in hbsagpositive patients with chronic hepatitis b and to detect drug resistance-related mutations in n. gonorrhoeae (vereshchagin et al., 2005) and m. tuberculosis (ikryannikova et al., 2007) . the same method has been successfully applied to the rapid detection of clinically significant tem-type extended-spectrum beta-lactamases in clinical strains of e. coli and klebsiella pneumonia (ikryannikova et al., 2008) . faix, sherman, and waterman (2009) used pcr and esi-ms to classify swine-origin influenza a (h1n1) viruses (s-oiv). data from numerous outbreak sites indicate that the novel influenza a/h1n1 virus is currently the dominant influenza strain in most parts of the world.ecker's research group identified the genotypes of bacteria in complex mixtures of clinical samples, by performing a basecomposition analysis of pcr-amplification products with highresolution esi-ms. they employed this approach to identify quinolone resistance in acinetobacter spp., whose quinolone resistance is mediated by mutations in the quinolone resistance-determining dna sequences of two essential housekeeping genes (hujer et al., 2009) . the results provide important information for the therapeutic treatment of acinetobacter spp. infection. analysis of respiratory samples collected during respiratory disease outbreaks revealed high concentrations of pathogenic respiratory species, including haemophilus influenzae, n. meningitidis, and s. pyogenes . this approach has been used to identify 14 isolates of nine diverse coronavirus spp., including the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-associated coronavirus. the detection limit was one plaque-forming-unit per ml of human serum .recent outbreaks, including the sars outbreak that was caused by coronavirus and the h1n1 flu outbreak that was caused by a novel influenza a virus, as well as some biothreat incidents, reveal the importance to develop more rapid, sensitive, and accurate real-time detection methods. ms has been successfully applied to the analysis of biomarkers from microbial samples. many advanced methods for microbial analysis have been proposed. the maldi-ms fingerprinting of microorganisms has a number of advantages, including rapidity and ease of implementation. construction of a large reference spectral library and the use of a fingerprint-selection algorithm are critical to the success of the fingerprinting approach because of the complexity and the lack of reproducibility of microbial mass spectra obtained from real-world samples. identification of microorganisms through the sequence analysis of peptide or proteins markers might solve the problems associated with spectral reproducibility. top-down or bottom-up protein identification methods can be used to analyze sequence information. although the proteomic methods are limited by the number of available proteome databases, more and more microbial proteomes have been revealed and should broaden the applicability of these approaches in microbial analysis. top-down methods directly characterize proteins, and are, therefore, quick and simple. in bottom-up approaches, the complexity of microbial biomarkers might be simplified with various chromatography-based methods; although separation processes reduce the speed of identification, they provide significantly improved accuracy and selectivity. furthermore, because the dynamic range is also increased, even a small amount of microorganisms in complex sample matrices can be identified. most current microbial analysis methods require the culturing of the target cells to obtain detectable signals. the culturing time is by far the rate-limiting step in rapid microbial identification. reducing the detection threshold for microbial cells will be one of the major challenges in the future. methods and instrumentation must both be improved to reach this goal. cell enrichment through affinity techniques will also be important. selective biomarker analysis with multiple reaction monitoring approaches coupled with affinity techniques will enhance the sensitivity and accuracy of microbial identification. the ms detection of pcr products from microbial genes might be an alternative means to improve the detection limit, especially in analyses of non-culturable microorganisms. advances in ms instrumentation and methods shall support a simple and accurate means of pathogen identification for environmental monitoring and clinical diagnosis. we thank the national science council of the republic of china for financially supporting part of the work mentioned in this review.background and aims: cardiac biomarkers like cardiac troponins and natriuretic peptides are elevated in a substantial proportion of patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). we propose an algorithmic approach using cardiac biomarkers to triage, risk-stratify and prognosticate patients with severe covid-19. methods: we systematically searched the pubmed and google scholar databases until may 31st, 2020, and accessed the available data on the role of cardiac biomarkers in patients with covid-19. results: covid-19 is associated with acute cardiac injury in around 7-28% of patients, significantly increasing its associated complications and mortality. patients with underlying cardiovascular disease are more prone to develop acute cardiac injury as a result of covid-19. the use of cardiac biomarkers may aid in differentiating the cardiac cause of dyspnea in patients with severe covid-19. cardiac biomarkers may also aid in triaging, risk-stratification, clinical decision-making, and prognostication of patients with covid-19. however, there are concerns that routine testing in all patients with covid-19 irrespective of severity, may result in unnecessary downstream investigations which may be misleading. in this brief review, using an algorithmic approach, we have tried to rationalize the use of cardiac biomarkers among patients with severe covid-19. this approach is also likely to lessen the infection exposure risk to the cardiovascular team attending patients with severe covid-19. conclusion: it appears beneficial to triage, risk-stratify, and prognosticate patients with covid-19 based on the evidence of myocardial injury and the presence of underlying cardiovascular disease. future research studies are, however, needed to validate these proposed benefits.cardiac biomarker-based risk stratification algorithm in patients with severe covid-19drug allergy labeling and delabeling in the coronavirus disease 2019 era what is important and what do we need to know at the time of this writing, april 7, 2020, more than 1.2 million people worldwide are infected and more than 68,000 have died because of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) induced by the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection, and this figure will surely multiply in the next few weeks according to dr anthony fauci, head of the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 uses angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) (a type i transmembrane metallocarboxypeptidase) as its preferred entry receptor. the expression of ace-2 is high in alveolar and epithelial tissues in the lungs and the gastrointestinal tract. drugs which affect the expression of ace-2 (such as ace inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers) are being investigated as possible risk factors for the severity of coronavirus disease 2019. 1 nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs are being similarly investigated. 2 clinical trials with azithromycin and hydroxychloroquine, 3 antiretroviral drugs, 4 and antieinterleukin-6 5 are ongoing in an attempt to improve disease outcomes before a vaccine can be available. this provides a glimpse of the complexities of this disease and reveals the importance of identifying candidate drugs for clinical trials that may save lives. it follows in importance to identify patients with allergy who are at risk, if treated, and who may need desensitization. understanding the mechanisms of drug allergy 6 is key, given that the classification of drug hypersensitivity continues to expand. 7 cytokine stormelike reactions with elevated interleukin-6 can be seen in patients treated with chemotherapy and monoclonal antibodies 8 and are now part of a broader definition of anaphylaxis, allowing for better management and treatment options.the timing of this issue of the annals is highly relevant given that it is dedicated to broadening our understanding of the scope of drug allergy in the general population. various tools can be used in personalized medicine to confirm or refute specific drug allergy status through delabeling. these standardized diagnostic interventions can allow both children and adults to safely take the drug for which they had been previously labeled as allergic, thereby resulting in the removal of this label. the topics covered in this issue provide the necessary and updated knowledge for all allergists involved in labeling and delabeling procedures, aiming to broaden drug choices and treatment options for patients in this unknown world of covid-19 pandemic and other disease states.our first question is: who is labeled as drug allergic in the general population and what can be done to uncover true drug allergy? a review by macy 9 provides data on a large cohort of more than 2 million members of kaiser health care, with 20% reported to have a drug allergy and more than 13% having antibiotic allergy. in this drug allergy cohort, twice as many patients are females. age of more than 50 years and increased body mass index were found to be associated with drug allergy. the review also discusses whether drug allergy and hypersensitivity are due to increased use, given that countries with lower rates of antibiotic use have a lower prevalence of antibiotic allergy. inappropriate use of antibiotics is still high in the setting of dental procedures. target populations for receiving a drug allergy label include the following: (1) children with approximately 70,000 visits to the emergency department reported annually for adverse drug events with penicillins, cephalosporins, and sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim as the most frequent medications; and (2) hospitalized patients with cancer, of whom 23% have a label of antibiotic allergy. what are the tools for the labeling or delabeling of a drug allergy? for individuals with penicillin-associated anaphylaxis, penicillin skin testing with penicilloyl-polylysine before oral amoxicillin 250 mg oral challenge (if skin test negative) is the avenue proposed by the author; however, with the lack of minor determinants, sensitization is not addressed. for patients with a history of benign cutaneous reactions, 1 single oral dose of amoxicillin is recommended.what are the benefits and dangers of a drug allergy label? in a review by solenki, 10 the author reviewed self-reported penicillin allergy, which accounts for at least 10% of the population, and observed that, among these individuals claiming to be allergic to penicillin, more than 90% are not truly allergic and can tolerate penicillin. these discrepancies were reviewed, which included initial mislabeling at the time of the clinical event, such as associated symptoms of viral infections, including urticaria and gastrointestinal adverse effects of antibiotics. many drug allergies are not long-lived and the natural resolution of penicillin allergy was reviewed. the author validated current diagnostic tools for the diagnosis of penicillin, cephalosporins, and other antibiotics allergies. multicentered clinical trials are needed to validate skin testing predictive values and to assess the value of new tools, such as specific immunoglobulin e and basophil activation test.how to detect children with true penicillin allergy? vyles et al 11 provide a review that describes that most allergies in pediatric patients are self-reported and often clinically inconsistent with true allergy. the rate of parent-reported adverse drug reactions ranges from 6% to 10%, and most of these so-called allergic reactions are attributed to beta-lactam antibiotic derivatives, anti-inflammatory drugs, and other antibiotics. nonimmediate rashes occurring after several days of treatment are the most frequently reported symptoms. although skin testing, followed by oral challenge, is the safest way to identify true immunoglobulin emediated allergy in children with high-risk allergy symptoms, risk stratification and direct oral challenge of low-risk patients is becoming a standard. of interest are 2 studies, which reported that both parents and physicians were reluctant to utilize penicillin class antibiotics after the penicillin allergy label was removed because of fear of an allergic reaction. the authors concluded that current and future efforts should focus on preventing penicillin allergy labels that can carry over into adulthood, providing education and decision support in the electronic medical record, and testing low-risk drug administration strategies in low-risk patients. integrating penicillin allergy management into stewardship efforts with the government and third-party payer incentives should be the long-term goal for penicillin allergy delabeling at the population level.what is the current understanding of drug hypersensitivity and allergic reactions? jakubovic et al 12 provide a broad and updated review of the current knowledge by reviewing the classical model of drug hypersensitivity reactions and comparing this with the current and more customized classification based on phenotypes, endotypes, and biomarker profiles. this approach allows for the classification of reactions to chemotherapy drugs, monoclonal antibodies, and new small molecules. complementing the gell and coombs classification drug allergy phenotypes allows for the description of classical and atypical clinical symptoms, such as cytokine stormelike manifestations in the context of drug exposure, timing, and severity. the endotypes look at the mechanisms, and also the molecular and cellular targets, whereas biomarkers are used as diagnostic tools. biomarkers such as skin testing, tryptase, and basophil activation test provide the signature for the different endotypes. as more mechanisms of drug allergy are uncovered and new biomarkers become available, they can be incorporated into this flexible classification, guiding clinicians toward an optimal approach for patient labeling or delabeling, treatment, and management.what is the evidence for, and how can recommendations be made for labeling and delabeling? are there models for these recommendations? shaker et al, 13 on behalf of the joint task force for allergy practice parameters (jtfpp), provided a review of the recommendations for anaphylaxis treatment. the authors introduced grading of recommendations assessment, development, and evaluation (grade), a new method of evidence appraisal and translation, which has emerged as a leading approach to anaphylaxis guidelines development. grade creates explicit processes for evaluating the broad evidence based on a specific, structured, and answerable clinical question. randomized controlled trials begin the evaluation process as high certainty, whereas observational studies begin as low certainty. evidence may be downgraded depending on the following considerations: (1) the risk of bias, (2) imprecision, (3) inconsistency, (4) indirectness, and (5) publication bias. through this methodology, evidence and certainty are clearly and simply described as "very low," "low," "moderate," or "high." the jtfpp has been producing grade guidelines since 2017, and the 2020 jtfpp anaphylaxis grade is focused on the practice of anaphylaxis prevention through identification and mitigation of risk factors for biphasic anaphylaxis and evaluation of the use of supplemental glucocorticoid and/or antihistamine premedication for immunotherapy, radiocontrast media and chemotherapy. in contrast to grade, good practice statements include the administration of epinephrine as first-line treatment for uniphasic and/or biphasic anaphylaxis. a good practice statement may be used when there is a high certainty that a recommendation will be more beneficial than harmful, though there is little direct evidence. grade is prescriptive, explicit, and transparent and requires expert judgment and consensus of guideline groups as evidence is evaluated and translated into recommendations.what is the practical approach to drug allergy labeling and delabeling? louisias and wickner 14 provided a review on the playground and available tools for drug allergy delabeling. the authors indicated that large-scale drug allergy delabeling is influenced by multiple factors, such as changing cultural moors, easily adapted tools to delabel, and electronic health record (ehr) crosstalk. current functionalities of ehrs' drug allergy sections are often at odds with providing reliable, updated, expert, safe, and affordable care. they reported that up to 35% of patients had at least 1 drug allergy listed in their ehr, and many had up to 20; nobody removed duplicates or delabel drugs with nonallergic symptoms. the authors indicated the need to uncover the integral components of drug allergy delabeling programs that can be tailored and disseminated, incentivized by insurance companies and hospitals, and standardized nationally. one study estimated penicillin allergy delabeling programs could have cost savings of $192,223 per year in tertiary care center pediatric emergency departments, thus underscoring the economic incentives of delabeling.allergists need to challenge every drug allergy label and to recognize drug allergy and hypersensitivity symptoms using the new framework of phenotypes and endotypes supported by biomarkers. providing risk stratification is key to safe delabeling procedures and to help provide management options including desensitization to patients who are truly allergic. minimizing inappropriate use, recording accurate intolerances, delabeling whenever possible, and adhering to essential elements of effective stewardship will solve the antibiotic allergy epidemic.predictive molecular pathology in the time of covid-19in the early months of 2020, covid-19 has rapidly spread around the world. 1 2 at the time of writing, italy represents the third country by higher incidence and the second by mortality. [1] [2] [3] the public health crisis precipitated in the darkest days of early march, when the italian government, in the figure of the prime minister, locked down the country. people were forced to remain at home; most activities were blocked, including academic teaching and research. 4 accordingly, all elective medical procedures, scheduled as non-urgent, were postponed. conversely, it was widely held that the activities directly related to prolong life expectancy of oncological patients must not be delayed. predictive molecular testing to select potential responsive oncological patients for targeted treatment certainly falls into this category.the predictive molecular pathology laboratory at the university of naples federico ii is serving several nearby institutions. during the covid-19 outbreak, the laboratory kept performing predictive molecular testing on tumour tissue specimens. [5] [6] [7] [8] however, laboratory organisation needed to be completely reshaped to limit personnel number and working hours. before the covid-19 outbreak, our laboratory adopted, in most cases, laboratorydeveloped tests (ldts). 5 6 9-12 special care had been taken to simplify laboratory workflows. as an example, tissue samples from lung, colon cancer, melanoma and gastrointestinal tumours (gist) were batched, and all processed by nextgeneration sequencing (ngs), using the custom sire gene panel. 6 9 ngs technology is fascinating and our sire assay has recently been adopted by several institutions, along the italian peninsula. 13 however, ngs requires significant hands-on time, and in some steps, laboratory staff need to work closely. in this current health emergency, however, safety issues are crucial. the number of individuals in laboratory space and physical interactions should be minimised as much as possible, and the protocols should take into account at least the 1 m distance rule. to respect these indications, in our laboratory, a paradigm shift towards simple and fast automated testing platforms was deemed to be not only necessary but also cost-effective.in the times of coronavirus disease, predictive molecular testing for oncological patients is more challenging than usual. cost-effective and technologically advanced laboratory organisation strategies should be balanced with the need to limit virus transmission. here, this study aimed to report and to critically analyse the evolving scenario. to this end, all clinical reports issued from 9 march to 20 april 2020 were reviewed. the number of patients referred from oncologists, the number of sample patients evaluated for each biomarker, the testing methodologies adopted, the laboratory staff composition and their working hours, the reagent costs and the turnaround time (tat) from sample to results were taken into account. in particular, tat was considered the time between the receipt of samples to clinical reporting. to monitor the impact of covid-19 on our activity, data were compared with those relative to the same period (9 march to 20 april), in 2019.written informed consent was obtained from all patients and documented in accordance with the general authorisation to process personal data for scientific research purposes from 'the italian data protection authority' (http://www. garanteprivacy. it/ web/ guest/ home/ docweb/-/ docwebdisplay/ export/ 2485392).before the covid-19 outbreak, the laboratory staff was composed by five units of personnel with interchangeable skills (fp, mr, cdl, ai and um). each employee worked full time (35 hours a week). the laboratory director (um) as a delegate of the head of the department (gt), was responsible of the overall organisation and administration of the laboratory, planning the workload for each employee and organising the staff rotation to harmonise responsibilities and to obtain an adequate tat.in table 1 a number of different genotyping technologies have been validated in our laboratory to ensure a versatile approach tailored on each sample feature. briefly, the sire panel-based ngs assay on ion s5 system (thermofisher scientifics, waltham, massachusetts, usa) is the key laboratory methodology covering 568 hotspot clinical relevant mutations in six genes (egfr, kras, nras, braf, kit and pdgfra). 6 9 the analysis for msi, an agnostic biomarker for different tumour types, is usually carried out by using a pcr-based bethesda panel combined with a microfluidic platform (tape station 4200; agilent technologies, santa clara, california, usa) analysis. 10 only, in selected cases, when biomarker assessment is urgently required in acute deteriorating patients, the fully automated real-time pcr (rt-pcr) platform idylla (biocartis, mechelen, belgium) is preferred. 11 12 finally, ihc analysis were carried out to evaluate alk gene fusions by using d5f3 (ventana, roche diagnostics, basel, switzerland) and ros1 gene rearrangements, by using d4d6 clone (cell signalling technology, leiden, the netherlands). in addition, pd-l1 expression analysis in patients with advanced-stage lung cancer by ventana pd-l1 sp263 assay on benchmark xt (roche diagnostic) was also carried out. 5during the covid-19 outbreak, the laboratory director, following the head of department recommendations to limit as much as possible the time spent by each employee in the hospital, organised a rotation involving the three biotechnologist units (fp, mr and cdl) to ensure that the genotyping assays for the assessment of ras, egfr, braf, kit, pdgfra and msi status would be carried out. a pathologist assistant (ai) ensured the histological processing of the tissue samples. ai was the bridge between the pathologists (cb and ev) assessing cellular content and the predictive molecular pathology laboratory. overall, biotechnologists (fp, mr and cdl) were organised to follow a weekly rotation, while the assistant pathologist (ai) was asked to attend the lab on alternate days. um kept working full time to supervise the activities to ensure the reagent supply and to interpret and report results.the number of patients undergoing biomarker testing in 2020 (45) was similar to that of the same period of 2019 (43). the patient and sample characteristics are reported in table 1. molecular analysis was successfully carried out in 42 (97.7%) out of 43 samples and 41 (91.1%) out of 45 samples for the 2019 and 2020 group, respectively. the adopted molecular platforms differed (figure 1); the vast majority of cases in 2019 were analysed by ngs (32/42, 76.2%), followed by idylla (4/42, 9.5%), ngs plus tape station (3/42, 7.1%), tape station alone (2/42, 4.8%) and conventional rt-pcr (1/42, 2.4%). during the outbreak, to allow laboratory staff rotation, the genotyping laboratory workflow was completely reshaped, and the fully automated platform was prioritised to minimise biotechnologist hand-on times. thus, in 2020, almost all cases were analysed by idylla (38/41, 92.7%), and the remaining cases were analysed by ngs (3/41, 7.3%). the results, in terms of type and frequency of detected alterations, relative to assays performed, are reported in online supplementary table 1. as far as predictive ihc is concerned, no differences were reported in the methodological approach between the two periods, and the relative results are reported in online supplementary table 1.the mean tat, from the receipt of suitable samples by our laboratory to reporting the results to the clinical care team was 7.9 working days (ranging from 3 to 22) in 2019, while it was shorter in 2020 (5.3 days (ranging from 1 to 12)) (figure 1). regarding the average reagent costs, ngs required €98 to cover all the reagent cost necessary for nucleic acid extraction, gene panel, library preparation and sequencing for each patient. the reagent costs for the idylla platform ranged from €95 to €136 for single gene/assay evaluation.during the covid-19 outbreak, in our laboratory, oncological patients have timely been tested for targeted treatments. in addition, actions were needed to ensure laboratory staff safety. to accomplish these results, laboratory organisation had to be deeply reshaped. 14 thus, the covid-19 emergency is also changing the way we practise predictive molecular pathology. since this activity is crucial to extend and improve the life expectancy and quality of oncological patients, it is not surprising that the molecular testing volume was steady, in contrast to our recent report showing a reduced number of samples in anatomical pathology laboratories. 15 fully automated technologies are advancing at a rapid pace. 16 in normal times, this technology has usually been considered as second class, to be 'segregated' in small laboratories featuring limited workload and lacking skilled and trained staff. 17 in larger and academic institutions, as previously reported, this technology was considered only when acute deteriorating patients needed urgent treatment or when nucleic acid quality was unsuitable for ngs. 18 however, in the time of covid-19, ldts based on several sequential steps and requiring long hands on time are more difficult to be carried out; fully automated technologies can be prioritised to ensure accurate biomarker evaluation and sustainable laboratory activity. indeed, we should rethink and re-evaluate the value originally assigned to each laboratory staff working hour, being aware that the time spent by a biotechnologist in the laboratory is today more precious than before. 11 12 in fact, it should be borne in mind that a critical attitude is required to interpret and validate the results. in our experience, the possibility for a highly trained molecular pathologist to visually inspect the rt-pcr curves online, thanks the web-based idylla explore application, is crucial. 19 in fact, although most cases (95%) were diagnosed by the fully automated approach only, on some occasions, ngs was still carried out to refine uncertain results displaying rt-pcr curves of undetermined interpretation. 20 moreover, not all clinically relevant biomarkers are testable by idylla; as an example, automated assays for kit and pdgfra gene evaluations have not been developed yet. on the other sides, the disadvantage of the fully automated approach is the higher overall cost for a single patient. 21 in fact, the cost of a comprehensive analysis for a patient with crc (kras, nras, braf and msi) with idylla is around €350 with respect to €98 of our sire ngs panel. this latter offers also the possibility to simultaneously assess a larger number of clinically relevant biomarkers from the same sample. 22 this is a crucial point in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer where retrospective data can be mined to integrate the egfr analysis with information on braf and kras status. 23 although is not considered a must-test gene yet, kras is acquiring greater relevance considering the amg510 (amgen, thousand oaks, california, usa) clinical trials, underlining the role of exon 2 p.g12c point mutation as a positive predictive biomarker. 24the need to maintain physical distance between laboratory staff is well established. 25 26 conversely, since molecular testing is based on formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue or on ethanol-fixed cytological material, the possibility that the virus would be present in the examined tissue samples is minimal. 27 conversely, liquid biopsy may represent a potential source of transmission, and recommendations to regulate this activity should be provided soon.in conclusion, the covid-19 outbreak underlines even more the concept that predictive molecular pathology should be practised in advanced laboratories by highly trained staff. in fact, even a fully automated procedure needs to be used in the proper scenario, making the versatility of testing technologies a crucial opportunity for modern molecular medicine.► the covid-19 outbreak modifies laboratory organisation to limit personnel number and working hours. ► despite these limitations, in our laboratory, oncological patients have timely been tested for targeted treatments. ► this public health emergency underlines even more the concept that predictive molecular pathology should be practised in advanced laboratories by highly trained staff, even if fully automated procedures are employed.handling editor runjan chetty.contributors um and gt conceived the study; cdl, fp, mr, rs and mn contributed as biotechnologists; ai contributed as laboratory technician; um and pp contributed as molecular pathologists; ev, cb, fcs and gt contributed as cytopathologists; um, fp, pp and gt wrote the paper; all authors approved the final version of the manuscript.the authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.competing interests um reports personal fees (as speaker bureau or advisor) from boehringer ingelheim, astrazeneca, roche, msd, amgen, merck and bms. gt reports personal fees (as speaker bureau or advisor) from roche, msd and pfizer.patient consent for publication not required.ethics approval all information regarding human material was managed using anonymous numerical codes, and all samples were handled in compliance with the declaration of helsinki (http://www. wma. net/ en/ 30publications/ 10policies/ b3/).provenance and peer review not commissioned; internally peer reviewed.data availability statement data are available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author.this article is made freely available for use in accordance with bmj's website terms and conditions for the duration of the covid-19 pandemic or until otherwise determined by bmj. you may use, download and print the article for any lawful, non-commercial purpose (including text and data mining) provided that all copyright notices and trade marks are retained.sepsis is a leading cause of death among hospitalized patients worldwide. despite recent advances in terms of management, sepsis remains a life-threatening condition with poor prognosis. the risk factors for sepsis usually include patientrelated physiological characteristics, underlying diseases, or clinical treatment backgrounds. patients with one or more of these factors are susceptible to sepsis. the most vulnerable are the elderly and infant populations; patients with chronic diseases, severe trauma, or burns; individuals who are immunocompromised or receiving immunosuppressive therapy; and malnourished and debilitated patients. the early diagnosis of sepsis is critical because mortality increases by 7.6% for each hour that appropriate antimicrobial therapy is delayed [1] . however, the accurate and timely detection of sepsis remains a great challenge because of its various nonspecific clinical manifestations and its complex and indeterminate pathophysiology. therefore, neither microbial detection, which is considered the gold standard for identifying infection, nor traditional biomarkers can fulfill the existing need for the early diagnosis and management of sepsis [2] .infection involves an extensive and complex pathogen-host interaction. sepsis develops when the initial appropriate host response to an infection becomes amplified and then dysregulated [3] . the host immune defenses determine the fate of infecting organisms. that is, these organisms could remain localized; be phagocytosed and removed by immunocytes, leading to the release of pathogen components into the circulation; or multiply in local tissue and enter the bloodstream, resulting in bacteremia and sepsis. the pathogen and its structural components not only cause extensive changes in both the innate and acquired immune responses but also affect the nervous, endocrine, respiratory, circulatory, metabolic systems, etc. [3] . traditional biomarkers for sepsis are mainly derived from this host immune/inflammatory response. various high-throughput omics technologies facilitate comprehensive screening of sepsis-specific biomarkers. this review paper describes currently available and novel sepsis biomarkers in the context of genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics to provide novel insights into the development of sepsis and ultimately offer new tools for overcoming the present diagnostic limitations.biomarkers are molecular indicators used to diagnose and predict the outcome of illnesses, as well as identify susceptible individuals. they are quantifiable measures of biological homeostasis that provide a frame of reference for identifying abnormal processes [2] , and are important factors in the decision-making process of disease assessment. commonly used biomarkers for sepsis include c-reactive protein (crp) and procalcitonin (pct) [4, 5] , cytokines [tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-α, interleukin (il)-1, il-6, il-10, osteopontin] [6, 7] , chemokines [macrophage migration inhibitory factor (mif), high-mobility-group box 1] [8, 9] , and soluble receptors [soluble triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 1 (strem-1), soluble urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (supar)] [10, 11] .the use of a single biomarker cannot satisfy all requirements for sepsis diagnosis and treatment management because sepsis has a complex pathophysiology that involves hundreds of mediators or single molecular complexes [12] . for instance, crp is frequently used to identify infection and sepsis [2] . the plasma concentration of crp is positively correlated with the risk of organ dysfunction and death [13, 14] . however, the level of crp cannot accurately reflect the severity of infection and sepsis because it increases during minor infection or remains high even after the time course of infection [2] . the level of crp may also increase during an inflammatory response to noninfectious events, such as myocardial infarction, tumorigenesis, or operation. these findings suggest that crp lacks specificity as an early-stage sepsis biomarker. by contrast, the elevation of pct is listed as a diagnostic criterion for sepsis [15] . a recent meta-analysis that included 30 studies has revealed that pct has a mean sensitivity of 0.77, a mean specificity of 0.79, and an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (auc) of 0.85 [16] . despite its value for the early diagnosis of sepsis in critically ill patients, pct remains unsuitable as a definitive diagnostic measure [16] .using different combinations of biomarkers could overcome the above limitations. in a prospective cohort study of 151 patients with systemic inflammatory response syndrome (sirs), supar, strem-1, mif, pct, neutrophil count, and crp were used as biomarkers to detect the bacterial cause of inflammation, with aucs of 0.5, 0.61, 0.63, 0.72, 0.74, and 0.81, respectively [17] . the combined auc of the six biomarkers was determined to be 0.88 using a statistical estimation of the optimum linear combination test and the associated maximum auc [18] . this result showed that using the six biomarkers simultaneously had better diagnostic accuracy than using any of the biomarkers alone for detecting the bacterial versus nonbacterial causes of inflammation. in another prospective study of critically ill patients [19] , a bioscore that combined the polymorphonuclear neutrophil cd64 index with pct and strem-1 serum levels was used to diagnose sepsis with an auc of 0.97. this result showed that the biomarkers had better performance when used in combination than when used alone. the diagnostic accuracy of the bioscore was confirmed in a validation cohort, with 90.9% of patients being correctly classified. although the combination of biomarkers improves diagnostic sensitivity and specificity, factors including time, cost, sample availability, and the practicability of the detection method limit the application of this approach in clinical practice.genomics requires large data sets obtained from recombinant dna methods, dna sequencing, and bioinformatics approaches to analyze genomes and explain physiological or pathophysiological events. similar to many pathological states, sepsis is a polygenic syndrome initiated by infection. genetic factors determine the susceptibility and response of patients to infection [20] and can thus influence clinical outcomes [21, 22] . genomic approaches can be used to identify genetic polymorphisms and epigenetic marks that can serve as bioindicators for the detection of sepsis.a genetic polymorphism is a regular occurrence ( > 1%) of two or more alleles at a given chromosome location. several genetic polymorphisms involved in inflammation, immunity, and coagulation have been linked to sepsis susceptibility or prognosis [20] . such polymorphisms have become the focus of most gene association studies of sepsis. snps, the most common type of gene polymorphism, are substitutions, deletions, or insertions of a single nucleotide occurring in approximately one of every 1000 base pairs in the human genome. snps could produce an altered protein, change the expression level of a normal protein, or have no discernible effect on protein function [23] . thus, studying the snp genotypes in sepsis is necessary to identify the potential markers of susceptibility, severity, and clinical outcome.snp genotyping of several genes, including cd14 [24] [25] [26] [27] , toll-like receptors (tlrs) [22, 28] , lipopolysaccharide binding protein [29] , cytokines [21, 28, 30, 31] , and coagulation factors [32, 33] , has provided information that is clinically relevant to sepsis. for example, burn patients with tlr4 and tnf-α polymorphisms are 1.8 times more likely to develop severe sepsis than patients who are homozygous; however, this increase in susceptibility is not significantly associated with mortality [28] . tlr1 snps are associated with increased mortality in patients with gram-positive bacterial sepsis after traumatic injury; thus, they may serve as a novel marker for the risk of death in critically injured patients [22] . a recent study has revealed an association between the vascular endothelial growth factor + 936cc genotype and risk of developing acute kidney injury in patients with severe sepsis [30] . genome-wide snp genotyping assays enable the accurate detection of hundreds of thousands of snps in a single experiment [34, 35] . therefore, such assays are valuable to the identification of novel sepsis susceptibility-associated snps.several factors should be considered in evaluating the validity and applicability of these studies. potential confounding variables must be identified and matched; positive association studies and replicate studies must be validated and analyzed based on the primary hypothesis rather than on multiple comparisons; and large-scale analyses of sepsis susceptibility-associated snp genotypes should be performed to determine new significant risk factors [20, 36] .genes associated with immunity and inflammation are subject to epigenetic regulation [20] , which refers to hereditary gene expression changes that are not caused by alterations in dna sequence [37] . dna methylation marks and histone posttranslational modifications are major indicators for the epigenetic regulation of gene expression [38] , and greatly impact host defense responses.sepsis induces epigenetic changes in dendritic cells and lymphocytes that incapacitate host defenses for an extended period after the initial immune challenge [39] [40] [41] . this latephase immunosuppression has been confirmed in a postmortem study [42] . epigenetic mechanisms affect an early stage in the progression of sepsis by suppressing proinflammatory gene products and subsequent immune cell activation and proliferation. thus, epigenetic markers can serve as biomarkers for the early diagnosis of sepsis and offer insights into the progression of this condition [43] .the immune response to sepsis is complex, and the exact mechanisms have yet to be fully elucidated [44] . the balance between pro-and anti-inflammatory responses is achieved through a tight regulation of gene expression [45] . thus, evaluating the expression profiles of key genes using highthroughput dna microarrays can reveal the immune status of septic patients. in a mouse model of sepsis, specific changes in gene expression were identified by microarray analysis of various organs and tissue, including the heart [46] , liver [47] , spleen [48] , and leucocytes [49] .in a study of 92 intensive care unit (icu) patients who were at risk of developing sepsis, the mrna levels of il-1β, il-6, il-8, il-10, tnf-α, fasl, and ccl2 in the blood leukocytes were measured daily using real-time reverse transcription pcr (rt-pcr) and then analyzed with a nonlinear method (i.e., neural network analysis) [50] . the data correctly predicted the onset of sepsis in an average of 83.09% of patient cases with high sensitivity (91.43%) and selectivity (80.20%) between one and four days before a clinical diagnosis was conducted. in another study, microarray and multiplex tandem pcr were used to evaluate transcriptional profiles in circulating white blood cells of icu septic patients, postsurgical patients, and healthy control subjects [51] . a panel of 42 gene expression markers was identified, and the prediction of sepsis from a mixed inflammatory cell population had an auc between 86% and 92%. the gene expression profile of patients with sepsis differs from that of patients with inflammation alone, and changes in marker gene expression become apparent 0 h to 48 h prior to a clinical manifestation [52] . therefore, changes in the expression of genes involved in innate immunity, t cell differentiation, protein synthesis, and cytokine receptor production can serve as a marker for the early diagnosis of sepsis.transcriptomic methods only partially reflect steady-state mrna abundance, which is influenced by multiple factors; these methods do not provide any direct information on gene end products (proteins) and on post-translational modifications of protein function [53] . the source of rna used in the analysis can also present a potential confounding factor. the use of whole blood as rna source complicates gene profile analysis because of the heterogeneity of blood cell populations; meanwhile, the use of a specific cell type can result in relevant expression information from other cells being overlooked [53] . these significant shortcomings highlight the need for more reliable and clinically useful approaches.mirnas are short rnas of 18 to 25 nucleotides that posttranscriptionally regulate gene expression through a sequence-specific interaction with target sites in mrna [54] . mirnas have been linked to normal physiological and pathological processes [54] . serum and plasma levels of mirnas are consistent among individuals of the same species; moreover, mirnas are resistant to rnase a digestion and remain stable even after multiple freeze-thaw cycles and long-term storage [55, 56] . this stability makes mirnas potentially useful candidates for diagnostic and other clinical applications. although the source of circulating mirnas is still unclear, they have been implicated in a wide range of diseases, including cancer [57, 58] , trauma [59, 60] , acute pancreatitis [61] , and hepatitis [62] .microarrays and quantitative rt-pcr were used for the genome-wide mirna profiling of peripheral blood leukocytes and plasma of septic patients. the results demonstrated that mir-150 levels are significantly reduced in both leukocytes and plasma, and are negatively correlated with the level of disease severity as measured by the sequential organ failure assessment score, making mir-150 an early biomarker of sepsis [63] . a similar investigation on the levels of mir-150 and mir-143 in the peripheral blood leukocytes of septic patients using rt-pcr found that the expression of these mirnas is significantly decreased and is weakly correlated with the severity of the condition. thus, these mirnas are useful for assessing inflammatory responses and for acting as prognostic markers of sepsis [64, 65] .the pathophysiology of sepsis involves various tissue and organs. simple screening for mirnas differentially expressed in leukocytes excludes the mrnas secreted by other cells that can also be contributing factors. a genomewide microarray screen was performed to identify the serum mirnas that were differentially expressed in septic patients who survived and those who did not; two (mir-297 and mir-574-5p) of the identified mirnas were further validated by rt-pcr in a larger subject group [66] . the combined assessment of serum levels, sepsis stage, and sepsis-related organ failure assessment scores of mir-574-5p has a better predictive value than any single above-mentioned indicator for mortality. in addition, the serum levels of mir-146a and mir-223 are significantly reduced in septic patients compared with sirs patients and healthy control subjects; therefore, these mirnas can potentially serve as novel, highly sensitive, and specific biomarkers for sepsis [67] . knowledge of mirnas in the serum remains incomplete. in addition, parameters such as the expression levels of circulating mirnas at different stages of sepsis and their potential correlation with injured organs require further investigation.in addition to dna methylation and histone modifications, noncoding rnas (ncrnas) are also involved in the epigenetic control of gene expression. ncrnas have a range of sizes and can originate from intergenic regions, introns, or enhancers [40] . among these ncrnas, long ncrnas (lncrnas) are transcripts longer than 200 nucleotides. these transcripts have widespread, differential expression in response to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection [68] , suggesting a possible link between lncrnas and the host defense response against infection. thus, lncrnas can potentially become a new class of biomarkers and therapeutic targets for infectious diseases. however, future studies on the regulatory effects of lncrnas during infection are needed.the proteome is the set of all proteins that are expressed by an organism. proteomics provides an analysis of the expression, localization, function, and interaction of proteomes. compared with other immunologic tests, proteomics is a novel method that has the advantages of high throughput, sensitivity, and specificity. the development of proteomics has provided a means for studying cellular processes, such as cell signaling, identifying protein modifications, and characterizing specific biological markers [69] .therefore, proteomics approaches are invaluable for clinical applications and studies of sepsis biomarkers. for instance, intravenous injection of pseudomonas aeruginosa in a rabbit model of sepsis leads to the differential expression of 11 proteins in lymphocytes after 24 h, as identified using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry. these factors are involved in the folding, assembly, transport, and degradation of proteins required for signal transmission, inflammation, immunization, energy metabolism, proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis [70] . a recent study has established a rat model of acinetobacter baumannii-induced sepsis and revealed 41 differentially expressed proteins in neutrophils using 2d electrophoresis and mass spectrometry [71] . the detected proteins include antioxidant proteins, cytoskeletal and regulatory proteins, proteins involved in signaling and energy metabolism, and proteases.proteomics-based analyses revealed that ykl-40 has high expression in serum samples from septic patients; thus, ykl-40 is considered a possible biomarker of sepsis [72] . plasma profiling, which couples protein chip array with surfaceenhanced laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry, was used to analyze the plasma of postoperative patients that had undergone liver transplantation; results revealed that five protein peaks in combination are potential diagnostic biomarkers of postoperative sepsis [73] . however, despite this promising result, the proteins have yet to be identified, and their diagnostic value must be assessed through clinical trials.although many potential sepsis biomarkers have been identified through genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics, the changes in cellular metabolism during sepsis cannot be ignored. metabolomics is an emerging omics approach that focuses on metabolites with molecular weights less than 1000 kda under physiological or pathological conditions. this approach can be used to analyze biochemical events in cells, tissue, or organs and to evaluate diseases in terms of severity. the main experimental techniques used in metabolomics include nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr), gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (gc/ms), and high performance liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (hplc/ms).the development of sepsis involves the interaction of multiple systems that affect the expression levels and activities of metabolic enzymes. a more timely diagnosis and prognosis of sepsis may be achieved by detecting changes in the concentrations and ratios of metabolites [74] . a previous research identified the metabolic profiles of sera from septic rats with cecal ligation and puncture using nmr and hplc/ms [74] . compared with the rats that survived, those that did not survive exhibited lower levels of free fatty acids. this finding can be explained by a heightened systemic demand for energy during sepsis, suggesting that the level of free fatty acids can serve as a useful bioindicator. moreover, an increase in the level of certain polyunsaturated fatty acids was observed; this increase can be indicative of an increased anti-inflammatory response. the metabolic profile analysis was used as a reference to develop a model for predicting outcome; this model serves as a novel tool for assessing sepsis prognosis. nmr-based metabolic profiling revealed differ- [24] [25] [26] [27] genotyping and logistic regression analysis 14 septic patients and 30 healthy controls [24] 514 critically ill patients [25] 58 severely injured blunt trauma patients [26] 228 burn patients [27] na na na na -260c!t 1. no association with an increased risk of severe sepsis in trauma patients [24, 26] 2. association with increased susceptibility to sepsis [27] 3. higher -260tt genotype frequency in icu survivor patients [25] il-6, tlr4, and tnf-α [27] genotyping and logistic regression analysis 228 burn patients [ ences in metabolites of energy metabolism and inflammation in lung tissue, bronchoalveolar lavage (bal) fluid, and serum samples obtained from septic and control rats [75] . compared with the control rats, the septic rats had higher creatine concentration in the three samples. however, only alanine and phosphoethanolamine levels were higher in the lung tissue and serum samples of the septic rats compared with the control rats. myo-inositol was higher in the lung tissue but lower in the bal fluid of the septic rats compared with the control rats. in addition, the septic rats had higher acetoacetate content but lower formate content in the serum compared with the control rats. with the generation of a predictive model using partial least-squares discriminant analysis, a diagnosis of sepsis was successfully achieved using this approach.sepsis involves numerous pathophysiological changes in various organ systems; thus, systematic identification of sepsis biomarkers and examination of the molecular mechanisms underlying sepsis using omics approaches may provide insights into the physiological state of patients following infection. several issues need to be considered before omics-based approaches can be efficiently used for the diagnosis and monitoring of sepsis in clinical settings. first, appropriate, highly specific biomarkers with high diagnostic value must be identified. the gold standard for determining infection still depends on microbial detection, which can provide a false negative result even in patients exhibiting the clinical manifestations of infection, because of the mildness of the disease, the load/type/growth capacity of pathogens, and the use of antibiotics [76] . conversely, false positive results may be observed because of sample contamination. therefore, perfections to this standard diagnostic method are needed.second, universally applicable biomarkers for sepsis, especially for multi-centered or multi-indexed investigations, are still lacking. validation studies must be undertaken to determine the utility of diagnostic indicators; only indicators with high sensitivity, high specificity, and clinical applications should be retained.third, most studies of sepsis rely on a single omics approach (table 1) rather than on a combination of omics approaches. various omics may reveal sepsis mechanisms at different levels for a specific molecule or group of molecules; thus, a multi-pronged strategy using two or more omics can provide integrated information on particularly significant biomarkers. for instance, the multi analyte pathway inference tool algorithm enables the principled integration of epigenomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics data for cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and biomarker discovery [77] .the lack of a clear understanding of the pathophysiology of sepsis limits biomarker identification [2] . however, the application of new technologies and the combination of multiple omics approaches are necessary to develop tools for the effective diagnosis of sepsis and to improve the prognosis for this condition.. we propose an algorithmic approach using cardiac biomarkers to triage, risk-stratify and prognosticate patients with severe covid-19.we systematically searched the pubmed and google scholar databases until may 31st, 2020, and accessed the available data on the role of cardiac biomarkers in patients with covid-19.covid-19 is associated with acute cardiac injury in around 7-28% of patients, significantly increasing its associated complications and mortality. patients with underlying cardiovascular disease are more prone to develop acute cardiac injury as a result of covid-19. the use of cardiac biomarkers may aid in differentiating the cardiac cause of dyspnea in patients with severe covid-19.cardiac biomarkers may also aid in triaging, risk-stratification, clinical decision-making, and prognostication of patients with covid-19. however, there are concerns that routine testing in all patients with covid-19 irrespective of severity, may result in unnecessary downstream investigations which may be misleading. in this brief review, using an algorithmic approach, we have tried to rationalize the use of cardiac biomarkers among patients with severe covid-19. this approach is also likely to lessen the infection exposure risk to the cardiovascular team attending patients with severe covid-19.it appears beneficial to triage, risk-stratify, and prognosticate patients with covid-19 based on the evidence of myocardial injury and the presence of underlying cardiovascular disease. future research studies are, however, needed to validate these proposed benefits. with covid-19 is likely to be non-specific and multifactorial, and less likely to be due to atherothrombotic coronary occlusion; therefore, this approach would favour unnecessarily downstream testing. acc did not mention any words regarding its prognostic role. furthermore, acc made a similar recommendation for measuring natriuretic peptides in covid patients, recommending its use only if one suspects heart failure on clinical grounds. 4 however, in a study by shaobo shi et al., 2 3 , which showed that 52 (27.8%) out of 187 confirmed severe covid-19 patients developed acute cardiac injury (measured by elevated troponin t in this study). troponin levels showed a high and significantly positive linear correlation with nt-pro bnp levels. interestingly, there was a dynamic escalation of difference in troponin t and nt-pro bnp levels between the patients who died and those who recovered/discharged successfully. both troponin t and nt-pro bnp levels increased significantly during hospitalization in those who ultimately died, but no such dynamic changes of troponin t or nt-pro bnp levels were evident in survivors. this study also revealed an important finding that the risk of mortality was higher in patients with elevated troponin t and underlying cardiovascular disease compared to those with elevated troponin t but without underlying cardiovascular disease.thus, it is evident that cardiac injury plays a significant role in the disease progression and outcome associated with covid-19. thus, it is reasonable to include the indicators of cardiac injury in the patient's diagnosis, triaging, treatment, and prognosis, while recognizing that their abnormality may not be related to direct coronary involvement. the usefulness is enhanced among patients with prior cardiovascular disease. if we continue to ignore their importance, we are likely to miss a significant number of ischemic and non-ischemic causes of myocardial injury associated with covid-19.eventually, many patients are going to be mismanaged and deprived of potentially useful therapies like inotropes, vasopressors, and diuretics for heart failure, and perhaps immunosuppressants for myocarditis. the use of biomarker-based risk stratification may identify a substantial proportion of severe covid-19 patients with normal or mildly elevated troponin and bnp values (<3 times the upper limit of normal) , thus avoiding the need for further cardiac consultation, electrocardiogram, and echocardiogram. this strategy will translate into lesser infection exposure to the cardiovascular team and a reduction in the need for additional ppe.therefore, in this covid-19 era, we urge the cardiology community to stop using troponin just as a test to rule out myocardial infarction and to decide whether patients should be shifted for coronary angiography or not.instead, we propose using both troponin and natriuretic peptides in all severe covid-19 patients for risk stratification (as advised in our proposed algorithm), clinical decision making, rationale use of ecg/echocardiography, initiating aggressive treatment strategies, and for risk prognostication of the patients.such an approach might enhance cardiovascular care among covid-19 patients, as well as reduce the risk of infection exposure to the cardiovascular care team. however, future research is needed to validate whether cardiac biomarker testing improves triage, assists in treatment decisions, and alters outcomes. injury may be secondary to ischemic or nonischemic processes [9, 10] . traditionally, elevated troponin concentrations have been considered equivalent to myocardial infarction. however, with improvements in troponin assays, elevated levels without overt symptoms or signs of myocardial ischemia are now more common; hence, the fourth universal definition of myocardial infarction considers myocardial injury to be a separate, unique entity [11] . based on current evidence, a myocardial injury without overt ischemia represents approximately 60% of cases of abnormal troponin elevation [9] . the differential diagnosis is broad in such cases. it can be recognized in the variety of cardiac such as acute heart failure, pulmonary embolism, myocarditis, cardiac surgery or procedures, cardiac arrhythmias, hypertension, stress-induced cardiomyopathy, or several non-cardiac conditions such as acute renal failure, sepsis, anemia, hypoxia, critical illness, drug-induced, rhabdomyolysis among others [9, 10] . association of viral infections with myocardial injury has been well recognized, and the most common associations involve adenoviruses and enteroviruses such as coxsackie viruses [12] . according to data from previous influenza virus and coronavirus epidemics, these viral infections have also been shown to cause myocardial injury, because cases of myocarditis have been described to be caused by both influenza and coronaviruses [13, 14] .although sars-cov-2 infection predominantly causes pulmonary complications, such as pneumonia and ards, the disease has also been associated with a variety of cardiovascular complications, including acute myocardial injury, myocarditis, arrhythmia, heart failure, and venous thromboembolism [6] . moreover, studies have shown that patients with covid-19 and preexisting cardiovascular disease (cvd) have an increased risk of acquiring the illness and subsequently having severe disease and death [6, 7] . in a clinical bulletin issued by the american college of cardiology (acc), the overall case-fatality rate was 2.3%, but the mortality reached 10.5% in patients with underlying cvd [15] . among various cardiac complications, acute cardiac injury with elevated cardiac biomarkers has been described in early studies from china on hospitalized patients with covid-19. we discuss the prevalence, mechanism, clinical characteristics, management, and prognostic implications of sars-cov-2-induced myocardial injury, according to current published research.sars-cov and mers may also result in cardiovascular complications, although most of the data are anecdotal, in the absence of systematic studies. although sars-cov infection is associated with some cardiovascular manifestations, there are no clear reported cases of myocarditis [16] [17] [18] [19] . however, in the 2012 saudi arabia outbreak, mers-cov was reported to cause acute myocarditis and heart failure ( table 1 ) [14] .first author and cohort size cardiovascular manifestation outcomes sars yu et al. [16] (n=121) tachycardia (72%), hypotension (50%), bradycardia (15%), cardiomegaly (11%) andparoxysmal atrial fibrillation in only one patient transientpan et al. [17] (n=15) cardiac arrest deathli et al. [18] (n=46) subclinical diastolic dysfunction without systolic impairment reversible on recovery peiris et al. [19] (n=75) acute myocardial infarction cause of death in two of five fatal cases mers alhogbani [14] (n=1) acute myocarditis and acute onset heart failure recovered acute cardiac injury has been reported to be highly prevalent in hospitalized patients with covid-19 ( the earliest single-center retrospective study conducted in china, involving 41 hospitalized patients with covid-19, detected acute cardiac injury in five (12%) patients. in the study, a diagnosis of acute cardiac injury was made if serum levels of cardiac biomarkers (troponin i) were above the 99th percentile upper reference limit, or new abnormalities were detected in electrocardiography (ecg) and echocardiography [1] . since then, numerous retrospective studies reported an increased prevalence of myocardial injury in hospitalized patients with covid-19, with a frequency between 5% and 28% [1, [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] . the prevalence of cardiac injury increased with the severity of the disease ( however, data regarding troponin elevation in asymptomatic and mildly symptomatic, non-hospitalized patients are not available.the mechanism of cardiac injury among patients with covid-19 remains uncertain. the following potential mechanisms have been suggested.one potential mechanism is direct myocardial involvement mediated via angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) [8, 32] . the betacoronaviruses can infect human hosts through ace2, a membrane-bound protein expressed in many human cells, including vascular endothelia, renal tissue, cardiovascular tissue, and small intestinal epithelia. ace2 negatively regulates the renin-angiotensin system by inactivating angiotensin ii, and it is likely to protect against acute lung failure. a murine model has demonstrated that pulmonary infection with sars-cov also precipitates ace2-dependent myocardial infarction. among humans, during the toronto sars outbreak, sars-cov viral rna was detected in 35% of autopsied hearts, thus raising the possibility of direct damage of cardiomyocytes by the virus [32] . phylogenetic analysis has demonstrated that sars-cov-2 has a very similar receptor binding domain/motif to that of the sars coronavirus, thus suggesting that sars-cov-2 may use ace2 as a receptor to enter human cells and causes direct damage to the lung epithelia, thereby leading to pneumonia and ards. because ace2 is also highly expressed in the heart, covid-19 induced cardiac injury might potentially be mediated by ace2, although whether sars-cov-2 binding alters ace2 expression or causes dysregulation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) pathway remains unclear [6, 7, 32, 33] . hence, one potential explanation for the higher likelihood of acquiring infection, and the increased risk of severe disease and adverse outcomes in patients with covid-19 with pre-existing cvd, maybe the elevated secretion of ace2 in these patients, thus making them more susceptible to direct viral damage to cardiac myocytes [33] ; but, this has not yet been demonstrated in pathology studies. in a case report describing autopsy results for a 50-year-old man who died of covid-19 associated with ards, histologic examination of biopsied cardiac tissue showed rare interstitial mononuclear inflammatory infiltrates without substantial myocardial damage. however, the troponin level was not reported in the study [34] .another suggested mechanism of covid-19 related cardiac involvement is an overwhelming immuneinflammatory response and cytokine storm [6, 7, 33] . the hallmark of cytokine storm syndrome is an uncontrolled and dysfunctional immune response involving the continuous activation and proliferation of lymphocytes and macrophages [24] . huang et al. have found that patients with covid-19 admitted to the intensive care unit have higher plasma levels of cytokines, including interleukins (il-2, il-7, il-10, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor and igg-induced protein 10), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, macrophage inflammatory protein 1-alpha, and tumor necrosis factor α [1] . from a previous study of sars-cov infection and cardiovascular complications, subclinical diastolic left ventricular impairment appears to be common during acute sars infection and to be reversible after recovery, thus suggesting that left ventricular dysfunction in the acute phase might be associated with cytokine storm syndrome [18] . several studies have shown that patients with covid-19 with myocardial injury show evidence of severe systemic inflammation, including elevated leukocyte and neutrophil counts, interleukin levels, c-reactive protein, procalcitonin, globulin, and biomarkers of myocardial injury and stress, such as creatine kinase and myoglobin and n-terminal pro-b-type natriuretic peptide (nt-probnp), thus linking myocardial injury to the severity of inflammation and subsequent ventricular dysfunction [24, 25, 35] . similarly, in a case report of sars-cov 2 induced fulminant myocarditis, the described patient had markedly elevated interleukin 6, thus suggesting that the presence of cytokine storms might have caused increased vascular wall permeability and myocardial edema, thus resulting in the observed thickening of the interventricular septum. because the myocarditis was transient, and recovery was enhanced with the use of continuous renal replacement therapy (crrt), myocardial injury can be considered to be associated with an excessive immune response mediated by viral infection [36] .severe hypoxia due to acute lung injury and several systemic complications caused by the virus can result in oxidative stress and hence secondary myocardial injury due to increased myocardial oxygen demand [7, 33] . for example in one study, there was a characteristic pattern of rise in cardiac troponin i over time. the troponin level was normal during admission, but subsequently increased in 37.5% of patients especially in those who died. in those patients, the troponin level significantly increased in the week preceding the death coinciding with severe systemic disorders including multiple organ failure, severe electrolyte disturbances, management of ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo), severe metabolic acidosis and coagulation dysfunction all of which can potentially lead to secondary myocardial injury due to increased oxidative stress on the heart [37] .studies have demonstrated that patients with underlying cvd and other comorbid conditions are predisposed to myocardial injury during covid-19; the prevalence of hypertension among patients with cardiac injury has been reported to be as high as 45%-65%, and that of coronary artery disease (cad) has been reported to be approximately 20%-30% ( thus making the plaques prone to rupture. inflammation also causes endothelial dysfunction and increases the procoagulant activity of the blood, thereby contributing to the formation of occlusive thrombi over ruptured coronary plaques and predisposing patients to ischemic myocardial injury [38] .there are several clinically diagnosed myocarditis cases in patients with covid-19 with supporting imaging ( in the study, among 84 patients with covid 19, four (4.8%) were clinically diagnosed with sars-cov-2 myocarditis based on the most updated diagnostic criteria for viral myocarditis [42] . however, in a singlecenter retrospective study in 112 admitted patients with confirmed covid-19, the authors explored whether sars-cov-2 caused the myocarditis by performing at least one echocardiographic evaluation in all patients during hospitalization. a total of 14 patients (12.5%) presented with abnormalities suggestive of possible myocarditis with an elevation of troponin. the myocarditis diagnosis was based on findings of triple elevation in cardiac troponin i (>0.12 ng/ml) plus abnormalities in echocardiography and/or ecg. the abnormalities in echocardiography were defined as a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (lvef) (<50%) or segmental wall motion abnormality or left ventricular wall thickening (>10 mm) and/or presence of pericardial effusion (≥5 mm); the abnormalities in ecg were defined as st-segment elevation/st-t changes. the echocardiography did not show typical signs of myocarditis, as stated above, except for the presence of small pericardial effusion in some patients and nonspecific ecg manifestations, most commonly tachycardia, which was not typical for myocardial injury but was more suggestive of systemic causes. hence, the authors suggested that myocardial injury may be more likely to be a result of systemic consequences rather than direct damage by sars-cov-2 [37] .uncertainties exist whether sars-cov-2 can directly cause cardiomyocyte infection as no biopsy-or autopsy-demonstrated sars-cov-2 localization within cardiomyocytes has been reported to date. in a study of covid-19 through post-mortem needle core biopsy of the lung, liver, and heart in four patients who died of covid-19 pneumonia, cardiac biopsy performed in two patients in whom cardiac troponin was elevated during hospital course showed only mild focal fibrosis and mild myocardial hypertrophy, which were probably associated with the underlying conditions, such as hypertension-associated myocardial hypertrophy and past ischemic injury; however, there was no evidence of inflammatory cellular infiltration to indicate myocarditis [43] .tavazzi et al. have described the first case in which a biopsy demonstrated myocardial localization of viral particles suggestive of sars-cov-2, in a patient presenting with cardiogenic shock [41] . the clinical presentation was suggestive of fulminant myocarditis; however, the pathologic study demonstrated lowgrade myocardial inflammation without evidence of myocardial necrosis. given that the viral particles were observed in interstitial cytopathic macrophages and their surroundings, but not in cardiac myocytes, the authors could not infer viral cardiotropism and suggested that either a viremic phase or migration of infected macrophages from the lung is likely to occur in patients with covid-19 with non-ischemic acute myocardial injury [41] . further investigations along with the histological demonstration of myocarditis (inflammatory lymphomonocytic infiltrates plus myocyte necrosis not typical of ischemia [44] ) and identification of the viral genome in cardiac tissue will be required in the future to clarify the direct association of covid-19 with myocarditis.myocardial injury has been shown to present in three different patterns:1. the most common pattern is mild troponin elevation (typically < 99th percentile of the upper reference limit), with a modest rise or fall on subsequent days, as frequently observed in patients without cardiac symptoms and those who survive after hospitalization [21, 37] .2. the second pattern is progressive, in which some patients have normal troponin levels or moderate troponin elevation during admission. however, the level progressively increases as the patients experience clinical deterioration with respiratory failure along with an increase in other biomarkers (e.g., interleukin-6, ferritin, and lactate dehydrogenase) and usually occurs during the second week of hospitalization. this pattern is observed among non-survivors, and death occurs around a median of 18.5 days after symptom onset. one study has demonstrated that at four days after symptom onset, the median high sensitivity cardiac tni (hs-ctni) levels were 8.8 pg/ml in non-survivors vs. 2.5 pg/ml in survivors. during follow-up, the median hs-ctni among survivors did not change significantly (2.5-4.4 pg/ml), whereas it rose to 24.7 pg/ml on day 7, to 55.7 pg/ml on day 13, to 134.5 pg/ml on day 19 and to 290.6 pg/ml on day 22 in nonsurvivors [21, 32, 37] .3. the third pattern is early moderate troponin elevation (which may approach or exceed the 99th percentile upper reference limit) and, subsequently, fall over the course of illness; this pattern is usually seen in patients with clinically suspected myocarditis presenting predominantly with cardiac symptoms [36, 39, 40] .studies have shown that patients with cardiac injury are more likely to be older (median age 65-74 years) than those without cardiac injury [22, 24, 25] , and most patients present with typical symptoms of covid-19 like fever, cough, fatigue, and dyspnea. in a study of 291 covid-19 patients, 15 of whom had evidence of cardiac injury, no patients complained of chest pain or palpitations. the common symptoms at illness onset in both groups of patients with or without cardiac injury were similar and included fever, cough, headache, fatigue, and dyspnea [22] . however, a minority of patients with cardiac injury might present with cardiac symptoms with or without respiratory symptoms. in another study, 11 of 82 (13.4%) patients with myocardial injury presented with chest pain, compared with 3 of 334 (0.9%) patients without cardiac injury (p<0.001) [24] . in a case report of myocarditis, the initial presenting symptom was chest pain and respiratory involvement, but an atypical presentation without respiratory symptoms was also described [36, 37] . in terms of radiologic findings, bilateral and multiple mottling and ground-glass opacity are more prevalent in patients with than without cardiac injury [25] . limited studies in which patients with cardiac injury underwent ecg have revealed ecg abnormalities such as t-wave depression and inversion, st-segment depression, and q waves [24] . patients with clinically suspected myocarditis have been found to have stsegment elevations [39, 40] .patients with cardiac injury and elevated troponin are more likely to be admitted to the intensive care unit and to develop complications including ards, malignant arrhythmias including ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation, acute coagulopathy, electrolyte disturbances, and acute kidney injury, and to receive mechanical ventilation, crrt, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, and vasopressor therapy, thus further suggesting that cardiac injury might be associated with the clinical outcomes of covid-19. the use of antibiotic treatment, glucocorticoids, and intravenous immunoglobulin treatment is also significantly higher in patients with cardiac injury than without cardiac injury [24, 25] .studies have shown that cardiac injury is associated with higher mortality in patients with covid 19 ( tables  2,3 [24] . similarly, in another case series, even though patients with covid-19 with cardiac injury and underlying cvd had the highest mortality (69.44%), patients with underlying cvd but normal tnt levels during the disease course had more favorable prognoses than patients with elevated tnt levels but no underlying cvd (mortality, 13.3% vs. 37.5%), thus indicating relatively favorable prognosis in patients with underlying cvd but without myocardial injury [25] . these studies demonstrate that cardiac injury might be independently associated with an increased risk of mortality in patients with covid-19.moreover, the mortality rate directly increases with the magnitude of the reference value of cardiac troponin. in a single-center, retrospective cohort study including 188 patients with covid-19 in wuhan, china, conducted to explore whether heart injury occurred during covid-19 on admission and later increased mortality, approximately 11.2% of patients had high-sensitivity cardiac troponin i (hs-tni) exceeding the clinical upper normal limit on admission. patients with high levels of hs-tni on admission had significantly higher mortality (50.0%) than patients with moderate or low levels of hs-tni (10.0% or 9.1%). besides, hs-tni level on admission was significantly negatively correlated with the number of survival days (r=-0.42, p=0.005) [35] . a study by guo et al. showed that tnt and nt-probnp levels increased significantly during hospitalization in patients who ultimately died, whereas these dynamic changes in tnt or nt-probnp levels were not evident in survivors [25] . based on a few studies, initial measurement of cardiac biomarkers immediately after hospitalization for sars-cov-2 infection and longitudinal monitoring during the hospital stay may aid in identifying a subset of patients who might progress to a poorer clinical condition. however, further evidence from more studies is required.a myocardial injury should be suspected in patients with covid-19 with troponin elevation or new abnormalities in ecg and could be related to type 1 or type 2 myocardial infarction, myocarditis, stressinduced cardiomyopathy or cytokine induced-myocardial injury [45, 46] . the approach to evaluating myocardial injury in patients with known or suspected covid-19 should be based on balancing the benefits of further evaluation in changing the management strategy versus the potential risk of nosocomial spread of covid-19 infection [45, 46] .as such, elevated troponin levels should not be considered as evidence of acute myocardial infarction, which is diagnosed based on symptoms and signs of ischemia and ecg changes [9] . in a multicenter case series study form six hospitals in new york inpatients with confirmed covid-19 who had st-segment elevation on ecg with the elevation of cardiac enzymes, 10 out of 18 patients were classified as having noncoronary myocardial injury with no evidence of obstructive disease on coronary angiography and normal wall motion on echocardiography. eight patients received a clinical diagnosis of myocardial infarction. the median peak troponin level was higher in patients with myocardial infarction than in those with a clinical diagnosis of noncoronary myocardial injury [47] .if the clinical presentation is suggestive of an acute coronary syndrome (acs), timely evaluation is required to determine the need for urgent intervention. in patients with covid-19 who have mild to moderate troponin elevation without symptoms and signs of acute heart failure, clinical monitoring may be performed without routine cardiac imaging until the recovery from the acute viral syndrome [46] . for patients with clinical signs and symptoms of heart failure, echocardiography may be performed if the management strategy and prognosis would be likely to change with the diagnosis. the possible diagnosis in the patients with ventricular wall motion abnormalities, elevated troponin, and no acs include clinically suspected myocarditis or stress cardiomyopathy [45] . as there is no established therapy for clinically suspected myocarditis, routine evaluation with cardiovascular magnetic resonance or endomyocardial biopsy in those cases is not recommended [45] . as such, regardless of fulminant or non-fulminant presentation, american college of cardiology recommends against routine endomyocardial biopsy in patients with active covid-19 with abnormal cardiac enzymes as biopsy is unlikely to change immediate clinical management whether the etiology is due to myocarditis, cytokine-induced myocardial injury or type-2 myocardial infarction [45, 46] .unfortunately, beyond guidelines for treating patients with ischemic myocardial injury, no consensus exists regarding the routine management of patients with covid-19 and myocardial injury. the management of myocardial injury focuses on identifying and treating the underlying cause and supportive care (including management of heart failure, therapy of arrhythmias, and avoidance of cardiotoxins) [45, 46] . if the patient clinically deteriorates or develop hemodynamic instability, or has severely elevated or rapidly rising troponin, detailed evaluation, cardiology consultation and enrollment in clinical trials or experimental therapies like antiviral agents, anti-cytokines (il-6 inhibitors such as tocilizumab), the convalescent plasma may be considered on the case-by-case basis [46] . although the use of steroids has not been recommended in the general treatment of covid-19, some reports have described patients recovering from fulminant myocarditis with intravenous immunoglobulin and steroids. however, more studies will be needed to determine which patient would benefit from such therapies [8] . for patients with refractory shock or ventricular arrhythmias secondary to fulminant myocarditis, early institution of mechanical support with ecmo can be considered as case reports with the successful rescue of such patients have been described [46] . in general, as the presence of cvd and myocardial injury in covid-19 patients has been associated with more severe outcomes and increased mortality, triaging patients with covid-19 according to the presence of underlying cvd and evidence of myocardial injury for prioritized treatment strategies may be reasonable [25] .finally, several therapies with potential cardiovascular side effects are currently being studied, and caution must be used when administering these therapies to patients with underlying cardiovascular disease. for example, preliminary clinical research has suggested the potential efficacy of hydroxychloroquine alone and in combination with azithromycin for treatment of covid-19, but this is associated with qtc prolongation and risk of fatal arrhythmias, thus warranting regular monitoring of qtc [48] . controversy remains concerning the use of acei/arb for covid-19. some preclinical studies have suggested that raas inhibitors may increase ace2 (functional receptor for sars-cov-2) expression, raising concerns regarding safety in patients with covid-19; however, the data remain anecdotal, and no clinical studies have evaluated the effects of raas inhibitors in covid-19. as such, several leading professional societies recommend continuation of raas inhibitors for patients who are at risk for, being evaluated for or currently have covid-19, and are taking these medications to treat other conditions for which these agents are known to be beneficial, such as heart failure, or ischemic heart disease [49] .most studies have been conducted on chinese cohorts, and thus the generalizability of the results to other countries, including the united states, remains to be determined. most studies have been single-centered retrospective studies with the enrollment of small numbers of patients. larger cohorts, multicenter and prospective studies should be planned. they should include assessment of detailed heart function related data, particularly ecg, echocardiography and possibly cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging to determine myocardial function, and the etiology and mechanism of cardiac injury. most studies have not discussed why troponin was measured in the first place, and no data are available to support a different management strategy for patients with elevated troponin. studies must be planned to define whether adjunctive cardioprotective therapies, such as corticosteroids, immunosuppressants, antivirals agents, interferons and/or immunomodulatory therapy (immunoglobulins), may be advisable for patients with significant elevation of cardiac injury biomarkers. pathological examination of myocardial tissue of patients with covid-19 with definite myocardial injury will be needed to provide pathological evidence of the etiology of myocardial injury and establish covid-19 as a new etiological agent for myocarditis.in conclusion, covid-19 has been associated with an increased prevalence of acute cardiac injury, even more so in patients with severe disease. the presence of preexisting cardiovascular disease increases the risk of cardiac injury in patients with covid-19. although the exact mechanism underlying the association of cardiac injury in patients with covid-19 remains unclear, direct virus-induced cardiomyocyte injury leading to viral myocarditis, systemic cytokine-mediated myocardial injury and hypoxia-induced myocardial oxidative stress have been suggested. the presence of myocardial injury is independently associated with mortality and may be a predictor of progression to severe disease and adverse clinical outcomes in patients with covid-19. further studies are needed to elucidate the predominant etiology of myocardial injury in patients with covid-19 and to promote targeted treatment programs to improve patient prognosis.in compliance with the icmje uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: payment/services info: all authors have declared that no financial support was received from any organization for the submitted work. financial relationships: all authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. other relationships: all authors have declared that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) often results in coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , a disease that endangers disproportionately the elderly, those with pre-existing chronic conditions such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus and hypertension (1, 2) . if deteriorating, covid-19 can lead to sepsis, septic shock, and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome, with mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation having low therapeutic efficacy (3) . the pathophysiological background underlying deterioration and low efficacy of common treatments is unclear.most patients with covid-19 who require intensive care will develop an atypical form of the acute distress respiratory syndrome (ards) with preserved lung gas volume (4), suggesting hypoxia due to physiological processes other than alveolar dysfunction may play a role in the prognosis of the disease (5) . disturbed iron metabolism may be one such affected process. indeed, recent data show that covid-19 patients tend to present decreased hemoglobin levels indicating the presence of anemia, and pathologically increased levels of ferritin. a study of 67 covid-19 patients in singapore reported that during their course in an intensive care unit (icu), patients developed more profound and significantly lower hemoglobin levels, compared to patients not admitted to icu (6) . another study in elderly patients hospitalized for covid-19 found that most patients had hemoglobin levels lower than the normal range, but did not find significant differences in hemoglobin levels between survivors and non-survivors. however, follow-up was incomplete for half of the patients (7) . in a report of 5700 patients hospitalized for covid-19 in the new york city area, ferritin levels were pathologically high, a finding in line with previous studies from china (8, 9) . both anemia and hyperferritenemia, regardless of the underlying pathology, are strong predictors of mortality (10, 11) . anemia could be the result of iron-restricted erythropoiesis arising from alterations in iron metabolism. increased ferritin levels could be indicative of a strong inflammatory reaction in covid-19 or related to viral entry into the human body and its impact on iron metabolism (12, 13) . iron is an essential micronutrient for both humans and pathogens (14) . the innate immune response could restrict iron availability during infections to deprive the pathogen of it, a mechanism that would also lead to anemia (15, 16) . anemia, in turn, reduces oxygen delivery to the tissue and may thus play an important role in the development all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20122267 doi: medrxiv preprint of multi organ failure. therefore, it is crucial to understand the relation between anemia, iron metabolism and progression of covid-19, and whether these associations differ by age, sex and presence of chronic conditions. we thus conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of available observational evidence to (i) quantify the mean levels of hemoglobin, ferritin and other biomarkers of iron metabolism in covid-19 patients, (ii) explore whether the levels would differ by age, sex presence of chronic conditions and severity of covid-19, and (iii) whether these biomarkers could have clinical and/or prognostic utility in covid-19.we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis according to a recent published guideline and reported according to prisma (preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses) guidelines17). the protocol was registered in prospero and is available in https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?recordid=180670.we searched medline (national library of medicine, us), embase (elsevier, netherlands), web of science (clarivate analytics, us), cochrane (cochrane collaboration, uk), the who covid-19 database and google scholar (google, inc., us) to identify relevant articles. we used search terms related to covid-19 infection and sars-cov-2 virus, and several markers of anemia and iron storage and metabolism, including hemoglobin, ferritin, transferrin, soluble transferrin receptor, hepcidin, haptoglobin, unsaturated iron-binding capacity, erythropoietin and free erythrocyte protoporphyrin. we also included search terms related to clinical progression of covid-19 such as prognosis, severity, icu admission, mortality, risk factors, clinical features, clinical characteristics or predictors. we searched the databases from inception until may 05 th 2020. we limited our search to human studies and restricted our analysis to articles published in english. the detailed search strategies are presented in eappendix 1.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20122267 doi: medrxiv preprintall observational studies (e.g., cross-sectional, cohort, and case-control studies), except for case reports and case-series, were included. we included studies that reported on the levels of the biomarkers of iron metabolism, erythropoietin or hemoglobin levels, the prevalence of anemia in covid-19 patients, or their levels by the clinical outcome of patients with covid-19. outcomes of interest include disease severity, admission to intensive care unit, mechanical ventilation, and mortality across all age groups. studies examining the association between the biomarkers of interest and risk of covid-19 complications (e.g., admission to intensive care unit, death) were also included.two independent reviewers screened the titles and abstracts according to the selection criteria. we recorded data on the author's name, study location, study design, sample size, clinical characteristics, laboratory results, disease severity, and outcome in a data extraction form. the form was developed, piloted, and discussed within the review group before full data extraction. all laboratory values were the quality of included studies was assessed by two authors independently using the newcastle-ottawa scale for case-control, cross-sectional and cohort studies, as applicable. a third author adjudicated in case consensus was not reached. the scale was developed for non-randomized and observational studies and assesses quality in three broad categories, namely, selection of study groups/participants, comparability of the study groups/participants, and the assessment of exposure/outcome of interest. quality was assessed on a 10-point scale and classified as good quality (9-10 points), fair quality (6) (7) (8) , and poor quality (<6). all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20122267 doi: medrxiv preprintbased on the extracted data of each study, we computed pooled means and standard deviations for each biomarker and anemia prevalence for all covid-19 patients, and weighted mean difference in levels of biomarkers between severe vs. moderate cases, and survivors vs. non-survivors. for the adult population, anemia was defined according to world health organization (who) guidelines (hemoglobin levels for males <130 g/l and for females <120 g/l). we pooled mean difference by using a random-effects model (dersimonian and laird, 1986). geographical location, age group (pediatric vs. adult), the mean age of the study population, gender distribution, percentage of comorbidities and proportion of patients admitted to icu were pre-specified as characteristics for assessment of heterogeneity and were evaluated using stratified analyses and univariate random effects meta-regression. publication bias was appraised using funnel plot as well as egger's test for assessing asymmetry. we used stata 15.1 (statacorp, texas, us, 2017) for all the analyses. we only calculated 2-tailed tests. a p-value <0.05 was considered significant.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20122267 doi: medrxiv preprint1302 unique citations were identified of which 178 were selected for full-text evaluation. of those, 56 observational studies comprising 14,044 individuals diagnosed with covid-19 were included for further analysis (figure 1) . references of the 56 included studies can be found in the supplemental material. forty-nine studies provided information on blood hemoglobin, and eighteen studies provided information on serum ferritin. we did not find studies reporting on other markers of iron metabolism or providing information on anemia according to who age and sex-specific criteria or on erythropoietin. detailed characteristics of the included studies can be found in supplemental table   s1 . in brief, besides three studies conducted in the usa (n=2) and italy (n=1), all identified studies were conducted in asia. the majority of studies were conducted in an adult population (n=39, 69.6%), fifteen studies (24.7%) included both pediatric and adult patients, and two studies included pediatric patients only. the median age of the mean population age was 59 years (iqr 48-63.7 years), the median proportion of males was 60.3% (iqr 49.5-67.5%) and the median percentage of patients having comorbidities was 46% (iqr 32.8-49).based on findings from 49 observational studies, including 8,828 individuals, pooled mean hemoglobin level was 130.41 g/l (95% confidence interval (ci) 128.42; 132.39; i 2 =98.3%, p-value for heterogeneity<0.001), table 1 table s2 ). similarly, after regressing the mean age per study and mean serum hemoglobin levels, a significant linear trend was observed, with mean serum hemoglobin levels decreased with increasing age (figure 2a) . also, studies including exclusively adult populations, had lower mean serum hemoglobin levels in comparison to studies including both adults and pediatric individuals [129.15g/l (95% ci 126.58; 131.71) vs. 133.59g/l all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. table s2 ). the stratified analysis showed lower mean hemoglobin levels in studies including patients with a higher prevalence of comorbidities, especially of type 2 diabetes, and with a higher proportion of patients admitted to icu, while no differences were observed by the proportion of males and the percentage of survivors by the end of the study (supplementary table s2 table s3 ). nevertheless, age, percentage of male population and percentage of comorbidities were not major sources of heterogeneity (supplemental table s3 , efigure 6). based on retrospective data from 245 individuals with covid-19, liu et al. found that the unadjusted association between baseline hemoglobin levels and all-cause mortality during hospitalization was non-significant, and the odds ratio of death with increasing serum hemoglobin level was 0.98 (95% ci 0.96, 1.00, p= 0.05) (20) . similarly, based on data from six studies we did not find a significant difference in hemoglobin levels between survivors and non-survivors [wmd, 0.24 (95% ci -2.39; 2.88); i 2 =0%, pvalue for heterogeneity=0.85] (table 1 and efigure 2) .all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. 1 and efigure 4) . due to the limited number of studies we were only able to perform subgroup analyses comparing pooled ferritin levels in studies below and above median age (56.7 years) and the proportion of the males (62.4%) and found no significant differences (supplementary table s3 ). yet, when regressing the mean age per study and mean serum ferritin levels we observed a significant linear trend with mean serum ferritin levels increasing with advancing age and the proportion of the male population (figure 2c&d) ; after removing the single study performed in a pediatric population the trend between mean ferritin levels and age became nonsignificant (efigure 7). furthermore, when fitting regression lines using data from 7 studies (in adult patients), we observed a positive significant linear trend between mean ferritin and hemoglobin levels (figure 2e) . 1 and efigure 3) . in line with this finding, zhou et al., found in a univariable analysis that odds of in hospital death were higher among patients with ferritin levels above 300ng/ml compared to those with serum ferritin ≤399ng/ml( odds ratio was 9.10 (95% ci 2.04; 40.58, p=0.0038). indeed, levels of serum ferritin were elevated in non-survivors compared with survivors (562 ng/ml±492 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20122267 doi: medrxiv preprint ng/ml) throughout the clinical course, and were increased with disease deterioration (3) . similarly, in a study by li et al., ferritin was significantly higher in severe cases (21) .six (10,7%) of the included studies were evaluated at low risk of bias, while the rest at medium risk of bias (supplemental table s1 and s4). due to the limited number of studies included in comparative analyses of severity and survival of covid-19, we could only test for publication bias in studies focusing on hemoglobin levels and comparing severe vs. non-severe cases, and survivors vs. nonsurvivors and found no evidence for publication bias (efigure 7).to the best of our knowledge, the current study is the first updated and comprehensive systematic review and meta-analyses acknowledging the potential clinical utility of anemia and iron metabolism in covid-19 . based on data from 56 studies and 14,044 covid-19 patients across all ages, we found a pooled mean hemoglobin level of 130.41 g/l, which decreased with older age, higher proportion of comorbid illness and severity. we also found pathological values of ferritin in most patients, a finding more prominent in men and elderly. major differences in ferritin levels were reported between different levels of severity, and among patients who survived and those who did not.we did not find any study in covid-19 patients investigating the levels of biomarkers of iron status other than ferritin, and prevalence of anemia according to age and sex-who cut-off.the mean level of hemoglobin in covid-19 patient across all-ages found in this review represents a borderline value regarding the value for anemia diagnosis in men as defined by who (<130 g/l), with anemic mean levels observed in the elderly, and in severe cases. indeed, a study in 339 hospitalized elderly covid-19 patients found that the majority of patients had mean values of hemoglobin lower than normal (7) . however, most of the studies did not report hemoglobin levels by sex, and none of the studies reported the prevalence of anemia based on age and sex-specific who cut-offs. thus, it was challenging to provide an accurate picture of the burden of anemia in covid-19 patients. the sasr-all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20122267 doi: medrxiv preprint cov-2 infection is associated with high mortality, especially among the elderly over the age of 65+ and comorbid patients.hemoglobin concentration is one of the most important determinants of the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood. low hemoglobin in covid-19 patients, especially on populations at risk of complications and mortality, could indicate that the patients could suffer from a decreased capability of hemoglobin to support the increased peripheral tissue demands for oxygen due to the hypermetabolic states during infection. indeed, significant complications of covid-19 patients are sepsis, septic shock, and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome, with mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation having low efficacy in mitigating its impact and progression (3) . according to recent evidence, covid-19 patients do experience an atypical form of the acute distress respiratory syndrome with preserved lung gas volume(4), suggesting that the prognosis could depend on the ability of the human body to meet the oxygen demands of the peripheral tissues, which, if not met, may lead to hypoxia and ischemia. studies have reported that anemia is associated with 2.6 times increased risk of mortality in chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases; the overall 90-day mortality among these patients with acute respiratory failure treated with invasive mechanical ventilation was 57.1% versus 25% in non-anemic patients (22, 23) . a previous meta-analysis has shown that among a mixed population, independent of sex, age and cardiovascular diseases, anemia is associated with a 41% and 33% increased risk of all-cause mortality and cardiovascular mortality, respectively (11) . a similar risk of mortality was also shown in two other meta-analyses comparing heart failure patients with and without anemia, or stroke patients with and without anemia (24, 25) . also, another metaanalysis has shown that lower baseline hemoglobin values in heart failure patients are associated with increased crude mortality rates (r = -0.396, p = 0.025) (24) . in this meta-analysis we show that the severity of disease and prognosis of patients with covid-19 might depend on lower hemoglobin levels as severe cases had significantly lower hemoglobin levels than moderate cases. future prospective studies with complete follow-up are needed to confirm the impact of anemia in covid-19 outcomes, and whether the incidence of low hemoglobin levels does predict mortality in these patients. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20122267 doi: medrxiv preprint a striking finding of this meta-analysis is the pathological value of ferritin among covid-19 patients, with significant differences between severe and moderate cases, and survivors and non-survivors.ferritin is known to be elevated in inflammatory conditions, with hyperferritinemia being a key acutephase reaction used by clinicians as a marker for therapeutic response (12) . however, recent studies suggest that increased levels of circulating ferritin levels may not only reflect an acute-phase response, but also play a critical role in inflammation by contributing to the development of a cytokine storm (12) . according to shoenfeld et al., the clinical picture of the critical cases of covid-19 resembles macrophage activating syndrome, which is commonly associated with high levels of ferritin or even a cytokine storm (26) . h-chain of the ferritin could be important in activating macrophages to increase the secretion of inflammatory cytokines observed in covid-19 patients (26) . another explanation for the increased levels of ferritin could be the role of iron metabolism in supporting the innate immune system to fight invading microorganisms. the innate immune system orchestrates control over iron metabolism as a response to viral infections. for viral replication, enhanced cellular metabolism and optimal iron levels within host cells are necessary (13, 27) . therefore, the innate immune system will react by decreasing the bioavailability of iron to limit the replication of the virus during the acute phase of infection. in these conditions, through interleukin-6 and toll-like-receptor-4 dependent pathways, the levels of the liver-derived iron hormone hepcidin-the master regulator of iron homoestasis-could increase and block, the activity of the transporter ferroportin which carries iron out of the cells, and therefore decrease the amount of iron absorbed from the diet, causing cellular sequestration of iron (i.e., principally in hepatocytes, enterocytes, and macrophages) (27) . increased intracellular iron sequestration will lead to an upregulation of cytosolic ferritin which sequesters and stores iron to prevent iron-mediated free radical damage (27) . the increased retention and storage of iron within ferritin in macrophages contribute to the characteristic fall in serum iron concentrations and an increase in serum ferritin concentrations as observed in an acute phase response (28) . the net result will be a diminished iron availability for erythropoiesis and as a result further aggravation of anemia. regardless of the etiology, serum ferritin is highly elevated in patients with covid-19, and it seems warranted to assess whether serum ferritin could be used as a screening biomarker for the severity of the inflammatory state that patients with covid-19 have.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20122267 doi: medrxiv preprint our systematic review highlights important gaps in the role of iron biomarkers other than ferritin in the prognosis of covid-19. of the included iron status parameters, only information on ferritin levels was available. future studies should measure also other iron status parameters to establish whether iron-restricted erythropoiesis is inflicting anemia, and whether anemia is contributing to poor outcomes. assessing the other stated parameters and interpreting them with respect to iron status in the setting of inflammation will be a challenging task. therefore, the inclusion of soluble transferrin receptor (stfr) could be of additive value for iron-restricted erythropoiesis, as elevated levels of stfr reflect both erythroid activity and functional iron deficiency. the markers is known to be less affected by concomitant chronic disease or inflammation. future prospective population-based and clinical studies are necessary to investigate the utility of using levels of hemoglobin levels and iron biomarkers for risk stratification and to identify patients who could benefit from early prevention strategies.provided that anemia and altered iron metabolism play a role in covid-19, public health strategies may be designed to protect this the population that could be at risk of covid-19 complications.this study has several limitations. first, considering we restricted our review to articles in english, we cannot rule out publication bias, which could limit our overall findings. second, the interpretation of the findings should be based on the quality of the included studies. despite most studies being of high quality, the data provided are mainly of cross-sectional nature. third, there was heterogeneity in the definition of moderate and severe cases of covid-19 patients and in the definition of comorbid patients, which could have contributed to the observed heterogeneity in our meta-analysis.this meta-analysis suggests that hemoglobin and ferritin levels vary according to the severity of covid-19 as well as age, gender and presence of comorbidity among covid-19 patients. whether hemoglobin and ferritin can be used for prognostic purposes, or have further implications for identifying novel treatment targets, needs further investigation acknowledgement all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20122267 doi: medrxiv preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20122267 doi: medrxiv preprint bubble plots with fitted meta-regression line of (a) the mean serum hemoglobin levels and mean age among 49 observational studies; (b) the mean serum hemoglobin levels and mean percentage of patients hospitalized at intensive care unit among 37 observational studies; the mean serum ferritin levels and mean age and percentage of male population among 9 observational studies respectively and (c/d) and mean ferritin levels regressed against mean hemoglobin levels based on findings from 7 observational studies (e). circles are sized according to the precision of each estimate with larger bubbles for more precise estimates.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. febrile urinary tract infection (uti) is the most common serious bacterial infection in children [1] [2] [3] . febrile uti can occur simultaneously with a respiratory tract infection, but the likelihood of uti has been reported to be significantly lower among respiratory virus-positive than in virus-negative febrile infants [4, 5] . highly sensitive multiplex polymerase chain reaction (pcr) assays and other nucleic acid amplification tests with short turnaround times are currently widely used in hospitals and emergency departments (eds) for detecting respiratory viruses. however, positive results must be interpreted with caution since certain respiratory viruses, like rhinoviruses, coronaviruses, and human bocavirus, are frequently detected also in asymptomatic children [6] . in addition to rapid and sensitive virus detection methods, a biomarker of host response to respiratory virus infection could be useful in the evaluation of febrile infants.myxovirus resistance protein a (mxa) is an interferoninducible protein with antiviral activity against a wide range of viruses that cause respiratory, gastrointestinal, and generalized infections [7, 8] . it has been studied as a potential biomarker of symptomatic viral infections due to its broad antiviral range, rapid induction in 1 to 2 h after onset of symptoms, and low basal levels in healthy children [9, 10] . blood mxa protein levels are markedly elevated in symptomatic viral infections but not in respiratory virus-positive asymptomatic children [7] . mxa response has not been extensively studied in very young infants or in children with coinciding viral and bacterial infections. in a study of acute pharyngitis, elevated blood mxa levels were found in children coinfected with a respiratory virus and group a streptococcus but not in children with only group a streptococcus infection [11] .the aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence of symptomatic and asymptomatic respiratory virus infections in children hospitalized with febrile uti and to estimate antiviral immune responses by the blood mxa protein levels.this study was a part of a prospective observational two-center study of biomarkers to differentiate between viral and bacterial infections in children. children hospitalized for an acute severe infection (based on an order for blood bacterial culture) were enrolled at the pediatric eds of turku university hospital and seinäjoki central hospital, finland, between december 2016 and april 2018. the inclusion criteria were (1) age between 4 weeks and 16 years, (2) admission to hospital, and (3) blood bacterial culture drawn by the decision of the attending clinician. an exclusion criterion was cancer under active treatment. for the current analysis, we included study children with a diagnosis of febrile uti. data on symptoms and recently administered vaccines were collected by parent-filled structured questionnaires and from the electronic registries of well-baby clinics. documentation of respiratory symptoms (rhinorrhea, cough) was based on parental questionnaire and on clinical examination at the ed. nasopharyngeal, blood, and urine samples were collected at the ed.the study protocol was approved by the ethics committee of the hospital district of southwest finland. the parents of all children and children or adolescents themselves, if old enough, provided their written informed consent at the enrolment.urine samples were collected either by a suprapubic aspiration, a urine collection bag, or as a clean voided midstream specimen and analyzed by standard flow cytometry and culture methods at the hospital laboratories. a definite febrile uti was defined as fever and a positive culture of urine obtained by suprapubic aspiration or as fever, pyuria, and a positive culture of urine obtained by a collection bag or as a midstream specimen. a positive urine culture was defined as any bacterial growth in a suprapubic aspirate or as a growth of ≥ 10 4 colony-forming units per ml of a single uropathogen species in a sample obtained by a collection bag or as a midstream specimen. pyuria was defined as a positive leucocyte esterase test or as a count of ≥ 30 × 10 6 white blood cells (wbc)/l urine (approximately equivalent to 5 wbcs per high-power field in microscopic analysis). a probable febrile uti was defined as fever and a positive urine culture but no pyuria in a sample obtained by a collection bag or as a midstream specimen.nasopharyngeal swab samples were suspended into phosphate-buffered saline, and nucleic acids were extracted using nuclisens easymag (biomerieux, boxtel, netherlands). allplex respiratory panel multiplex pcr (seegene, seoul, south korea) was used in the turku university hospital and filmarray (biofire diagnostics, salt lake city, ut) in seinäjoki central hospital for the detection of respiratory viruses. both methods detected adenovirus; influenza a and b viruses; parainfluenza viruses type 1, 2, 3, and 4; respiratory syncytial virus; human metapneumovirus, coronaviruses v2293, nl62, and oc43; rhinovirus; and enteroviruses. allplex also detected human bocavirus and filmarray coronavirus hku1. as filmarray detected picornaviruses together, samples positive for rhinovirus/enterovirus by this method were further analyzed with allplex to make a specific diagnosis of either rhinovirus or enterovirus.blood samples for bacterial culture, wbc count, plasma creactive protein (crp), plasma procalcitonin (pct), and blood mxa protein levels were collected by venous puncture. blood bacterial culture, wbc count, and plasma crp and pct levels were determined by routine methods in the hospital central laboratory. whole blood samples for mxa protein measurement were diluted 1:20 in hypotonic buffer and stored at − 70°c until the enzyme immunoassay analysis was performed as described earlier [7] . samples with a level exceeding the range of the assay in primary analysis were retested at a 1:200 dilution.blood mxa protein levels were compared in children with febrile utis grouped by respiratory symptoms and virus findings using kruskal-wallis test followed by pairwise mann-whitney u test. p values were adjusted for multiple comparisons with the use of bonferroni correction. receiver operating characteristic (roc) analysis was used to evaluate the capability of blood mxa protein level to distinguish viruspositive children with respiratory symptoms from virusnegative children without respiratory symptoms and to discriminate between virus-positive children with or without respiratory symptoms. a cutoff level for blood mxa protein was calculated from the roc analysis using youden index (sensitivity + specificity -1). two-tailed p values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. statistical analyses were performed using ibm spss statistics, version 25.0 (ibm corp., armonk, ny).in the main study, 273 children were recruited, and 48 of them were diagnosed with febrile uti. four children were excluded because of a missing nasopharyngeal swab sample and one child for a missing blood mxa sample. of the 43 children included in the analysis, 42 (98%) were classified as having a definite uti and one (2%) as having a probable uti ( [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] months (p = 0.73). the most common pathogen detected in urine cultures was escherichia coli (n = 33) followed by enterococcus species (n = 4) and klebsiella pneumoniae (n = 2). a respiratory virus was detected in nasopharyngeal samples of 17 (40%) children with a febrile uti. rhinovirus was detected in 11 children, coronavirus nl63 or oc43 in 4, human bocavirus in 2, respiratory syncytial virus in 2, influenza b virus in 1, adenovirus in 1, and parainfluenza virus type 1 in 1 child. multiple viruses were detected in 4 (9%) children. symptoms of a respiratory tract infection were present in 11 (26%) children with a febrile uti, in 7 (41%) of 17 virus-positive children, and in 4 (15%) of 26 children without a detected virus. at least one respiratory virus was detected in 64% of children with respiratory symptoms and in 31% of children without respiratory symptoms. roc analysis was done to estimate the ability of blood mxa protein to differentiate virus-positive children with respiratory symptoms from virus-negative children without respiratory symptoms. the area under the roc curve (auc) was 0.96 (95% confidence interval [ci], 0.89-1.0), and the greatest sum of sensitivity (100%) and specificity (90.9%) was obtained with a cutoff level of 409 μg/l (fig. 2) . with a cutoff level of 220 μg/l, which is close to the cutoff of 200 μg/l set by engelman et al. in their study comparing children with viral or bacterial infections [8] , the sensitivity was 100%, and the specificity was 59%. when discriminating between virus-positive children with or without respiratory symptoms, the auc was 1.0 (95% ci, 1.0-1.0), and a cutoff level of 434 μg/l gave sensitivity and specificity of 100%.nineteen (44%) children had received live attenuated oral rotavirus vaccine within 30 days prior to entering the study. none had received other live vaccines during this period. we frequently found respiratory viruses by multiplex pcr panels in children with febrile uti. at least one respiratory virus was detected in 40% of children hospitalized with febrile uti; however, nearly half of the virus-positive children did not have any focal symptoms of a respiratory tract infection. antiviral immune response of the host was demonstrated by elevated blood mxa protein level in all virus-positive children who had respiratory symptoms. our results emphasize the high detection rate of respiratory viruses using multiplex pcr tests in nasopharyngeal samples of children with febrile uti and show the potential of blood mxa protein as a biomarker of a symptomatic viral infection. to our knowledge, this is the first study to examine symptoms of respiratory tract infection, respiratory viruses, and antiviral immune responses in children with febrile uti. earlier studies have investigated the risk of serious bacterial infection in febrile infants with or without respiratory virus infection. the presence of a respiratory virus infection has been reported to reduce the probability of uti among febrile infants in comparison with virus-negative children [4, 5] , but there are differences between viruses in this regard. the risk of concomitant uti in infants with respiratory syncytial virus or influenza virus infection, detected either by pcr or by an antigen test, is lower than the risk in virus-negative children [12] [13] [14] . on the contrary, in another study, the probability of uti was not substantially lower in rhinovirus-positive compared with virus-negative infants [14] .multiplex respiratory virus pcr panels include viruses, which frequently cause asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic infections, such as rhinovirus or coronavirus, and viruses that persist in the airways, such as human bocavirus, and positive results for at least one virus are common also in healthy children [6, 7] . the perception that virus positivity reduces the fig. 1 boxplot graph (median, iqr, 95% ci, outliers) of blood mxa protein levels in 43 children with febrile uti according to the detection of viruses and the presence of symptoms of respiratory tract infection (rti). differences between groups were significant by kruskal-wallis test. for pairwise comparisons of group "virus detected, symptoms of rti" with "no virus detected, no symptoms of rti", p < 0.001, and with "virus detected, no symptoms of rti", p = 0.006 by mann-whitney u test risk of uti or other serious bacterial infection possibly does not apply if febrile children are systematically tested with broad multiplex pcr panels. our results of frequent respiratory virus findings with or without respiratory symptoms in children with uti support this view. as expected by its frequency in all young children [15] , rhinovirus was the most commonly detected virus. our results call for diagnostic stewardship in terms of whom to test for respiratory viruses by using highly multiplexed, sensitive diagnostic assays. if multiplex pcr is routinely used in febrile children in the ed, blood mxa protein could serve as a useful biomarker for a symptomatic viral infection.we report somewhat higher cutoff levels for blood mxa protein than previous studies [7, 8] . we examined mainly infants, but age does not seem to fully explain this finding. we did not find any large differences in mxa levels in infants below the age of 12 months compared to older children when those with respiratory symptoms were excluded. this is consistent with our previous study, in which we found higher baseline levels of blood mxa protein in children compared to adults but similar levels at ages 2 and 13 months [7] . it is important to consider the role of rotavirus or other live virus vaccinations in studies of mxa protein or other interferoninducible proteins in children, as live vaccines can increase blood mxa levels temporarily [7, 16] . however, recent rotavirus vaccination had only minor effect on blood mxa protein levels in the present study, similarly to our earlier observations [7] . we also earlier reported that febrile respiratory infections were associated with substantially higher blood mxa levels than infections without fever [7] . the current study included febrile children only, and although the cause of fever was presumably uti in most children, some children may have been febrile because of a simultaneous viral infection. this could have affected the blood mxa levels in children with no apparent respiratory symptoms.our study has certain limitations. first, despite using aseptic techniques to collect urine samples, we cannot rule out the possibility of contamination or asymptomatic bacteriuria (if symptoms were caused by a virus infection) being labeled as a uti. second, the relatively small number of children limits the generalizability of our results. third, a further study with a comparison group without uti would help in understanding whether the risk of uti is reduced in febrile children with respiratory virus infection and elevated blood mxa level.in conclusion, our study showed that respiratory viruses are frequently detected in children with febrile uti when using multiplex pcr methods. an antiviral host response was demonstrated by elevated blood mxa levels in children with uti and simultaneous respiratory symptoms. blood mxa protein could be a robust biomarker of symptomatic viral infection in children with febrile uti. its use in evaluation of febrile infants deserves further study.funding information open access funding provided by university of turku (utu) including turku university central hospital. this work was supported by the finnish medical foundation, the pediatric research foundation (finland), and tyks foundation.conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.ethical approval all procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional research committee (the ethics committee of the hospital district of southwest finland) and with the 1964 helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards statement of informed consent informed consent was provided by parents of all children and children or adolescents themselves if old enoughopen access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution 4.0 international license, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.febrile urinary tract infection (uti) is the most common serious bacterial infection in children [1] [2] [3] . febrile uti can occur simultaneously with a respiratory tract infection, but the likelihood of uti has been reported to be significantly lower among respiratory virus-positive than in virus-negative febrile infants [4, 5] . highly sensitive multiplex polymerase chain reaction (pcr) assays and other nucleic acid amplification tests with short turnaround times are currently widely used in hospitals and emergency departments (eds) for detecting respiratory viruses. however, positive results must be interpreted with caution since certain respiratory viruses, like rhinoviruses, coronaviruses, and human bocavirus, are frequently detected also in asymptomatic children [6] . in addition to rapid and sensitive virus detection methods, a biomarker of host response to respiratory virus infection could be useful in the evaluation of febrile infants.myxovirus resistance protein a (mxa) is an interferoninducible protein with antiviral activity against a wide range of viruses that cause respiratory, gastrointestinal, and generalized infections [7, 8] . it has been studied as a potential biomarker of symptomatic viral infections due to its broad antiviral range, rapid induction in 1 to 2 h after onset of symptoms, and low basal levels in healthy children [9, 10] . blood mxa protein levels are markedly elevated in symptomatic viral infections but not in respiratory virus-positive asymptomatic children [7] . mxa response has not been extensively studied in very young infants or in children with coinciding viral and bacterial infections. in a study of acute pharyngitis, elevated blood mxa levels were found in children coinfected with a respiratory virus and group a streptococcus but not in children with only group a streptococcus infection [11] .the aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence of symptomatic and asymptomatic respiratory virus infections in children hospitalized with febrile uti and to estimate antiviral immune responses by the blood mxa protein levels.this study was a part of a prospective observational two-center study of biomarkers to differentiate between viral and bacterial infections in children. children hospitalized for an acute severe infection (based on an order for blood bacterial culture) were enrolled at the pediatric eds of turku university hospital and seinäjoki central hospital, finland, between december 2016 and april 2018. the inclusion criteria were (1) age between 4 weeks and 16 years, (2) admission to hospital, and (3) blood bacterial culture drawn by the decision of the attending clinician. an exclusion criterion was cancer under active treatment. for the current analysis, we included study children with a diagnosis of febrile uti. data on symptoms and recently administered vaccines were collected by parent-filled structured questionnaires and from the electronic registries of well-baby clinics. documentation of respiratory symptoms (rhinorrhea, cough) was based on parental questionnaire and on clinical examination at the ed. nasopharyngeal, blood, and urine samples were collected at the ed.the study protocol was approved by the ethics committee of the hospital district of southwest finland. the parents of all children and children or adolescents themselves, if old enough, provided their written informed consent at the enrolment.urine samples were collected either by a suprapubic aspiration, a urine collection bag, or as a clean voided midstream specimen and analyzed by standard flow cytometry and culture methods at the hospital laboratories. a definite febrile uti was defined as fever and a positive culture of urine obtained by suprapubic aspiration or as fever, pyuria, and a positive culture of urine obtained by a collection bag or as a midstream specimen. a positive urine culture was defined as any bacterial growth in a suprapubic aspirate or as a growth of ≥ 10 4 colony-forming units per ml of a single uropathogen species in a sample obtained by a collection bag or as a midstream specimen. pyuria was defined as a positive leucocyte esterase test or as a count of ≥ 30 × 10 6 white blood cells (wbc)/l urine (approximately equivalent to 5 wbcs per high-power field in microscopic analysis). a probable febrile uti was defined as fever and a positive urine culture but no pyuria in a sample obtained by a collection bag or as a midstream specimen.nasopharyngeal swab samples were suspended into phosphate-buffered saline, and nucleic acids were extracted using nuclisens easymag (biomerieux, boxtel, netherlands). allplex respiratory panel multiplex pcr (seegene, seoul, south korea) was used in the turku university hospital and filmarray (biofire diagnostics, salt lake city, ut) in seinäjoki central hospital for the detection of respiratory viruses. both methods detected adenovirus; influenza a and b viruses; parainfluenza viruses type 1, 2, 3, and 4; respiratory syncytial virus; human metapneumovirus, coronaviruses v2293, nl62, and oc43; rhinovirus; and enteroviruses. allplex also detected human bocavirus and filmarray coronavirus hku1. as filmarray detected picornaviruses together, samples positive for rhinovirus/enterovirus by this method were further analyzed with allplex to make a specific diagnosis of either rhinovirus or enterovirus.blood samples for bacterial culture, wbc count, plasma creactive protein (crp), plasma procalcitonin (pct), and blood mxa protein levels were collected by venous puncture. blood bacterial culture, wbc count, and plasma crp and pct levels were determined by routine methods in the hospital central laboratory. whole blood samples for mxa protein measurement were diluted 1:20 in hypotonic buffer and stored at − 70°c until the enzyme immunoassay analysis was performed as described earlier [7] . samples with a level exceeding the range of the assay in primary analysis were retested at a 1:200 dilution.blood mxa protein levels were compared in children with febrile utis grouped by respiratory symptoms and virus findings using kruskal-wallis test followed by pairwise mann-whitney u test. p values were adjusted for multiple comparisons with the use of bonferroni correction. receiver operating characteristic (roc) analysis was used to evaluate the capability of blood mxa protein level to distinguish viruspositive children with respiratory symptoms from virusnegative children without respiratory symptoms and to discriminate between virus-positive children with or without respiratory symptoms. a cutoff level for blood mxa protein was calculated from the roc analysis using youden index (sensitivity + specificity -1). two-tailed p values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. statistical analyses were performed using ibm spss statistics, version 25.0 (ibm corp., armonk, ny).in the main study, 273 children were recruited, and 48 of them were diagnosed with febrile uti. four children were excluded because of a missing nasopharyngeal swab sample and one child for a missing blood mxa sample. of the 43 children included in the analysis, 42 (98%) were classified as having a definite uti and one (2%) as having a probable uti ( [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] months (p = 0.73). the most common pathogen detected in urine cultures was escherichia coli (n = 33) followed by enterococcus species (n = 4) and klebsiella pneumoniae (n = 2). a respiratory virus was detected in nasopharyngeal samples of 17 (40%) children with a febrile uti. rhinovirus was detected in 11 children, coronavirus nl63 or oc43 in 4, human bocavirus in 2, respiratory syncytial virus in 2, influenza b virus in 1, adenovirus in 1, and parainfluenza virus type 1 in 1 child. multiple viruses were detected in 4 (9%) children. symptoms of a respiratory tract infection were present in 11 (26%) children with a febrile uti, in 7 (41%) of 17 virus-positive children, and in 4 (15%) of 26 children without a detected virus. at least one respiratory virus was detected in 64% of children with respiratory symptoms and in 31% of children without respiratory symptoms. roc analysis was done to estimate the ability of blood mxa protein to differentiate virus-positive children with respiratory symptoms from virus-negative children without respiratory symptoms. the area under the roc curve (auc) was 0.96 (95% confidence interval [ci], 0.89-1.0), and the greatest sum of sensitivity (100%) and specificity (90.9%) was obtained with a cutoff level of 409 μg/l (fig. 2) . with a cutoff level of 220 μg/l, which is close to the cutoff of 200 μg/l set by engelman et al. in their study comparing children with viral or bacterial infections [8] , the sensitivity was 100%, and the specificity was 59%. when discriminating between virus-positive children with or without respiratory symptoms, the auc was 1.0 (95% ci, 1.0-1.0), and a cutoff level of 434 μg/l gave sensitivity and specificity of 100%.nineteen (44%) children had received live attenuated oral rotavirus vaccine within 30 days prior to entering the study. none had received other live vaccines during this period. we frequently found respiratory viruses by multiplex pcr panels in children with febrile uti. at least one respiratory virus was detected in 40% of children hospitalized with febrile uti; however, nearly half of the virus-positive children did not have any focal symptoms of a respiratory tract infection. antiviral immune response of the host was demonstrated by elevated blood mxa protein level in all virus-positive children who had respiratory symptoms. our results emphasize the high detection rate of respiratory viruses using multiplex pcr tests in nasopharyngeal samples of children with febrile uti and show the potential of blood mxa protein as a biomarker of a symptomatic viral infection. to our knowledge, this is the first study to examine symptoms of respiratory tract infection, respiratory viruses, and antiviral immune responses in children with febrile uti. earlier studies have investigated the risk of serious bacterial infection in febrile infants with or without respiratory virus infection. the presence of a respiratory virus infection has been reported to reduce the probability of uti among febrile infants in comparison with virus-negative children [4, 5] , but there are differences between viruses in this regard. the risk of concomitant uti in infants with respiratory syncytial virus or influenza virus infection, detected either by pcr or by an antigen test, is lower than the risk in virus-negative children [12] [13] [14] . on the contrary, in another study, the probability of uti was not substantially lower in rhinovirus-positive compared with virus-negative infants [14] .multiplex respiratory virus pcr panels include viruses, which frequently cause asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic infections, such as rhinovirus or coronavirus, and viruses that persist in the airways, such as human bocavirus, and positive results for at least one virus are common also in healthy children [6, 7] . the perception that virus positivity reduces the fig. 1 boxplot graph (median, iqr, 95% ci, outliers) of blood mxa protein levels in 43 children with febrile uti according to the detection of viruses and the presence of symptoms of respiratory tract infection (rti). differences between groups were significant by kruskal-wallis test. for pairwise comparisons of group "virus detected, symptoms of rti" with "no virus detected, no symptoms of rti", p < 0.001, and with "virus detected, no symptoms of rti", p = 0.006 by mann-whitney u test risk of uti or other serious bacterial infection possibly does not apply if febrile children are systematically tested with broad multiplex pcr panels. our results of frequent respiratory virus findings with or without respiratory symptoms in children with uti support this view. as expected by its frequency in all young children [15] , rhinovirus was the most commonly detected virus. our results call for diagnostic stewardship in terms of whom to test for respiratory viruses by using highly multiplexed, sensitive diagnostic assays. if multiplex pcr is routinely used in febrile children in the ed, blood mxa protein could serve as a useful biomarker for a symptomatic viral infection.we report somewhat higher cutoff levels for blood mxa protein than previous studies [7, 8] . we examined mainly infants, but age does not seem to fully explain this finding. we did not find any large differences in mxa levels in infants below the age of 12 months compared to older children when those with respiratory symptoms were excluded. this is consistent with our previous study, in which we found higher baseline levels of blood mxa protein in children compared to adults but similar levels at ages 2 and 13 months [7] . it is important to consider the role of rotavirus or other live virus vaccinations in studies of mxa protein or other interferoninducible proteins in children, as live vaccines can increase blood mxa levels temporarily [7, 16] . however, recent rotavirus vaccination had only minor effect on blood mxa protein levels in the present study, similarly to our earlier observations [7] . we also earlier reported that febrile respiratory infections were associated with substantially higher blood mxa levels than infections without fever [7] . the current study included febrile children only, and although the cause of fever was presumably uti in most children, some children may have been febrile because of a simultaneous viral infection. this could have affected the blood mxa levels in children with no apparent respiratory symptoms.our study has certain limitations. first, despite using aseptic techniques to collect urine samples, we cannot rule out the possibility of contamination or asymptomatic bacteriuria (if symptoms were caused by a virus infection) being labeled as a uti. second, the relatively small number of children limits the generalizability of our results. third, a further study with a comparison group without uti would help in understanding whether the risk of uti is reduced in febrile children with respiratory virus infection and elevated blood mxa level.in conclusion, our study showed that respiratory viruses are frequently detected in children with febrile uti when using multiplex pcr methods. an antiviral host response was demonstrated by elevated blood mxa levels in children with uti and simultaneous respiratory symptoms. blood mxa protein could be a robust biomarker of symptomatic viral infection in children with febrile uti. its use in evaluation of febrile infants deserves further study.funding information open access funding provided by university of turku (utu) including turku university central hospital. this work was supported by the finnish medical foundation, the pediatric research foundation (finland), and tyks foundation.conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.ethical approval all procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional research committee (the ethics committee of the hospital district of southwest finland) and with the 1964 helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards statement of informed consent informed consent was provided by parents of all children and children or adolescents themselves if old enoughopen access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution 4.0 international license, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.a 49-year-old male presented to the emergency department with acute-onset high-grade fevers accompanied with dry cough and shortness of breath, ongoing for a week prior to presentation. he denied any associated nausea/vomiting, diarrhea, sore throat, congestion, or skin rash. of note, he had recently returned from a high-prevalence area for covid-19 within the united states and was in self-quarantine. he was monitoring his symptoms, however, when his shortness of breath was not improving with his asthma medications (albuterol inhaler and cetirizine), he presented to the emergency department. on arrival, he was noted to be febrile at 102.5 degree fahrenheit, was tachypneic to 22 per min, normotensive at 125/75, heart rate was 75 bpm and he was saturating 98% on room air. physical examination was remarkable for decreased breath sounds bilaterally.his past medical history was significant for mild intermittent asthma.our patient's clinical presentation was concerning for viral or bacterial lower respiratory tract infection.ekg revealed normal sinus rhythm with normal pr (172 ms) and qrs (94 ms) intervals ( figure 1) . no acute st-t wave changes were noted. single view chest x ray showed blunted costo-phrenic angles bilaterally with concern for right middle lobe opacity (figure 2 was negative. given the high pretest probability for covid-19, nasopharyngeal swab for the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) was collected, and he was admitted to the medicine floor given concern for viral/bacterial pneumonia. during his hospital course, he was noted to have evidence of bradycardia with intermittent high degree av block and av dissociation; ventricular rate was less than 20 bpm (telemetry strips shown in figures 3   and 4) . he was symptomatic with diaphoresis during these episodes, but remained hemodynamically stable. pacer pads were placed, however, he did not require transcutaneous pacing. cardiac biomarkers including troponin i (<0.012 ng/ml; normal range 0-0.034 ng/ml) and nt-probnp (38.3 pg/ml; normal range 0-125 pg/ml) were normal. transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal ejection fraction, normal diastolic function, no wall motion abnormalities, and no significant valvular disease (videos 1-3). inflammatory markers were mildly elevated; ferritin being 571 mg/ml (normal range 0-400 ng/ml) and c-reactive protein was elevated at 1.2 mg/dl (normal range 0-0.9 mg/dl). procalcitonin was negative at 0.039 ng/ml (normal range 0-0.080 ng/ml) and thyroid hormone levels were within normal limits. his nasopharyngeal swab tested positive for sars-cov-2 rna.given underlying asthma, that predisposed him to an increased risk for pulmonary complications, he was started on a course of azithromycin and hydroxychloroquine after consultation with infectious disease doctors.he was monitored inpatient for worsening hypoxemia for five days. the rest of his hospital course remained uneventful. no further evidence of conduction disease was noted on telemetry and qtc remained normal while on hydroxychloroquine. he continued to improve clinically, was discharged home with plan to continue self-quarantine and outpatient follow-up was arranged.receptor, which is abundant in the heart (1). among 138 patients hospitalized with covid-19 in wuhan, acute cardiac injury (defined if the serum levels of cardiac biomarkers were above the 99th percentile upper reference limit or new abnormalities were shown in electrocardiography and echocardiography) was diagnosed in 7% patients and about 16.7 % patients were noted to have cardiac arrhythmias (2) . covid-19 involvement in the heart has ranged from asymptomatic myocardial injury to acute coronary syndrome, mild to fulminant myocarditis, stress cardiomyopathy and cardiogenic shock; however, the mechanism of cardiac involvement is not exactly clear (3) . furthermore, underlying cardiovascular disease or risk factors and myocardial injury have been shown to portend poor prognosis in these patients (4) . in this case, we present a patient with moderate covid-19 infection who showed evidence of transient conduction disturbances with high-degree av block. high-degree av block is known to be an uncommon presentation of acute myocarditis in adults, more commonly seen in cardiac sarcoidosis and giant-cell myocarditis (5) . however, our patient did not have any other overt evidence of myocardial involvement with normal cardiac biomarkers and normal echocardiogram, which makes his presentation unusual and interesting. it is possible that covid-19 may have caused sub-clinical myocarditis leading to a high-degree av block in this case. ace2 receptors are abundant in the heart, are present in multiple cell types including macrophages, endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and cardiomyocytes (6) . further, animal models have shown presence of ace2 receptors in sino-atrial nodal cells in rats (7) and conduction disturbances and ventricular fibrillation have been noted with overexpression of ace2 receptor in experimental mice models (8) . hence, another possibility is that isolated involvement of the av node and infra-hisian conduction system by sars-cov-2 may have caused transient high-grade av block. whether this block is secondary to direct viral involvement or due to an auto-immune is unknown at this time. our patient did not have recurrence of these conduction disturbances after he was started on supportive treatment with azithromycin and hydroxychloroquine, which may be due to recovery from viral infection or anti-inflammatory effects of the medications or both.we present an unusual presentation of a young patient without any significant cardiac comorbidities or underlying conduction disease, who presented with transient high-degree av block, associated with diagnosis of moderate covid-19 infection. conduction disturbances in our patient were likely due to a sub-clinical myocarditis or isolated involvement of the av node and infra-hisian block due to this novel coronavirus. we need to maintain a high index of suspicion for cardiovascular complications in these patients. conduction disturbances were transient in the case presented here. however, with increasing severity of disease, persistent conduction disturbances could require pacing.case: a patient who presented with covid-19 and transient high-grade av block.1. to be able to anticipate and diagnose conduction disturbances associated with the novel coronavirus.2. to understand the mechanism responsible for high-degree av block associated with covid- the lungs are the vital organs for respiration. from the anatomical point of view, the lung exhibits a specialized architecture and quite not resembles to the other organs in the body, that is, reflecting its designated role for gaseous exchange (weibel and gomez, 1962) . the substance of the lung is of a light and spongy texture. in general, the lungs have around 300 million alveoli; each individual alveolus is wrapped in a bundle of capillaries where the primary site of gaseous exchange with the blood takes place (weibel and gomez, 1962) . the alveoli consist of an epithelial layer and extracellular matrix surrounded by capillaries. there are three main alveolar cell types in the alveolar wall, namely type i cells, type ii cells, and macrophages. type i cells are the cells that are made of the alveolar wall; whereas type ii cells are secretory cells that secrete surfactants and form the aqueous protein-containing layer which facilitate gaseous exchange as well as preventing collapse of the alveoli (penney, 1988) . needless to say, macrophages are critical mediators in cellular defense against foreign invaders like germs and viruses (bowden, 1976) .as noted, the lung epithelial surface is one of the vital barriers or sensors in the body responding to the external atmosphere and thereby always subjecting to direct toxicological exposure, stress, stimulus, or infection. as a result, the respiratory system is inevitably an ideal location prone to various diseases and complications (table 1) (world health organization, 2008) .over the past decades, the use of lung epithelial cell culture and lung tissue from animal models or patients has facilitated our learning to lung physiopathology and toxicopharmacology. even so, without the assistance of a comprehensive tool, our understanding in this field would be hampered. in light of this, the utilization of proteomic approach has become an indispensable tool and proven to be very useful for the elucidation of the mechanisms as well as finding cure of various emerging lung diseases. for the vast emerging literatures published in just a few years, in this review, the potential applications of proteomic approach in studying lung-related diseases and biomarker discovery will be discussed.in general, three major types of studying samples have been employed in lung cell proteomic studies, including in vitro lung cell cultures, bronchial fluids obtained from lung [bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (balf)] (wattiez and falmagne, 2005) or sputum (secretions expectorated from the respiratory tract) (kips et al., 1998) as well as the other body fluids (i.e., serum, plasma, blood cells, or urine for instance), and the most traditional method of using lung tissues from biopsies or autopsies (fig. 1) . overall, each method has its own merit to the understanding of the etiology of the disease or the action mechanism of an agent to the lung cells. usually, biomarker study by sampling of body fluids is a convenient way to obtain the starting material, compared with using biopsies or autopsies. the generation of gene-knockout mice (e.g., cystic fibrosis (cf) transmembrane receptor knockout mice) as a studying model of cf also tremendously facilitated the discovery of the biomarkers and the understanding of this severely genetic disease (bensalem et al., 2005; brouillard et al., 2005) .in order to facilitate the process of biomarker discovery, many enrichment methods and strategies have been developed. in recent years, the advancement of proteomics has pushed to the level of investigating the proteome in individual organelles so-called the ''subcellular proteome.'' in this scenario, only a particular type of organelle inside the cell, for example, mitochondria or nuclear, is first separated from all the other cellular components and then being studied (lau et al., 2003; wang et al., 2008) . this method reduces the complexity and also indirectly provides for an enrichment of the proteins being studied and as a corollary of this, it can facilitate the resolution of protein separation and enhance the sensitivity of protein detection by mass spectrometry. subcellular proteomics is particularly useful to delineate the functional significance of the subcellular localization of a protein where conventional proteomics using whole cell extract can never achieve this result. further, the use of laser capture dissection on tissues can efficiently obtain more homogeneous cell type for research instead of contamination of mixtures of cancer and normal cells (gutstein and morris, 2007) . other methods like albumin depletion in serum samples before proteomic analysis also facilitated the identification of biomarkers in which otherwise masked by these albumin proteins on 2d gels (lei et al., 2008) . in addition, partial purification or concentration of substances secreted into lung fluids or released to the culture medium from cultured lung cells after being challenged by stimulatory agents also greatly provided a very good means for proteomics to study lung response and identify biomarkers for various diseases and complications.using various cutting-edge proteomic approaches, in recent years, lots of newly identified biomarkers of lung-related diseases have been reported. in this article, we are particularly interested in the study of (1) genetic diseases; (2) inflammatory and allergy diseases; (3) infectious diseases; and (4) lung cancer.cf, which is an autosomal recessive inherited disease, results from the mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance receptor (cftr) gene (tsui, 1995; zielenski and tsui, 1995) . mutation of this receptor results in defective anion secretion and excessive na þ reuptake across epithelia, leading to insufficient intraluminal hydration. this causes mucus accumulation and defective impaction states in intestine as well as impaired mucociliary clearance in airways (stutts et al., 1995; kunzelmann and mall, 2003) . currently, there is no cure for individuals with cf. however, through more in-depth studies, this would allow scientists to understand the mechanisms governing the etiology of this disease, and more effective medications could be applied to patients which can prolong their lifespan resulting from this disease.several recent proteomic studies have provided some interesting candidate proteins as possible biomarkers of cf. it was shown that low abundance inflammatory-associated autoantigens like myeloperoxidase were identified by immunoproteomic approach from sputum of subjects with cf. this approach was also exploited for detecting proteins expressed by the pseudomonas aeruginosa strain pa01, which is a frequent pathogenic organism invading lungs of cf patients. capture of pa01 antigens using circulating antibodies from cf subjects implicated in vivo expression of pseudomonas proteins.of all the cf subjects tested, but not controls, were immunoreactive against immunocaptured pseudomonas proteins, implicating their possibility as biomarkers of p. aeruginosa infection . in another study of saline-induced sputum from adults with cf with an exacerbation, extensive proteolytic igg degradation and influx of inflammation-related proteins were observed, indicating these changes as predictors of cf lung exacerbation . also, while the main high-molecular mass proteins in the sputum from all subjects were the mucins muc5b and muc5ac, these appeared degraded in cf adults with an journal of cellular physiology exacerbation. the glycosylation of these mucins also showed reduced sulfation, increased sialylation, and reduced fucosylation in cf adults compared with controls (schulz et al., 2007) . besides using sputum, serum samples from cf patients have been pooled and compared with equivalent pools of control sera in order to identify patterns of protein expression unique to cf by antibody microarrays. the set of significantly differentially expressed protein was enriched in protein mediators or inflammation from the nfkb signaling pathway . also, in pediatric cf patients, seldi-tof-ms balf profiling identified 53 unique, reliable proteins. they included the neutrophil proteins, a-defensin 1 and 2, calcium-binding proteins s100a8, s100a9, and s100a12, as well as novel forms of s100a8 and s100a12 with equivalent c-terminal deletions. concentrations of these molecules are abnormally high in early cf patients. the data provide new insights into cf lung disease and identify novel proteins strongly associated with cf airway inflammation (mcmorran et al., 2007) . using cf bronchial biopsies in normal and cf patients, the chaperone 75 kda glucose-regulated protein and ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase complex core protein i and one form of nidogen, a pseudogene of aconitase 2, were increased in cf. aberrant chaperone and metabolic proteins in cf may reflect molecular changes of cf as well as cf-linked inflammation, infection and cellular stress response (frischer et al., 2006) .further, an examination of protein profiles of cultured cf lung epithelial cells (ib3-1) (df508/w1282x) by 2de-ms analysis gave rise to 194 identified proteins. among the high abundance proteins identified were sets of proteins associated with inflammation, including the classical nfkb, p65 (rela) and nfkb, p65 (relb) (pollard et al., 2005) . following this study, by comparing the ib3-1 cells with ib3-1/s9 daughter cells repaired by gene transfer with aav-(wild-type) cftr, by simultaneous measurement of de novo biosynthetic rate with [ 35 s]methionine of all 194 proteins in both cell types resulted in the identification of an additional 31 cf-specific proteins. this kinetic portion of the high abundance cf proteome, hidden from direct analysis of abundance, included proteins from transcription and signaling pathways such as nfkb, chaperones such as hsc70, cytoskeletal proteins, and others. the conclusion of this study was that measurement of biosynthetic rates on a global scale could be used to identify disease-specific differences within the high abundance cf proteome . finally, using cftr à/à mice, annexin a1 was found to be absent in their colonic crypts. concurrently, annexin a1 was also undetectable in lungs and pancreas of these mice. it was suggested that the absence of this inhibitory mediator of the host inflammatory response was associated with colonic up-regulation of the proinflammatory cytosolic phospholipase a2. more importantly, annexin a1 was also down-regulated in nasal epithelial cells from cf patients, suggesting that decreased expression of annexin a1 contributed to the worsening of the cf phenotype (bensalem et al., 2005) . following this study, the same group also demonstrated that, mcica3, a member of a family of calcium-activated chloride channels considered to be key molecules in mucus secretion by globlet cells, was significantly decreased in the colon and lung of the cftr à/à mice. these results substantiated the conclusion that a cica-related function in the cf colon was dependent on cftr expression and may be correlated with the impaired expression of mcica3 (brouillard et al., 2005) .asthma is a chronic disorder of airway inflammation characterized by variable airflow obstruction and bronchial hyperresponsiveness (maddox and schwartz, 2002) . it is suggested that t-helper type 2 lymphocytes, and the cytokines that they produce, in conjunction with reactive oxygen species (ros) and reactive nitrogen species (rns) produced by inflammatory and epithelial cells, contributed as the key mediators of the chronic airway inflammation of asthma (calhoun et al., 1992; horwitz and busse, 1995; renauld, 2001; zhou et al., 2001) . the airway surface is covered by a thin fluid layer, termed as the airway surface liquid and this acts as a barrier to protect the underlying epithelium (widdicombe, 2002) . the identification of secreted proteins in this fluid may be important in understanding the etiology of asthma.by using ovalbumin (ova) as an allergen in mouse model of asthma, several groups of researchers provided new insights into pathogenesis of asthma and they may be useful as surrogate biomarkers for asthma. it has been shown that ova-induced oxidative stress resulted in proteolysis of annexin-1 and consequent up-regulation of cytosolic phospholipase a2 activity and leukotriene production in the lungs of these mice (chung et al., 2004) . nitrotyrosine is a marker of cellular oxidative stress; over 30 different proteins were targets of nitration following ova challenge, including the antioxidative enzyme catalase. oxidative modification at cys 377 of catalase and loss of the enzyme activity was observed. subsequent analysis of human balf showed that catalase activity was reduced in asthma by up to 50% as compared with normal controls. this study provided insights that catalase inactivation might be the one of the culprits contributing to the chronic inflammatory state of the asthmatic airway (ghosh et al., 2006) . while other studies showed that lungkine, a recently described chemokine, a family of chitinases including ym1, ym2, fizz1, and acidic mammalian chitinase, gob-5, a protein that mediates mucus secretion, and surfactant protein-d, a c-type lectin capable of modulating inflammatory responses, were significantly increased in the balfs of ova-treated asthmatic mice (zhao et al., 2005; zhang et al., 2009 ). finally, using plasma peptides from control and chronic asthma mice induced by ova, the authors quantitatively identified the fragment f of complement 3 (c3f), which is important for inflammation, was significantly higher in controls than chronic asthma mice. this study suggested that native small peptides detected by non-2de techniques may be useful and specific biomarkers of disease (yeo et al., 2004) . in human subjects, clinical study of patients by using peripheral t-lymphocytes from six normal individuals and six patients with asthma, increased expression of phosphodiesterase 4c and thioredoxin-2 and decreased expression of glutathione s-transferase m3 were confirmed in asthmatic patients, which may indicate as important biomarkers and therapeutic targets (jeong et al., 2007) . finally, it has been shown that gelsolin level was elevated in the balf of patients with asthma. the elevated level of gelsolin was proposed to improve the fluidity of airway surface liquid in asthma by breaking down filamentous actin that was released by dying cells during inflammation (candiano et al., 2005) .acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in critically ill patients (ware and matthay, 2000) . it is characterized by an acute pulmonary inflammatory process with epithelial apoptosis and interstitial and intra-alveolar edema, and the subsequent fibroblast proliferation, migration, and fibrosis (dechert, 2003) .using shotgun proteomics, several interesting proteins were identified in the balf of patients with ards, including insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-3 (igfbp-3). normal controls had low levels of igfbp-3, whereas patients with early ards had a significant increase in igfbp-3. these results exhibited that the igf pathway regulated apoptosis of lung fibroblasts but not lung epithelial cells, and igf pathway may contribute to the fibroproliferative response in ards (schnapp et al., 2006) . in another study, using seldi-tof and electrophoresis-based proteomics, it was found that increased levels of apolipoprotein a1, s100a8, and s100a9 proteins, in the balf of subjects challenged with bronchial lung endotoxin and patients with ards (de torre et al., 2006) . additionally, in a more recent study, in order to address the complex and dynamic changes that occurred during the course of ards, a quantitative proteomic approach was employed to profile proteins in the balf of patients with ards at days 1, 3, and 7 after the onset of illness and compared with those of healthy control subjects. results indicated that there were an enrichment of proteins involved in inflammation, infection, and injury in ards patients. the protein network analysis signified that the protein interactions in ards were complex and redundant, and revealed unexpected central components in the protein networks. nevertheless, the data in this study demonstrated the new relationships among proteins and identified new groups of mediators that could be targets for novel treatments (chang et al., 2008) .chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) is a lung disease in which the airways become narrowed and lead to a limitation of airflow, causing shortness of breathe (barnes et al., 2003) . in contrast to asthma, this limitation of airflow is poorly reversible and the syndrome worsens progressively over time. cigarette smoking, which exposes the lung to a high concentration of ros, is the major risk factor for copd (hogg, 2004) .one goal in copd research is the identification of biomarkers for early diagnosis of the disease. increased levels of surfactant protein-a (sp-a) were found in copd but not in the normal or fibrotic lung. also, elevated sp-a protein levels were detected from the induced sputum supernatants of copd patients while the levels of other surfactant proteins (sp-b, sp-c, sp-d) were not altered. these data revealed that sp-a was linked to the pathogenesis of copd and could be considered as a potential copd biomarker (ohlmeier et al., 2008) . in a recent study, serum amyloid a (saa) was identified as a novel blood biomarker of acute exacerbations of copd (aecopd) that was more sensitive than c-reactive protein alone or in combination with dyspnea. saa may offer new insights into the pathogenesis of aecopd (bozinovski et al., 2008) . by combining seldi-and maldi-tof-ms analysis, results signified that the concentrations of neutrophil defensins 1 and 2, s100a8, and s100a9 were elevated in balfs of smokers with copd when compared with asymptomatic smokers. increased concentrations of s100a8, salivary proline-rich peptide p-c, and lysozyme c were detected in balfs of asymptomatic smokers when compared with nonsmokers, whereas salivary proline-rich p-d and clara cell phospholipids-binding protein (cc10) were reduced in their concentration. these identified proteins and peptides might be useful in the future as diagnostic markers for smoke-induced lung irritations and copd (merkel et al., 2005) . several unfold protein response (upr) proteins have been shown to be upregulated in chronic smokers compared with nonsmokers and ex-smokers, including the chaperones, glucose-regulated protein 78 (grp78), and calreticulin; a foldase, protein disulfide isomerase (pdi); and enzymes involved in antioxidant defense. the clinical relevance of this study was that chronic smoking induced an endoplasmic reticulum stress response in human lung. failure of this compensatory system may contribute to the development of copd (kelsen et al., 2008) . lastly, lung tissues obtained from nonsmokers, smokers without copd, and smokers with copd found that mmp-13 and thioredoxin-like 2 were increased in patients with copd. these two proteins increased in the healthy smoker group and then increased further in the copd group, suggesting that these both might be more closely associated with the development of airflow limitation (lee et al., 2009 ).particulates, also known as ambient particulate matter (pm), are tiny airborne particles. there is a correlation between inhalation of pm and increases in the morbidity and mortality of respiratory diseases (laden et al., 2000; samet et al., 2000) .it was shown that in the dose range of 10-100 mg/ml, organic diesel exhaust particles (dep) extracts induced a progressive oxidative stress in the macrophage cell line raw264.7. maldi-tof-ms analysis showed that 32 newly induced/ nac-suppressed proteins were identified. these included antioxidant enzymes (heme oxygenase-1 and catalase), proinflammatory components (p38 mapk and rel a), and products of intermediary metabolism that were regulated by oxidative stress (xiao et al., 2003) . later, the same group of researchers showed that treatment of beas-2b cells with organic dep chemicals caused the induction of at least 14 proteins, among which heat shock protein (hsp70), hsp40, tpr2, and t-complex protein 1 (zeta-subunit) were known to play a role in the upr. dep extracts also induced the expression of il-6 and il-8 in the culture supernatant. these responses could be abrogated in the presence of nac . these data exhibited that dep induced oxidative stress response, upr, and proinflammatory effects and that some of these proteins may serve as markers for pm exposures. other airborne pm, with an aerodynamic diameter less than 10 mm (pm10), is a complex mixture of organic and inorganic compounds containing sulfates and various metals such as titanium (pagan et al., 2003) . because acute and chronic exposures to tio 2 particles have been shown to induce inflammatory responses in the airways and alveolar spaces of rats (schapira et al., 1995; warheit et al., 1997; ahn et al., 2005; kang et al., 2005) , tio 2 -treated rats are tested as a good model for the study of the human epithelial response to pm10 particles. treatment of epithelial cells with bsa-coated tio 2 particles altered expression of 20 proteins. these included defense-related, cell activating, and cytoskeletal proteins implicated in the response to oxidative stress. among one of these proteins was macrophage migration-inhibitory factor (mif). mif was expressed primarily in epithelium and was elevated in lung tissues and balfs of tio 2 -treated rats. interestingly, carbon black and dep also induced expression of mif protein in the epithelial cells (cha et al., 2007) . last but not the least, ultrafine carbon black (ufcb), which is carbon-centered ultrafine particles ( 0.1 mm in diameter), comprises the majority of fine particulate matters (oberdö rster and utell, 2002) . significantly greater increases in neutrophils influx and total proteins in balf have been observed after intratracheal instillation of ufcb, compared with carbon black (250 nm in diameter) (li et al., 1996) . ufcb also acts through a ros-dependent pathway to cause vascular endothelial growth factor (vegf) production and lung injury in mice (chang et al., 2005) . further proteomic study was carried out with balf from mice after treatment with ufcb. results showed that ufcb exposure caused the increase of epidermal growth factor receptor (egfr) and leukemia inhibitory factor receptor (lifr) in balf and decrease of both receptors in lung tissues, suggesting the acceleration of epithelial shedding from the lungs and increase of cell debris with membrane proteins egfr and lifr in balf. these data revealed the mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of ufcb-induced lung injury (chang et al., 2007) .severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), caused by coronavirus (cov), also known as atypical pneumonia, had emerged as a pandemic threat in 2003 (drosten et al., 2003; ksiazek et al., 2003; peiris et al., 2003) . understanding its pathogenesis and developing specific diagnostic methods for its early diagnosis are crucial for the effective management and control of this disease.although the genome sequencing and comparative analysis provided some abundant information to predict the structures and functions of the proteins comprising this virus, the possible post-translational modifications and cleavage products are difficult to be obtained from the genome sequence. using sars-cov-infected vero e6 cells, several studies provided new perspectives in the functions of the sars-cov viral proteins and the cellular responses. in he's group, they identified and characterized the structural proteins of sars-cov isolated from vero e6 cells infected with the bj-01 strain of the virus (ying et al., 2004) . in another study, the cytosol and nucleus fractions of sars-cov-infected cells as well as the crude virions were analyzed by one-dimensional electrophoresis followed by esi-ms/ms identification or by shotgun strategy with two-dimensional liquid chromatography-esi-ms/ms. of all the four predicted structural proteins of sars-cov, including s (spike), m (membrane), n (nucleocapsid) and e (envelope) proteins, were identified. this study indicated that 2d-lc-ms/ ms made contribution to rapidly and accurately characterize whether the cells contained virus and may be used for rapid screening the virus, virus-infected cells or even body fluids (zeng et al., 2004a) . further, characterization of the 3a protein of sars-cov in infected vero e6 cells and sera from sars patients showed that there was a tendency existed for co-mutation between the 3a protein and the spike protein of sars-cov isolates. the conclusion was that the 3a protein might be tightly correlated to the spike protein in the sars-cov functions and it may serve as a new clinical marker or drug target for sars treatment (zeng et al., 2004b) . to analyze the differential cellular response to sars-cov, the proteome of vero e6 cells with and without infection of sars-cov were resolved and quantitated with two-dimensional gel electrophoresis followed by esi-ms/ms identification. also, icat technology coupled with two-dimensional lc-ms/ms were applied to the differential proteins of infected cells. by combining these two methods, 355 unique proteins were identified and quantitated with 186 of them differentially expressed. this has been perhaps by far the most comprehensive proteomic index for sars-cov-infected cells and the identified differential profile furnished a valuable resource for diagnosis, drug development, and treatment for sars (jiang et al., 2005) .using serum from sars patients, several groups, including ours, provided useful biomarkers for the diagnosis of sars. our study in 2004, by using proteomic technology, showed that truncated forms of a 1 -antitrypsin (tf-a 1 -at) were increased significantly and consistently in sera of sars patients compared with control subjects. the dramatic increase in tf-a 1 -at may be the results of degradation of a 1 -at. as a 1 -at plays an important role in the protection of lung function, its degradation may be an important factor in the pathogenesis of sars and also may be a useful biomarker for the diagnosis of sars (ren et al., 2004) . using seldi-tof-ms analysis on 89 sera collected from 28 sars patients and 72 sera from 51 control patients with various viral or bacterial infections, and 10 sera from apparently healthy individuals, 9 significantly increased and 3 significantly decreased serum biomarkers were discovered in the sars patients compared with the controls. among these up-regulated markers, saa protein was confirmed by tandem mass spectrometric analysis and there was a good correlation between saa concentration and the extent of pneumonia. saa could be used to monitor disease activity and response to treatment in sars patients (yip et al., 2005) . in another study, using serum of 39 patients with early-stage sars infection and 39 suspected sars patients during the sars outbreak period, the authors reported that 2 proteomic features having the highest diagnostic value were the n-terminal fragment of complement c3c a-chain and an internal fragment of fibrinogen a-e chain (pang et al., 2006) . in a recent study, a coronavirus proteome microarray that contained the entire proteomes of the human sars-cov and five additional coronaviruses was constructed. these microarrays were used to screen $400 canadian sera from the sars outbreak, including samples from confirmed sars-cov cases, respiratory illness patients, and healthcare professionals. these arrays can serve as a rapid, sensitive, and simple tool for large-scale identification of viral-specific antibodies in sera .besides serum, the proteome of plasma from sars patients were investigated. a complete proteomic analysis was performed on four patients with sars in different time courses, and a total of 38 differential spots were selected for protein identification. most of the proteins identified were acute phase proteins and their presence represented the consequence of serial cascades initiated by sars-cov infection. there were several proteins that have never been identified in plasma before using 2d gel electrophoresis, among which was peroxiredoxin ii (prx ii). the high level of plasma prx ii in patients with sars could be secreted by t cells, which indicated that active innate immune responses, along with the oxidation-associated injuries, may play a role in the pathogenesis of sars . in another recent study, plasma proteins of sars patients with those of a normal control group were compared. to enrich the low-abundance proteins in human plasma, two highly abundant proteins, albumin and igg, were first depleted. the up-regulated proteins were identified as alpha-1 acid glycoprotein, haptoglobin, a 1 -antichymotrypsin, and fetuin. the down-regulated proteins were apolipoprotein a1, transferrin, and transthyretin. since all these up-regulated proteins identified above are well-known inflammation inhibitors, there is some mechanism that sustains the inflammation balance in sars patients which is helpful for the proper treatment and therapy of this disease (wan et al., 2006) .approximately one third of the world's population is currently infected with this pathogen and nearly 2 million people died of tb annually (clark-curtiss and haydel, 2003) . m. tuberculosis is a facultative intracellular bacterium, which persists and replicates within host phagocytes, predominantly macrophages, and dendritic cells (clark-curtiss and haydel, 2003) . upon phagocytosis, m. tuberculosis establish themselves in an early endosomal compartment and arrest phagosome maturation, then replicate and colonize. the persistence of its colonization in phagosomes of host phagocytes and development of drug resistance makes tb one of the top 10 diseases that cause people to die from this disease in the world (world health organization, 2008) . therefore, proteomic technology becomes an indispensable tool as to identify early diagnostic markers for tb.to identify proteins of m. tuberculosis unique to the intraphagosomal phase, mycobacteria were purified from phagosomes of infected murine bone marrow-derived macrophages and analyzed by 2-de and ms. results indicated that 11 mycobacterial proteins were exclusively detected in intraphagosomal mycobacteria, when compared with those of broth-cultured mycobacteria. six of the identified proteins were only observed in phagosomal mycobacteria, namely phosphoglycerate mutase i (gpm; rv0489), a lipid carrier protein (rv1627c), a putative potassium uptake protein (trka; rv2691), and the conserved hypothetical proteins rv0428c, rv1130, and rv1191 have not been identified previously in broth-cultured mycobacteria, suggesting that these proteins were indeed unique to phagosomal m. tuberculosis. the identification of the roles of these proteins and targeted drug design would allow direct interference of their functions to control intracellular growth of mycobacteria (mattow et al., 2006) . in another study, proteins secreted in the culture medium from the m. tuberculosis k-strain, which is the most prevalent among the clinical isolates in korea and belongs to the beijing family, were analyzed by 2d page and compared with those from the m. tuberculosis h37rv and cdc1551 strains. eleven proteins, rv0652, rv1636, rv2818c, rv3369, rv3865, rv0566c, mt3304, rv3160, rv3874, rv0560c, and rv3648c, were identified by maldi-tof-ms or lc-esi-ms. all these proteins were cloned and expressed in e. coli and affinity purified. by using three of these recombinant proteins in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa), when 100 sera from tb patients and 100 sera from the healthy controls were analyzed, rrv3369, rrv3874, and rrv0566c showed a sensitivity of 60%, 74%, and 43%, and a specificity of 96%, 97%, and 84%, respectively. these results displayed that the rrv3369 and rrv3874 proteins, which were expressed more abundantly in the more recently obtained clinical isolates of m. tuberculosis than in the laboratory-adapted h37rv strain, were promising for use in the serodiagnosis of tb (bahk et al., 2004) . a 32-kda putative glyoxalase in the culture filtrate of growing m. tuberculosis (originally annotated as rv0577, which is now designed as cfp32) was identified, cloned, and characterized. expression of cfp32 was provided by the serum recognition of recombinant cfp32 in 32% of tb patients by elisa as well as the direct detection of cfp32 by elisa in the induced sputum samples from 56% of pulmonary tb patients. interestingly, per sample, sputum cfp32 levels (a potential indicator of increasing bacterial burden) correlated with levels of expression in sputum of interleukin-10 (an immunosuppressive cytokine and a putative contributing factor to disease progression) but not levels of gamma interferon (a key cytokine in the protective immune response in tb), as measured by elisa. together, these data suggested that cfp32 may be useful as a diagnostic, drug, and/or vaccine target for tb (huard et al., 2003) .mtb81, a novel serological marker for tb identified by serological proteome analysis, is a promising antigen for the serodiagnosis of tb. it is suggested that the combination of mtb81 and the previously identified 38-kda antigen, in conjunction with other novel m. tuberculosis antigens, would lead to optimal sensitivity for the serodiagnosis of tb and potentially improve clinical sensitivity for tb-positive individuals co-infected with hiv (hendrickson et al., 2000) . following this study, the same group reported the use of multiepitope polyproteins in serodiagnosis of active tb. this time, three more tb antigens, mtb11 (also known as cfp-10), mtb8, and mtb48, were tested together with the previously reported 38-kda protein as well as their previously identified antigen mtb81. improved reactivity was observed, which indicated that the use of multiple antigens with some of which in a single polyprotein, can be used to facilitate the development of a highly sensitive test for m. tuberculosis antibody detection (houghton et al., 2002) . finally, in a recent study, serum proteomic profiles were obtained from patients with active tb and controls by seldi-tof-ms. a supervised machine-learning approach based on the support vector machine (svm) was used to obtain a classifier that distinguished between the groups in two independent test sets. a classifier trained on the 20 most informative peaks achieved diagnostic accuracy of 90%. from these, two peptides (saa protein and transthyretin) were identified and quantitated by immunoassay. since these peptides reflected inflammatory states, the authors also quantitated neopterin and c-reactive protein. application of an svm classifier using combinations of these values gave diagnostic accuracies of up to 84% for tb. the potential biomarkers for tb that was identified in this study through proteomic fingerprinting and pattern recognition have a plausible biological connection with the disease and could be used to develop new diagnostic tests (agranoff et al., 2006) .lung cancer is a malignant disease of heterogeneous histologies and has been divided into two major groups: small cell lung cancer (sclc) and non-small cell lung cancer (nsclc). nsclc accounts for 75% of lung cancers, and falls into three major types: squamous cell carcinoma (scc), adenocarcinoma, large cell lung cancer (lclc), and also less frequently found carinoids (srivastava et al., 1994) . cigarette smoking is a leading cause of lung cancers, resulting in a death toll of 1.3 million annually (ezzati et al., 2005) . worldwide mortality rate is increasing probably due to early smoking trend in teenage group. cigarette, made from tobacco and contained more than thousands of known and unknown toxic compounds and carcinogens, strongly promote lung cancer development. lung cancer may be seen on chest x-ray and computed tomography (ct scan) (swensen et al., 2005) . the diagnosis is confirmed with a biopsy. possible treatments include surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy. with treatment administrated to patients, the 5-year survival rate is just around 14% (jemal et al., 2005) . although early treatment seems promising in higher survival rate, it is virtually impossible to cure advanced stage lung cancer. no matter what, there is an urgent need to set up biomarkers for early lung cancer detection as well as proper drug development for treating this disease.in beer's group, a series of 93 lung adenocarcinomas and 10 uninvolved lung samples were examined by 2d-page. results indicated that antioxidant enzyme aoe372, atp synthase subunit d (atp5d), b1,4-galactosyltransferase, cytosolic inoraganic pyrophosphatase, glucose-regulated mr 58,000 protein, glutathione-s-transferase m4, prolyl 4-hydroxylase b subunit, triosephosphate isomerase, and ubiquitin thiolesterase (uchl1) were identified being significantly over-expressed in lung adenocarcinomas . using the same batch of samples, beer's group also demonstrated that 14 of 21 isoforms of cytokeratin 7 (ck7), ck8, ck18, and ck19 occurred at significantly higher levels in tumors compared with those of uninvolved adjacent tissue . similarly, our recent study also demonstrated that increased expressions of ck8 and ck14 in cadmium-induced lung cell transformation (lau and chiu, 2007) . it is suggested that increased expressions of specific cytokeratins can act as a scaffold to bind to apoptotic factors, preventing them to do their functions, which can provide additional survival advantages to evade apoptosis. therefore, specific isoforms of individual ck may have utility as diagnostic or predictive markers in lung tumorigenesis. using laser capture microdissection, differential proteins between primary lung adenocarcinoma with (lnm adc) and without lymph node metastasis (non-lnm adc) were identified by 2d-dige-ms. it was found that annexin a3, was significantly up-regulated in lnm adc compared with non-lnm adc. immunohistochemistry also showed that annexin a3 overexpression was frequently observed in lnm adcs and matched lymph node metastases compared with that of non-lnm adcs. these data indicated that annexin a3 might serve as a novel biomarker for lymph node metastasis and prognosis in lung adenocarcinoma (liu et al., 2009) . comparative proteome analysis on 20 human lung squamous carcinoma (hlsc) tissues and paired normal bronchial epithelial tissues revealed 76 differential proteins, among which 68 proteins were identified by pmf. serological proteome analysis of 10 hlsc tissues was performed to identify the tumor-associated antigens. the results revealed 36 ae 8 differential proteins reactive with patients' autologous sera, of which 14 proteins were identified. six of the 14 proteins, alpha enolase, pre-b cell-enhancing factor precursor, triosephosphate isomerase, phosphoglycerate mutase 1, fructose-bisphosphate aldolase a, and guanine nucleotide-binding protein beta subunit-like protein, were up-regulated in hlscs, indicating potential application of these 6 hlsc-associated antigens in diagnosis and therapy of hlsc . in another study, the authors investigated the distribution and expression of various prx isoforms in lung cancer and compared this with normal lung from human and mouse. among the prx isoforms, immunohistochemical staining showed the isoforms prx i, ii, iii, and v were predominantly expressed in bronchial and alveolar epithelium as well as in alveolar macrophages of the normal mouse lung. the isoforms i and iii were over-expressed in lung cancer tissues compared with normal lungs. the up-regulation of prx i and prx iii in lung cancer tissue may be advantageous for tumor cells to survive in this oxidative stress microenvironment (park et al., 2006) . using tobacco carcinogen nicotine-derived nitrosamine 4-(n-methyl-n-nitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (nnk) hamster pulmonary adenocarinoma (pac) model and human pac tissue arrays with matched and unmatched normal lung tissues, it was shown that raf-1, an effector of the egfr, and phosphorylated creb, an effector of the b-adrenoreceptor, were over-expressed in a significant subset of human pacs and could be served as early biomarkers of pac development (cekanova et al., 2007) . by proteomic analysis of urine samples from 10 healthy donors and 5 lung cancer patients with nsclc (adenocarcinoma cell type), some interesting biomarkers such as cd59 glycoprotein, transthyretin, g(m2) activator protein (gm2ap), and ig-free light chain were found to be differentially expressed (tantipaiboonwong et al., 2005) . using a panel of serum biomarkers for the diagnosis of lung cancer, it was found that carcinoembryonic antigen, retinol binding protein, a 1 -antitrypsin, and scc antigen were collectively found to correctly classify the majority of lung cancer and control patients (patz et al., 2007) .besides biopsies, several proteomic studies on various lung cancer cell lines were performed. comparative expression proteomic analysis on human normal (beas-2b) and malignant (a549) lung epithelial cells found that aldehyde dehydrogenase, prx i, fatty acid binding protein, aldoketoreductase, and destrin were up-regulated; whereas galectin-1, transgelin, and stathmin were down-regulated. an augmented expression of prx i was confirmed in cancer tissues compared with normal tissues from lung cancer patients, suggesting that it could be a potential biomarker of lung cancer (chang et al., 2001) . m-be, a sv40t-transformed human bronchial epithelial cell line with the phenotypic features of early tumorigenesis at high passage, was cultured in the conditioned media to collect its secretory proteins. cathepsin d was found to be increased either in culture media or in cells during passaging. tissue microarray and sandwich elisa analyses also validated significantly higher levels of cathepsin d in scc tissues as well as in plasma of lung squamous cell carcinoma patients, respectively, as compared with normal donors, indicating a potential role as a biomarker for lung cancer (lou et al., 2007) . similarly, using nsclc cell line a549, 14 proteins were found to be secreted in the conditioned medium, including peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase a, manganese superoxide dismutase, prx i, phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein, glutathione s-transferase p, ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase isozyme l1 (pgp9.5), alpha enolase, phosphoglycerate mutase 1, galectin-1, and dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (ddh). compared with normal lung tissues, higher ddh mrna and protein expression levels were found in 15 nsclc tissues. concurrently, serum level of ddh was significantly higher in nsclc patients than nonmalignant lung tumor and healthy controls. these data suggested that ddh could be served as a tissue marker and a novel serological marker of nsclc . further, protein profiles of four different human nsclc cell lines were compared with normal human bronchial epithelial cells using 2-de and maldi-tof-ms. among the protein identified, tumor suppressor gene 14-3-3s was downregulated whereas the proto-oncogene translation elongation factor 1d was up-regulated in nsclc cell lines. these proteins may be shared among these nsclc cell lines and closely tied in lung carcinogenesis . finally, to determine the metastasis-associated proteins in nsclc, comparative proteomic analysis was performed of two nsclc cell lines with different metastatic potentials, the non-metastatic cl1-0 and highly metastatic cl1-5 cell lines. results indicated that the up-regulation of s100a11 expression in nsclc tissues was significantly associated with higher tumor-node-metastasis stage and positive lymph node status, indicating that s100a11 might be an important regulatory molecule in promoting invasion and metastasis of nsclc (tian et al., 2007) .from this review, we summarized panels of biomarkers among most commonly contracted lung-related diseases in the world. we forecast that the emergence of further state-of-the-art and cutting-edge technologies from proteomics will reveal the molecular basis and novel insights into various lung-related diseases and complications. however, for the betterment of human life, much effort are needed to validate whether these biomarkers and drug targets are really useful in early detection, prediction, and so are prevention and cure of lung diseases. thus, only through the successful production of reliable diagnostic kits and targeted drugs could prove the real value of all these studies, that is, the era of lung proteomics is on its way.the patient is a 70-year-old male with a destination therapy heartmate 3 left ventricular assist device (lvad) implanted in 2016 who developed fever, flank pain and hematuria three days after attending a party. he was evaluated for nephrolithiasis at a local emergency department (ed) with ct abdomen and pelvis which incidentally found possible atypical or viral pneumonia. he was tested for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), but he left against medical advice. in the ensuing days, he continued to have fevers, new onset myalgias, diarrhea, and dyspnea. he returned to our ed and was in acute hypoxic respiratory failure, requiring supplemental oxygen to maintain peripheral oxygen saturation ≥94%.his medical history includes ischemic cardiomyopathy, stage 3 chronic kidney disease, and obesity. his post-lvad complications include gastrointestinal bleeding, ventricular tachycardia, and right ventricular (rv) dysfunction, but no infectious complications. he does not have diabetes or tobacco use. his blood group is a positive.pretest probability for covid-19 was moderate to high due to fever, dyspnea, and hypoxia as well as prior imaging showing peripheral ground-glass opacities.reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sar-cov-2) was positive at the initial ed visit and at our institution.serial laboratory and imaging tests are detailed in table 1 . several markers of disease severity were abnormal including absolute lymphocyte count, c-reactive protein and cardiac enzymes.chest x-ray showed bilateral infiltrates concerning for atypical pneumonia (figure 1 ).the patient was quarantined in a negative-pressure intensive care room. figure covid-19 is a pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2 and has taken a stronghold in new york state [1]. patients with heart failure on lvad support is a unique population at risk for covid-19. we present such a patient who developed covid-19 complicated by "cytokine storm" with severe ards and myocardial injury and illustrate clinical considerations that arose during his clinical course.the host response to covid-19 is often localized in the lung parenchyma, but a surge in pro-inflammatory cytokines can occur [2, 3] . known as a "cytokine storm," this phenomenon is described in graft-versus-host disease and viral illnesses including influenza and covid-19 [2] .the complication is mods including ards and cardiac manifestation. biomarkers of covid-19 related cytokine storm include lymphopenia, c-reactive protein, lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), ferritin, d-dimer, and troponin [2] [3] [4] . siddiqi and mehra proposed a schema to assess severity of "systemic hyperinflammation" in covid-19 to guide therapies [4] . serial evaluation of inflammatory markers should be done to risk stratify the critically ill from patients with milder disease.inflammation and myocardial injury from covid-19 must be differentiated from baseline inflammation often encountered during lvad support [5] . in our lvad patient, several biomarkers including ldh, absolute lymphocyte count, brain natriuretic peptide (bnp) and troponin have previously been obtained. in lieu of absolute values, the relative change in these biomarkers may be more pertinent in grading covid-19 severity in patients on lvad support. our patient had increased inflammatory and cardiac biomarker profiles from baseline that worsened with disease progression. this inflammatory biomarker profile improved after tocilizumab. changes in the pattern of these laboratory markers may be reliable tool to follow lvad patients with covid-19.cardiac manifestations. experience in china has shown that covid-19 could adversely affect the cardiovascular system [3] . our patient had evidence of myocardial injury as part of this covid-19 presentation. the myocardial effect is likely a multifactorial process due to "bystander effect" from mods, viral myocarditis, and activation of adverse remodeling mechanisms [3, 4] . furthermore, pea arrest in our patient may be a sequela of such cardiac damage, and as such, lvad support may have been instrumental in his resuscitation. in this context, management of patients on lvad support with covid-19 is difficult as there is a complex interplay between volume status and biventricular dynamics. we should closely monitor for 1) rv failure and need for inotropic support; 2) lvad speed drops or suction events, low flow, or pulsatility index (pi) events due to vasoplegia associated with infection.to limit healthcare worker (hcw) exposure to covid-19, nonessential testing such as echocardiograms, x-rays, ct and pulmonary artery catheters were deferred. physical examination of jugular venous pressure, pulmonary crackles, and hepatojugular reflux are essential to making clinical decisions. also, lvad monitor displays of flow parameters maybe useful as a surrogate for cardiac output if the display flow correlates with prior invasive hemodynamic data.though there is no definitive therapy for covid-19, there are multiple ongoing randomized trials evaluating different treatments [3] . the anti-malarial medication, hydroxychloroquine which was chosen as initial treatment for our patient, was shown to reduce in vitro sar-cov-2 cell entry, and a retrospective study suggested its clinical benefit in covid-19 [3, 4] . a major side effect is qtc prolongation, so our protocol provides monitoring guidance of this complication. immunomodulatory biologics such as tocilizumab are reserved for severe covid-19 defined by the presence of both worsening respiratory failure and cytokine storm as evidenced by increasing inflammatory markers. still, caution is warranted as major adverse effects of tocilizumab include infection, infusion reactions, dyslipidemia, neutropenia, and potential malignancy [6] . patients on lvad support are particularly vulnerable to infectious complications due to the inherent presence of hardware and driveline exposure as well as the fact that prolonged support has been associated with immune dysregulation [5] .finally, prone ventilation is beneficial in severe ards. the maneuver has been effective in improving lung mechanics and gas exchanges, and in some cases, it may prevent the need to escalate to venous-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation [7, 8] . though there are no published outcomes, early experience in wuhan, china indicates prone position was widely used in covid-19 related severe ards with possible benefits [8] . nonetheless, it may be prohibitive in heart failure patients on lvad support. prone positioning could result in complications such as compression of outflow graft and driveline, impaired venous return from increased thoracic pressure, hardware malpositioning, and worsening rv hemodynamics [9, 10] . there may be additional anxiety for staff caring for covid-19 patients, not otherwise familiar with lvad management. due to these considerations, prone ventilation was not performed in our patient. its potential for benefit in lvad supported patients with ards warrants further study.while his inflammatory profile improved after tocilizumab, he remained in critical condition on maximal ventilatory support and on vasopressors for shock. given his multiple complications, early palliative care discussion was initiated. his mods continued to worsen, and methylene blue was administered without improvement in hemodynamics. the patient ultimately expired on hospital day 8.this case highlights a systematic approach and various considerations for a patient with an lvad who developed life-threatening manifestations of covid-19. objectives: the hypothesis of the study is that treatment with hydroxychloroquine sulphate in hospitalised patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is safe and will accelerate the virological clearance rate for patients with moderately severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) when compared to standard care. furthermore, we hypothesize that early treatment with hydroxychloroquine sulphate is associated with more rapid resolve of clinical symptoms as assessed by the national early warning score 2 (news2), decreased admission rate to intensive care units and mortality, and improvement in protein biomarker profiles (c-reactive protein, markers of renal and hepatic injury, and established cardiac biomarkers like cardiac troponin and b-type natriuretic peptide). trial design: the study is a two-arm, open label, pragmatic randomised controlled group sequential adaptive trial designed to assess the effect on viral loads and clinical outcome of hydroxychloroquine sulphate therapy in addition to standard care compared to standard care alone in patients with established covid-19. by utilizing resources already paid for by the hospitals (physicians and nurses in daily clinical practice), this pragmatic trial can include a larger number of patients over a short period of time and at a lower cost than studies utilizing traditional randomized controlled trial designs with an external study organization. the pragmatic approach will enable swift initiation of randomisation and allocation to treatment. participants: patients will be recruited from all inpatients at akershus university hospital, lørenskog, norway. electronic real-time surveillance of laboratory reports from the department of microbiology will be examined regularly for sars-cov-2 positive subjects. all of the following conditions must apply to the prospective patient at screening prior to inclusion: (1) hospitalisation; (2) adults 18 years or older; (3) moderately severe covid-19 disease (news2 of 6 or less); (4) sars-cov-2 positive nasopharyngeal swab; (5) expected time of hospitalisation > 48 hours; and (6) signed informed consent must be obtained and documented according to good clinical practice guidelines of the international conference on harmonization, and national/local regulations. patients will be excluded from participation in the study if they meet any of the following criteria: (1) requiring intensive care unit admission at screening; (2) history of psoriasis; (3) known adverse reaction to hydroxychloroquine sulphate; (4) pregnancy; or (5) prolonged corrected qt interval (>450 ms). clinical data, including standard hospital biochemistry, medical therapy, vital signs, news2, and microbiology results (including blood culture results and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction [rt-pcr] for other upper airway viruses), will be automatically extracted from the hospital electronic records and merged with the study specific database. intervention and comparator: included patients will be randomised in a 1:1 ratio to (1) standard care with the addition of 400 mg hydroxychloroquine sulphate (plaqueniltm) twice daily for seven days or (2) standard care alone. main outcomes: the primary endpoint of the study is the rate of decline in sars-cov-2 viral load in oropharyngeal samples as assessed by rt-pcr in samples collected at baseline, 48 and 96 hours after randomization and administration of drug for the intervention arm. secondary endpoints include change in news2 at 96 hours after randomisation, admission to intensive care unit, mortality (in-hospital, and at 30 and 90 days), duration of hospital admission, clinical status on a 7-point ordinal scale 14 days after randomization ([1] death [2] hospitalised, on invasive mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation [3] hospitalised, on non-invasive ventilation or high flow oxygen devices [4] hospitalized, requiring supplemental oxygen [5] hospitalised, not requiring supplemental oxygen [6] not hospitalized, but unable to resume normal activities [7] not hospitalised, with resumption of normal activities), and improvement in protein biomarker profiles (c-reactive protein, markers of renal and hepatic injury, and established cardiac biomarkers like cardiac troponin and b-type natriuretic peptide) at 96 hours after randomization. randomisation: eligible patients will be allocated in a 1:1 ratio, using a computer randomisation procedure. the allocation sequence has been prepared by an independent statistician. blinding (masking): open label randomised controlled pragmatic trial without blinding, no active or placebo control. the virologist assessing viral load in the oropharyngeal samples and the statistician responsible for analysis of the data will be blinded to the treatment allocation for the statistical analyses. numbers to be randomized (sample size): this is a group sequential adaptive trial where analyses are planned after 51, 101, 151 and 202 completed patients, with a maximum sample size of 202 patients (101 patients allocated to intervention and standard care and 101 patients allocated to standard care alone). trial status: protocol version 1.3 (march 26, 2020). recruitment of first patient on march 26, 2020, and 51 patients were included as per april 28, 2020. study recruitment is anticipated to be completed by july 2020. trial registration: clinicaltrials.gov number, nct04316377. trial registered march 20, 2020. full protocol: the full protocol is attached as an additional file, accessible from the trials website (additional file 1). in the interest in expediting dissemination of this material, the familiar formatting has been eliminated; this letter serves as a summary of the key elements of the full protocol.norwegian coronavirus disease 2019 (no covid-19) pragmatic open label study to assess early use of hydroxychloroquine sulphate in moderately severe hospitalised patients with coronavirus disease 2019: a structured summary of a study protocol for a randomised controlled trialobjectives: the hypothesis of the study is that treatment with hydroxychloroquine sulphate in hospitalised patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is safe and will accelerate the virological clearance rate for patients with moderately severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) when compared to standard care. furthermore, we hypothesize that early treatment with hydroxychloroquine sulphate is associated with more rapid resolve of clinical symptoms as assessed by the national early warning score 2 (news2), decreased admission rate to intensive care units and mortality, and improvement in protein biomarker profiles (c-reactive protein, markers of renal and hepatic injury, and established cardiac biomarkers like cardiac troponin and b-type natriuretic peptide). trial design: the study is a two-arm, open label, pragmatic randomised controlled group sequential adaptive trial designed to assess the effect on viral loads and clinical outcome of hydroxychloroquine sulphate therapy in addition to standard care compared to standard care alone in patients with established covid-19. by utilizing resources already paid for by the hospitals (physicians and nurses in daily clinical practice), this pragmatic trial can include a larger number of patients over a short period of time and at a lower cost than studies utilizing traditional randomized controlled trial designs with an external study organization. the pragmatic approach will enable swift initiation of randomisation and allocation to treatment. participants: patients will be recruited from all inpatients at akershus university hospital, lørenskog, norway. electronic real-time surveillance of laboratory reports from the department of microbiology will be examined regularly for sars-cov-2 positive subjects. all of the following conditions must apply to the prospective patient at screening prior to inclusion: (1) hospitalisation; (2) adults 18 years or older; (3) moderately severe covid-19 disease (news2 of 6 or less); (4) sars-cov-2 positive nasopharyngeal swab; (5) expected time of hospitalisation > 48 hours; and (6) signed informed consent must be obtained and documented according to good clinical practice guidelines of the international conference on harmonization, and national/local regulations. patients will be excluded from participation in the study if they meet any of the following criteria: (1) requiring intensive care unit admission at screening; (2) history of psoriasis; (3) known adverse reaction to hydroxychloroquine sulphate; (4) pregnancy; or (5) prolonged corrected qt interval (>450 ms). clinical data, including standard hospital biochemistry, medical therapy, vital signs, news2, and microbiology results (including blood culture results and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction [rt-pcr] for other upper airway viruses), will be automatically extracted from the hospital electronic records and merged with the study specific database. intervention and comparator: included patients will be randomised in a 1:1 ratio to (1) standard care with the addition of 400 mg hydroxychloroquine sulphate (plaqueniltm) twice daily for seven days or (2) standard care alone. main outcomes: the primary endpoint of the study is the rate of decline in sars-cov-2 viral load in oropharyngeal samples as assessed by rt-pcr in samples collected at baseline, 48 and 96 hours after randomization and administration of drug for the intervention arm. secondary endpoints include change in news2 at 96 hours after randomisation, admission to intensive care unit, mortality (in-hospital, and at 30 and 90 days), duration of hospital admission, clinical status on a 7-point ordinal scale 14 days after randomization ([1] death [2] hospitalised, on invasive mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation [3] hospitalised, on non-invasive ventilation or high flow oxygen devices [4] hospitalized, requiring supplemental oxygen [5] hospitalised, not requiring supplemental oxygen [6] not hospitalized, but unable to resume normal activities [7] not hospitalised, with resumption of normal activities), and improvement in protein biomarker profiles (c-reactive protein, markers of renal and hepatic injury, and established cardiac biomarkers like cardiac troponin and b-type natriuretic peptide) at 96 hours after randomization. randomisation: eligible patients will be allocated in a 1:1 ratio, using a computer randomisation procedure. the allocation sequence has been prepared by an independent statistician. blinding (masking): open label randomised controlled pragmatic trial without blinding, no active or placebo control. the virologist assessing viral load in the oropharyngeal samples and the statistician responsible for analysis of the data will be blinded to the treatment allocation for the statistical analyses. numbers to be randomized (sample size): this is a group sequential adaptive trial where analyses are planned after 51, 101, 151 and 202 completed patients, with a maximum sample size of 202 patients (101 patients allocated to intervention and standard care and 101 patients allocated to standard care alone). trial status: protocol version 1.3 (march 26, 2020). recruitment of first patient on march 26, 2020, and 51 patients were included as per april 28, 2020. study recruitment is anticipated to be completed by july 2020. trial registration: clinicaltrials.gov number, nct04316377. trial registered march 20, 2020. full protocol: the full protocol is attached as an additional file, accessible from the trials website (additional file 1). in the interest in expediting dissemination of this material, the familiar formatting has been eliminated; this letter serves as a summary of the key elements of the full protocol.norwegian coronavirus disease 2019 (no covid-19) pragmatic open label study to assess early use of hydroxychloroquine sulphate in moderately severe hospitalised patients with coronavirus disease 2019: a structured summary of a study protocol for a randomised controlled trialobjectives: the hypothesis of the study is that treatment with hydroxychloroquine sulphate in hospitalised patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is safe and will accelerate the virological clearance rate for patients with moderately severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) when compared to standard care. furthermore, we hypothesize that early treatment with hydroxychloroquine sulphate is associated with more rapid resolve of clinical symptoms as assessed by the national early warning score 2 (news2), decreased admission rate to intensive care units and mortality, and improvement in protein biomarker profiles (c-reactive protein, markers of renal and hepatic injury, and established cardiac biomarkers like cardiac troponin and b-type natriuretic peptide). trial design: the study is a two-arm, open label, pragmatic randomised controlled group sequential adaptive trial designed to assess the effect on viral loads and clinical outcome of hydroxychloroquine sulphate therapy in addition to standard care compared to standard care alone in patients with established covid-19. by utilizing resources already paid for by the hospitals (physicians and nurses in daily clinical practice), this pragmatic trial can include a larger number of patients over a short period of time and at a lower cost than studies utilizing traditional randomized controlled trial designs with an external study organization. the pragmatic approach will enable swift initiation of randomisation and allocation to treatment. participants: patients will be recruited from all inpatients at akershus university hospital, lørenskog, norway. electronic real-time surveillance of laboratory reports from the department of microbiology will be examined regularly for sars-cov-2 positive subjects. all of the following conditions must apply to the prospective patient at screening prior to inclusion: (1) hospitalisation; (2) adults 18 years or older; (3) moderately severe covid-19 disease (news2 of 6 or less); (4) sars-cov-2 positive nasopharyngeal swab; (5) expected time of hospitalisation > 48 hours; and (6) signed informed consent must be obtained and documented according to good clinical practice guidelines of the international conference on harmonization, and national/local regulations. patients will be excluded from participation in the study if they meet any of the following criteria: (1) requiring intensive care unit admission at screening; (2) history of psoriasis; (3) known adverse reaction to hydroxychloroquine sulphate; (4) pregnancy; or (5) prolonged corrected qt interval (>450 ms). clinical data, including standard hospital biochemistry, medical therapy, vital signs, news2, and microbiology results (including blood culture results and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction [rt-pcr] for other upper airway viruses), will be automatically extracted from the hospital electronic records and merged with the study specific database. intervention and comparator: included patients will be randomised in a 1:1 ratio to (1) standard care with the addition of 400 mg hydroxychloroquine sulphate (plaqueniltm) twice daily for seven days or (2) standard care alone. main outcomes: the primary endpoint of the study is the rate of decline in sars-cov-2 viral load in oropharyngeal samples as assessed by rt-pcr in samples collected at baseline, 48 and 96 hours after randomization and administration of drug for the intervention arm. secondary endpoints include change in news2 at 96 hours after randomisation, admission to intensive care unit, mortality (in-hospital, and at 30 and 90 days), duration of hospital admission, clinical status on a 7-point ordinal scale 14 days after randomization ([1] death [2] hospitalised, on invasive mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation [3] hospitalised, on non-invasive ventilation or high flow oxygen devices [4] hospitalized, requiring supplemental oxygen [5] hospitalised, not requiring supplemental oxygen [6] not hospitalized, but unable to resume normal activities [7] not hospitalised, with resumption of normal activities), and improvement in protein biomarker profiles (c-reactive protein, markers of renal and hepatic injury, and established cardiac biomarkers like cardiac troponin and b-type natriuretic peptide) at 96 hours after randomization. randomisation: eligible patients will be allocated in a 1:1 ratio, using a computer randomisation procedure. the allocation sequence has been prepared by an independent statistician. blinding (masking): open label randomised controlled pragmatic trial without blinding, no active or placebo control. the virologist assessing viral load in the oropharyngeal samples and the statistician responsible for analysis of the data will be blinded to the treatment allocation for the statistical analyses. numbers to be randomized (sample size): this is a group sequential adaptive trial where analyses are planned after 51, 101, 151 and 202 completed patients, with a maximum sample size of 202 patients (101 patients allocated to intervention and standard care and 101 patients allocated to standard care alone). trial status: protocol version 1.3 (march 26, 2020). recruitment of first patient on march 26, 2020, and 51 patients were included as per april 28, 2020. study recruitment is anticipated to be completed by july 2020. trial registration: clinicaltrials.gov number, nct04316377. trial registered march 20, 2020. full protocol: the full protocol is attached as an additional file, accessible from the trials website (additional file 1). in the interest in expediting dissemination of this material, the familiar formatting has been eliminated; this letter serves as a summary of the key elements of the full protocol.norwegian coronavirus disease 2019 (no covid-19) pragmatic open label study to assess early use of hydroxychloroquine sulphate in moderately severe hospitalised patients with coronavirus disease 2019: a structured summary of a study protocol for a randomised controlled trialobjectives: the hypothesis of the study is that treatment with hydroxychloroquine sulphate in hospitalised patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is safe and will accelerate the virological clearance rate for patients with moderately severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) when compared to standard care. furthermore, we hypothesize that early treatment with hydroxychloroquine sulphate is associated with more rapid resolve of clinical symptoms as assessed by the national early warning score 2 (news2), decreased admission rate to intensive care units and mortality, and improvement in protein biomarker profiles (c-reactive protein, markers of renal and hepatic injury, and established cardiac biomarkers like cardiac troponin and b-type natriuretic peptide). trial design: the study is a two-arm, open label, pragmatic randomised controlled group sequential adaptive trial designed to assess the effect on viral loads and clinical outcome of hydroxychloroquine sulphate therapy in addition to standard care compared to standard care alone in patients with established covid-19. by utilizing resources already paid for by the hospitals (physicians and nurses in daily clinical practice), this pragmatic trial can include a larger number of patients over a short period of time and at a lower cost than studies utilizing traditional randomized controlled trial designs with an external study organization. the pragmatic approach will enable swift initiation of randomisation and allocation to treatment. participants: patients will be recruited from all inpatients at akershus university hospital, lørenskog, norway. electronic real-time surveillance of laboratory reports from the department of microbiology will be examined regularly for sars-cov-2 positive subjects. all of the following conditions must apply to the prospective patient at screening prior to inclusion: (1) hospitalisation; (2) adults 18 years or older; (3) moderately severe covid-19 disease (news2 of 6 or less); (4) sars-cov-2 positive nasopharyngeal swab; (5) expected time of hospitalisation > 48 hours; and (6) signed informed consent must be obtained and documented according to good clinical practice guidelines of the international conference on harmonization, and national/local regulations. patients will be excluded from participation in the study if they meet any of the following criteria: (1) requiring intensive care unit admission at screening; (2) history of psoriasis; (3) known adverse reaction to hydroxychloroquine sulphate; (4) pregnancy; or (5) prolonged corrected qt interval (>450 ms). clinical data, including standard hospital biochemistry, medical therapy, vital signs, news2, and microbiology results (including blood culture results and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction [rt-pcr] for other upper airway viruses), will be automatically extracted from the hospital electronic records and merged with the study specific database. intervention and comparator: included patients will be randomised in a 1:1 ratio to (1) standard care with the addition of 400 mg hydroxychloroquine sulphate (plaqueniltm) twice daily for seven days or (2) standard care alone. main outcomes: the primary endpoint of the study is the rate of decline in sars-cov-2 viral load in oropharyngeal samples as assessed by rt-pcr in samples collected at baseline, 48 and 96 hours after randomization and administration of drug for the intervention arm. secondary endpoints include change in news2 at 96 hours after randomisation, admission to intensive care unit, mortality (in-hospital, and at 30 and 90 days), duration of hospital admission, clinical status on a 7-point ordinal scale 14 days after randomization ([1] death [2] hospitalised, on invasive mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation [3] hospitalised, on non-invasive ventilation or high flow oxygen devices [4] hospitalized, requiring supplemental oxygen [5] hospitalised, not requiring supplemental oxygen [6] not hospitalized, but unable to resume normal activities [7] not hospitalised, with resumption of normal activities), and improvement in protein biomarker profiles (c-reactive protein, markers of renal and hepatic injury, and established cardiac biomarkers like cardiac troponin and b-type natriuretic peptide) at 96 hours after randomization. randomisation: eligible patients will be allocated in a 1:1 ratio, using a computer randomisation procedure. the allocation sequence has been prepared by an independent statistician. blinding (masking): open label randomised controlled pragmatic trial without blinding, no active or placebo control. the virologist assessing viral load in the oropharyngeal samples and the statistician responsible for analysis of the data will be blinded to the treatment allocation for the statistical analyses. numbers to be randomized (sample size): this is a group sequential adaptive trial where analyses are planned after 51, 101, 151 and 202 completed patients, with a maximum sample size of 202 patients (101 patients allocated to intervention and standard care and 101 patients allocated to standard care alone). trial status: protocol version 1.3 (march 26, 2020). recruitment of first patient on march 26, 2020, and 51 patients were included as per april 28, 2020. study recruitment is anticipated to be completed by july 2020. trial registration: clinicaltrials.gov number, nct04316377. trial registered march 20, 2020. full protocol: the full protocol is attached as an additional file, accessible from the trials website (additional file 1). in the interest in expediting dissemination of this material, the familiar formatting has been eliminated; this letter serves as a summary of the key elements of the full protocol.norwegian coronavirus disease 2019 (no covid-19) pragmatic open label study to assess early use of hydroxychloroquine sulphate in moderately severe hospitalised patients with coronavirus disease 2019: a structured summary of a study protocol for a randomised controlled trialthe coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic is a scientific, medical, and social challenge. the complexity of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is centered on the unpredictable clinical course of the disease that can rapidly develop, causing severe and deadly complications. the identification of effective laboratory biomarkers able to classify patients based on their risk is imperative in being able to guarantee prompt treatment. the analysis of recently published studies highlights the role of systemic vasculitis and cytokine mediated coagulation disorders as the principal actors of multi organ failure in patients with severe covid-19 complications. the following biomarkers have been identified: hematological (lymphocyte count, neutrophil count, neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio (nlr)), inflammatory (c-reactive protein (crp), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr), procalcitonin (pct)), immunological (interleukin (il)-6 and biochemical (d-dimer, troponin, creatine kinase (ck), aspartate aminotransferase (ast)), especially those related to coagulation cascades in disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic) and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). new laboratory biomarkers could be identified through the accurate analysis of multicentric case series; in particular, homocysteine and angiotensin ii could play a significant role.biomarkers associated with covid-19 disease progressionthe coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic is a scientific, medical, and social challenge. the complexity of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is centered on the unpredictable clinical course of the disease that can rapidly develop, causing severe and deadly complications. the identification of effective laboratory biomarkers able to classify patients based on their risk is imperative in being able to guarantee prompt treatment. the analysis of recently published studies highlights the role of systemic vasculitis and cytokine mediated coagulation disorders as the principal actors of multi organ failure in patients with severe covid-19 complications. the following biomarkers have been identified: hematological (lymphocyte count, neutrophil count, neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio (nlr)), inflammatory (c-reactive protein (crp), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr), procalcitonin (pct)), immunological (interleukin (il)-6 and biochemical (d-dimer, troponin, creatine kinase (ck), aspartate aminotransferase (ast)), especially those related to coagulation cascades in disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic) and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). new laboratory biomarkers could be identified through the accurate analysis of multicentric case series; in particular, homocysteine and angiotensin ii could play a significant role.biomarkers associated with covid-19 disease progressionthe coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic represents an unprecedented threat globally. protection of individuals at the highest risk for severe and potentially fatal covid-19 is a prime component of national policies, with stricter social distancing and other preventative means currently recommended mainly for elderly people and individuals with chronic health conditions. however, seemingly healthy middle-aged individuals also suffer from severe covid-19 (zhou et al 2020 , atkins et al 2020 , opensafely collaborative 2020 . more accurate identification of apparently healthy individuals at high risk could help to target social distancing as lockdown measures are being relaxed, facilitate safe return to work, and eventually prioritise individuals for vaccines with limited supply.pneumonia is a life-threatening complication of covid-19 and the most common diagnosis in severe covid-19 patients. as for covid-19, the main risk factors for community-acquired pneumonia are high age and preexisting respiratory and cardiometabolic diseases that can weaken the lungs and the immune system (almirall et al 2017) . based on analyses of large blood sample collections of healthy individuals, the biomarkers predictive of severe covid-19 are partly shared with biomarkers reflective of the risk for contracting pneumonia, including lower hdl cholesterol and elevated markers of impaired kidney function and inflammation (ho et al 2020) .comprehensive profiling of metabolic biomarkers, also known as metabolomics, in prospective population studies have suggested a range of blood biomarkers for cardiovascular disease and diabetes to also be reflective of future risk for contracting severe infectious diseases (ritchie et al 2015 , deelen et al 2019 . metabolic biomarker profiling of severe covid-19 patients could therefore potentially aid high-risk identification among healthy individuals, but such studies require measurement of large numbers of pre-pandemic samples to obtain sufficient number of individuals who eventually contract covid-19 and require hospitalisation. metabolic biomarker profiles have recently been measured using nightingale nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr) metabolomics in over 100 000 plasma samples from the uk biobank, with clinical data linkage unlocked 22 may 2020.here, we examined if metabolic biomarkers measured from blood samples collected a decade before the pandemic could be predictive of covid-19 hospitalisation in uk general population settings. exploiting the shared risk factor relation between covid-19 and pneumonia (hu et al 2020), we used well-powered statistical analyses of biomarkers with severe pneumonia risk to develop a multi-biomarker score that condenses the information from the metabolic profile into a single metric. taking advantage of the time-resolved information on the occurrence of severe pneumonia events in the uk biobank, we mimicked the influence of the decade lag from blood sampling to the covid-19 pandemic on the biomarker associations, and used short-term follow-up to interpolate to a scenario of preventative covid-19 screening carried out today.details of the design of the uk biobank have been reported previously (sudlow et al 2015) . briefly, the uk biobank recruited 502 639 participants aged 37-70 years in 22 assessment centres across the uk. all participants provided written informed consent and ethical approval was obtained from the north west multi-center research ethics committee. blood samples were drawn at baseline between 2007 and 2010. the current analysis was approved under uk biobank project 30418. no selection criteria were applied to the sampling.from the entire uk biobank population, a random subset of non-fasting baseline plasma samples (aliquot 3) from 118 466 individuals and 1298 repeat-visit samples were measured using targeted high-throughput nmr metabolomics (nightingale health ltd; biomarker quantification version 2020). this provides simultaneous quantification of 249 metabolic measures, including routine lipids, lipoprotein subclass profiling with lipid concentrations within 14 subclasses, fatty acid composition, and various low-molecular weight metabolites such as amino acids, ketone bodies and glycolysis metabolites quantified in molar concentration units. technical details and epidemiological applications have been reviewed (soininen et al 2015 , würtz et al 2017 . the nightingale nmr metabolomics technology has received various regulatory approvals, including ce-mark, and 37 biomarkers in the panel have been certified for diagnostics use (marked in (supplementary table 1 ). . we focused on this set of clinically validated biomarkers to facilitate potential translational applications and since these biomarkers span most of the different metabolic pathways measured by the nmr metabolomics platform. the metabolomics data were curated and linked to uk biobank clinical data in late-may 2020.we combined icd-10 codes j12-j18 to define the pneumonia endpoint. to strengthen the analogy with analysis of severe covid-19, we focused on severe pneumonia events, defined as diagnosis in hospital or death record based on uk hospital episode statistics data and national death registries (2507 incident cases in the current study). all analyses are based on first occurrence of diagnosis, and therefore 2658 individuals with recorded hospitalisation of pneumonia prior to blood sampling were excluded. additionally, 346 individuals with pneumonia diagnoses recorded in primary care settings and by self-reports were also omitted from the analyses. the registry-based follow-up was from blood sampling in 2007-2010 through to 2016-2017, depending on assessment centre (850 000 person-years). due to the shorter follow-up for severe pneumonia, there were no overlapping cases with severe covid-19.we used covid-19 data available in the uk biobank per 22 june 2020, which covers test results from 16 march to 14 june 2020. these data include information on positive/negative pcr-based diagnosis results and explicit evidence in the microbiological record on whether the participant was an inpatient (uk biobank data resource, 2020). for the present analyses, we focused on pcr-positive inpatient diagnoses. these hospitalised cases are here denoted as severe covid-19 (195 cases in the current study). there were additionally 80 test-positive individuals without explicit evidence of being an inpatient, which were inferred as non-severe and omitted from present analyses. covid-19 data were not available for assessment centres in scotland and wales, so individuals from these centres were excluded. individuals who had died during follow-up prior to 2018 were also excluded, since they were never exposed to covid-19.to examine the influence of prevalent diseases in the prospective analyses of severe pneumonia and severe covid-19, we used the following definitions of chronic respiratory and cardiometabolic conditions: prevalent cardiovascular disease (icd-10 codes i20-i25, i50, i60-i64 and g45), diabetes (e10-e14), lung cancer (c33-c34, d02.2, z85.1), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd; j43-j44), liver diseases (k70-k77), and renal failure (n17-n19).biomarker levels outside four interquartile ranges from median were considered as outliers and excluded. all 37 biomarkers were scaled to standard deviation (sd) units prior to analyses. for biomarker association testing with severe pneumonia and with severe covid-19 (as separate outcomes), we used logistic regression models adjusted for age, sex, and assessment centre. to examine the utility of multiple biomarkers in combination, we used a weighted sum of the biomarkers optimised for prediction of severe pneumonia; this multi-biomarker score was denoted as 'infectious disease score'. to minimize the collinearity of the biomarkers, the multi-biomarker score was trained using logistic regression with least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (lasso), which uses l1 regularization that adds penalty equal to the absolute value of the magnitude of the coefficients. the multi-biomarker infectious disease score was trained using half of the study population with complete data available for the 37 clinically validated biomarkers (n=52 573 and 1257 severe pneumonia events) using fivefold cross-validation to optimize the regularization parameter λ . the remaining half of the study population was used in validating the performance of the biomarker score in relation to risk for severe pneumonia. the multi-biomarker infectious disease score was then tested for association with severe pneumonia and covid-19 in logistic regression models adjusted for age, sex, and assessment centre. we further examined additional adjustment for body mass index (bmi) and smoking status (never, former, current), as well as prevalent respiratory and cardiometabolic diseases. the associations were also examined by omitting individuals with prevalent respiratory and cardiometabolic diseases and stratified by age and sex. in the case of severe pneumonia, we further examined the association magnitudes according to follow-up time: we used severe pneumonia events that occurred during 7-11 years after the blood sampling to mimic the decade long lag from blood sampling to 3/15 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 3, 2020. . the covid-19 pandemic, and severe pneumonia events occurring within the first 2 years to interpolate to the scenario of preventative screening for covid-19 carried out today (in both scenarios the confined follow-up times were arbitrarily chosen as short as possible while ensuring sufficient number of events). finally, to explore potential non-linear effects, the infectious disease score was plotted as a proportion of individuals who contracted severe pneumonia during follow-up when binning individuals into percentiles of the infectious disease score (khera et al 2018) and the time-resolution was examined by kaplan-meier curves of the cumulative risk for severe pneumonia.characteristics of the study population are shown in table 1 . among the 105 146 uk biobank study participants with complete data on metabolic biomarkers and severe pneumonia outcomes, and no prior history of diagnosed pneumonia, there were 2507 severe pneumonia events recorded in hospital or death registries after the baseline blood sampling (median follow-up time 8.1 years).for the severe covid-19 analyses, there were 195 pcr-confirmed positive cases diagnosed in hospital (inferred as severe cases in this study) among the 92 647 individuals with covid-19 data linkage available per 22 june 2020. in june 2020, the age range of study participants was 49-84 years. the median duration from blood sampling to the covid-19 pandemic was 11.2 years (interquartile range 10.0-12.6). the prevalence of chronic respiratory and cardiometabolic diseases was similar for study participants who developed severe pneumonia and those who contracted covid-19 and required hospitalisation; there was no overlap in cases.the number of individuals analysed for severe covid-19 is slightly lower than for severe pneumonia, since no covid-19 data were available from assessment centres in scotland and wales.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20143685 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 1a shows the associations of 37 biomarkers with risk of severe pneumonia in the entire study population (n=105 146). the biomarkers highlighted here are those with regulatory approval for diagnostics use in the nightingale nmr metabolomics platform; results for all 249 metabolic measures quantified are shown in supplementary figure 1 . strong associations were observed across several metabolic pathways: increased plasma concentrations of cholesterol measures, omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acid levels, histidine, branchedchain amino acids and albumin were associated with lower risk for contracting severe pneumonia. increased concentrations of mono-unsaturated and saturated fatty acids, as well glycoprotein acetyls (glyca, a marker of chronic inflammation) were associated with elevated risk for contracting severe pneumonia.since all the biomarkers are quantified in the same single measurement, we examined if even stronger associations with severe pneumonia could be obtained using a multi-biomarker combination. we derived this multi-biomarker combination, denoted 'infectious disease score', using logistic regression with lasso for variable selection, considering the 37 clinically validated biomarkers in half of the study population. this resulted in an infectious disease score comprised of the weighted sum of 25 biomarkers, with the weights selected by the machine learning algorithm. the strongest weight was attributed to glyca (supplementary table 2 ).the multi-biomarker infectious disease score was then tested for association with severe pneumonia in the other half of the study population. the magnitude of association for the infectious disease score was approximately twice as strong with severe pneumonia compared to any of the individual biomarkers ( figure 1b ). the odds for contracting severe pneumonia was increased 67% per 1-sd increment in the infectious disease score. this corresponds to close to 4-fold higher risk for severe pneumonia among people in the upper quintile of the infectious disease score, compared to those with a score in the lowest quintile.to assess the robustness of association with severe pneumonia, we adjusted for bmi, smoking, and existing diseases, and performed analyses stratified by age and sex ( figure 2 ). the association was attenuated by~10% in magnitude when adjusting for, or omitting, individuals with a diagnosis of respiratory and cardiometabolic disease at time of blood sampling (cardiovascular disease, diabetes, lung cancer, copd, liver diseases, and renal failure; panel 2a and 2b). the association was similar across age groups, and also for men and women analysed separately (panels 2c and 2d).to mimic the influence of the decade-long lag from blood sample collection to the covid-19 pandemic, we tested the association of the infectious disease score with severe pneumonia events occurring during 7-11 years after the blood sampling ( figure 3a ). since there were only few severe pneumonia events recorded with more than 9 years of follow-up, we could not fully mimic the decade long time lag to the covid-19 pandemic. the association magnitude for this time-lag accounting scenario was almost half of that observed for events occurring within the first 7 years. to interpolate to a scenario of preventative screening conducted today, we also tested the short-term association with severe pneumonia events occurring within the first 2 years after the blood sampling ( figure 3b ). the association magnitude in this scenario was approximately twice as strong as for severe pneumonia events occurring at least 2 years after blood sampling (odds ratio 2.2 per 1 sd; 8.0-fold risk elevation for individuals in the upper vs lower quintile of the infectious disease score). the elevation in short-term risk for severe pneumonia for high levels of the infectious disease score remained strong when adjusting for bmi, smoking and prevalent respiratory and cardiometabolic diseases (6.1-fold risk elevation for individuals in the upper vs lower quintile; supplementary figure 2 ). we next explored the risk gradient for severe pneumonia along increasing levels of the infectious disease score, since non-linear effects could potentially facilitate identification of thresholds for high risk . figure 4a shows the increase in proportion of individuals who contracted severe pneumonia according to percentiles of the score. the risk increased prominently in the upper quintile, and particularly for the highest few percentiles. the time-resolved plot of the cumulative probability of severe pneumonia during follow-up is shown in figure  4b . the increase in risk for severe pneumonia was elevated among individuals with the very highest levels of multi-biomarker infectious disease scores, and this was observed already during the first few years of follow-up, corroborating the time-censored odds ratios given in figure 3 . the prominent and immediate risk elevation was also observed when limiting analyses to individuals without chronic respiratory and cardiometabolic diseases at time of blood sampling (supplementary figure 3) .. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 3, 2020. . odds ratio for severe pneumonia (95% ci), per 1−sd increment in infectious disease score b (a) odds ratios with severe pneumonia (2507 hospitalisations or deaths during a median of 8 years of follow-up) for 37 clinically validated biomarkers measured by nightingale nmr metabolomics. (b) odds ratio with severe pneumonia for the multi-biomarker infectious disease score. the infectious disease score is the weighted sum of 25 out of 37 clinically validated biomarkers, optimised for prediction of severe pneumonia based on one half of the study population using lasso regression. biomarkers included in the infectious disease score are marked by #. the odds ratio for infectious disease score is evaluated in the other half of the study population (n=52 573; 1250 events). all models are adjusted for age, sex, and assessment centre. odds ratios are per 1-sd increment in the biomarker levels. horizontal bars denote 95% confidence intervals. closed circles denote p-value < 0.001 and open circles p-value 0.001. bcaa indicates branched-chain amino acids; dha: docosahexaenoic acid; mufa: monounsaturated fatty acids; pufa: polyunsaturated fatty acids; sfa: saturated fatty acids.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 3, 2020. . odds ratio for severe pneumonia (95% ci), highest vs. lowest quintile of infectious disease score odds ratio for severe pneumonia (95% ci), highest vs. lowest quintile of infectious disease score odds ratio for severe pneumonia (95% ci), highest vs. lowest quintile of infectious disease score q q men women men and women separately (a) odds ratios with severe pneumonia after additional adjustment for bmi, smoking status, and prevalent respiratory and cardiometabolic diseases. (b) odds ratios with severe pneumonia in study participants with and without prevalent respiratory and cardiometabolic disease. (c) odds ratios by age tertiles at the time of blood sampling. (d) odds ratios for men and women separately. all models are adjusted for age, sex, and assessment centre. the left-hand side shows odds ratio per 1-sd increment in the multi-biomarker infectious disease score, and the right-hand side odds ratios for individuals in the upper vs lower quintiles of the score. the results are based on the validation-half of the study population that was not used to derive the infectious disease score (1250 events during a median of 8 years of follow-up).. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 3, 2020. . odds ratio for severe pneumonia (95% ci), per 1−sd increment in infectious disease score odds ratio for severe pneumonia (95% ci), highest vs. lowest quintile of infectious disease score q q 2−11 years from blood sampling (1088 events) within 2 years from blood sampling (162 events) mimicking a preventative screening scenario carried out today (a) odds ratios with severe pneumonia events occurring within the first 7 years of blood sampling, compared to events that occurred 7-11 years after blood sampling. (b) odds ratios for severe pneumonia occurring within and after the first 2 years of blood sampling. models are adjusted for age, sex, and assessment centre. the left-hand side shows odds ratio per 1-sd increment in the multi-biomarker infectious disease score, and the right-hand side odds ratios for individuals in the upper vs lower quintiles of the score. the results are based on the validation-half of the study population that was not used to derive the infectious disease score. kaplan-meier curves of the cumulative probability of severe pneumonia in quantiles of the multi-biomarker infectious disease score. the follow-up time was truncated at 9.5 years since only a small fraction of individuals were followed longer. results are based on the validation half of the study population that was not used for deriving the infectious disease score (n=52 573). the corresponding plots for individuals free of baseline respiratory and cardiometabolic diseases are shown in figure s3 .. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20143685 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 5 shows the associations of the 37 clinically validated biomarkers and the infectious disease score with severe covid-19 (defined as pcr-confirmed positive inpatient diagnosis). many of the individual biomarkers were associated with increased risk for severe covid-19 at p-value<0.05, including lower levels of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids as well as albumin, and higher levels of glyca. we observed a high concordance in the overall pattern of biomarker associations with severe pneumonia (cf. figure 1a) , with a spearman correlation of 0.83 between the overall biomarker signatures for severe pneumonia and severe covid-19 ( figure 6) . the infectious disease score was robustly associated with severe covid-19, with the odds increased 34% per 1-sd. this corresponds to 2.5 fold higher risk for severe covid-19 for the individuals in the upper quintile of the infectious disease score, compared to individuals whose score was in the lowest quintile. this magnitude of association was similar to that observed with severe pneumonia events occurring during the interval of 7-11 years after the blood sampling.we further examined the association of the infectious disease score with severe covid-19 after adjustment or exclusion for prevalent disease, and conducted stratified analyses for age and sex (figure 7) . the association with severe covid-19 was attenuated, but remained significant when adjusted for bmi, smoking as well as prevalent respiratory and cardiometabolic diseases (panel 7a). the associations were approximately 40% weaker when limiting the covid-19 analyses to individuals without chronic respiratory and cardiometabolic diseases at time of blood sampling (panel 7b). there was no evidence of differences in association magnitude according to age (panel 7c) and odd ratios were similar for men and women (panel 7d).finally, we examined the technical repeatability and biological stability of measuring the infectious disease score. the measurement repeatability was high (pearson correlation 0.94 in blind duplicate samples). even though the blood samples were primarily non-fasting, the levels of the infectious disease score were broadly stable over time in repeat visits (pearson correlation 0.61 between baseline and repeat measurements after~4 years; supplementary figure 4 ).by exploring biomarker associations with severe pneumonia risk in the largest metabolomics study to date, we generated a blood biomarker score for infectious disease risk. we demonstrated that this score, comprised of multiple metabolic biomarkers captured in a single measurement, reflects an increased risk for covid-19 hospitalisation a decade prior to the covid-19 pandemic. the overall signatures of biomarker associations were similar for severe covid-19 and severe pneumonia, extending prior reports of a shared risk factor basis (hu et al 2020). exploiting the strong statistical power and time-resolved information for analyses of severe pneumonia, we showed that the very highest levels of the multi-biomarker infectious disease score are strongly indicative of risk for severe pneumonia. the risk elevation observed in relation to severe pneumonia events occurring after 7-11 years closely matched that of severe covid-19, where all events happened a decade after blood sampling. yet, a preventive screening for covid-19 risk would require more short-term prediction; when we confined analyses to severe pneumonia events occuring during the first 2 years, the risk elevation for individuals with high levels of the multi-biomarker infectious disease score was 8 fold compared to people with low levels. that is 3 times stronger than that observed for long-term risk of severe pneumonia. by analogy, if a similar enhancement in short-term risk extend to severe covid-19, then our results indicate potential applications for more personalised covid-19 prevention efforts, in particular among middle-aged individuals without prevalent respiratory or cardiometabolic disease. such a predictive tool would considerably extend our detection of covid-19 risk beyond the current notion for older persons and those with adverse health conditions. we observed multiple blood biomarkers, commonly linked with risk for cardiovascular disease and diabetes (soininen et al 2015 , würtz et al 2017 , holmes et al 2018 , ahola-olli et al 2019 , to be predictive of the risk for both severe pneumonia and severe covid-19. the overall pattern of biomarker changes followed a characteristic molecular signature reflective of increased risk for severe infectious disease. the biomarkers span multiple metabolic pathways, including low lipoprotein lipids, impaired fatty acid balance, decreased amino acid levels and high inflammation. several of these biomarkers have also been related to frailty and risk for all-cause mortality in large prospective cohort studies (ritchie et al 2015 , deelen et al 2019 . the biological mechanisms explaining why these biomarkers reflect future risk for both chronic and infectious diseases are 9/15 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 3, 2020. . odds ratio for severe covid−19 (95% ci), per 1−sd increment in infectious disease score b (a) odds ratios with severe covid-19 (defined as pcr-positivediagnosis in hospital; 195 cases out of 92 647 individuals) for 37 clinically validated biomarkers measured by nmr metabolomics. (b) odds ratio with severe covid-19 for the multi-biomarker infectious disease score. biomarkers included in the infectious disease score are marked by #. odds ratios are per 1-sd increment in the biomarker levels. models are adjusted for age, sex, and assessment centre. biomarker associations with severe pneumonia (y-axis) plotted against the corresponding associations with severe covid-19 (x-axis). the odds ratio, with adjustment for age, sex, and assessment centre, for each of the 37 clinically validated biomarkers in the nightingale nmr metabolomics panel is given with 95% confidence intervals in vertical and horizontal error bars. the dashed line denotes the diagonal. odds ratio for severe covid−19 (95% ci), highest vs. lowest quintile of infectious disease score q q men women men and women separately (a) odds ratios with severe covid-19 after additional adjustment for bmi, smoking status, prevalent respiratory and cardiometabolic diseases. (b) odds ratios with severe pneumonia in study participants with and without chronic cardiometabolic disease conditions at time of blood sampling. (c) odds ratios by age tertiles at the time of the covid-19 pandemic. (d) odds ratios for men and women separately. models are adjusted for age, sex and assessment centre. the left-hand side shows the odds ratio per 1-sd increment in the multi-biomarker infectious disease score, and the right-hand side the odds ratios for individuals in the upper vs lower quintiles of the score.poorly understood, but we note that the observational nature of our study does not inform whether the biomarkers are causally contributing to increase the risk, or if they are merely indirect risk markers.to capture the predictive information of the biomarker profile in a single metric, we used machine learning to derive an 'infectious disease score' composed of the weighted sum of 25 biomarkers. the strongest weight was attributed to the inflammatory marker glyca, but we caution against interpreting the relative importance from the weights, due to high correlation between the biomarkers. the shared pattern of biomarker associations for severe pneumonia and severe covid-19, and the coherent results for the multi-biomarker infectious disease score with long-term risk, may suggest that the overall molecular signature of biomarker changes reflects an inherent susceptibility to a more severe infectious disease course (bonafe et al 2020). the biomarker associations with risk for severe pneumonia were largely independent of prevalent disease. in particular, the prominent elevation of severe pneumonia risk in the upper tail of the multi-biomarker infectious disease score was observed even when limiting analyses to individuals without many chronic respiratory and cardiometabolic diseases. the corresponding association with severe covid-19 was more attenuated, but wide confidence intervals make it difficult to infer whether prevalent diseases could potentially confound the multi-biomarker infectious disease score to a larger extent than for severe pneumonia. however, studies on the entire uk biobank sample suggest that most prevalent diseases are equally strongly associated with long-term risk for pneumonia as with severe covid-19 (ho et al 2020) .most biomarker studies and omics analyses on covid-19 have focused on characterising the disease pathophysiology and potentially aid prediction of whether already infected patients progress to severe complications (kermali et al 2020 , shen et al 2020 , messner et al 2020 . a novelty of the present study is the use of metabolic profiling of pre-covid-19 blood samples that allowed us to explore the potential for identification of high-risk individuals. yet, even with 105 000 samples analysed and covid-19 case numbers consistent with per capita prevalence in the uk, we had modest statistical power for the individual biomarker associations with severe covid-19, and to explore nonlinear effects. to overcome this limitation, we took advantage of the well-powered biomarker associations with severe pneumonia. we observed prominent risk elevation for severe pneumonia in the extreme tail of the multi-biomarker infectious disease score, whereas the risk elevation was modest for approximately four fifth of the study population. these features could aid establishing high-risk threshold for potential preventative screening applications if results generalise to severe covid-19. the technical repeatability for measuring the infectious disease score was high, further supporting potential screening applications. the biological stability of the multi-biomarker score measured years apart was similar to that for cholesterol testing, reflecting the modifiable nature of the metabolic biomarkers but still indicating a stronger stability over time than many inflammatory markers.our study has both strengths and limitations. strengths include the large sample size, which enabled the analysis of risk for severe covid-19 based on pre-pandemic blood samples from general population settings. however, the uk biobank study participants are not fully representative of the whole uk population (fry et al 2017) ; although this is generally not a concern for investigating risk associations (keyes and westreich 2019), it does limit power to explore effects of ethnicity and old age. we used the widely employed nightingale metabolomics platform, which enables absolute quantification of biomarker concentrations in a low-cost and scalable setup. while other metabolomics assays may give more molecular resolution, the panel of 37 biomarkers in the nightingale metabolomics platform has been approved for diagnostic applications and is already used in individual person applications in finland. limitations include the decade long duration from blood sampling to the covid 19 pandemic. while this limits inference on how well the biomarkers predict short-term risk for severe covid-19, our analogy with long-term risk for severe pneumonia indicates that the time lag likely attenuates the biomarker associations substantially. conversely, the markedly strong associations for short-term risk of severe pneumonia lead us to speculate that similar enhancements in association magnitudes could also hold for severe covid-19. this should however be further tested, in particular in light of the bacterial origin of many severe pneumonia cases and the respiratory viral origin of covid 19. weaker biomarker associations for severe covid-19 compared to severe pneumonia may also arise from the uk biobank covid-19 data being influenced by ascertainment bias in terms of differential healthcare seeking and differential testing, whereas severe pneumonia is anticipated to have nearly complete case ascertainment (ho et al 2020) . the currently available data on inpatient status of covid-19 cases may further be ascertained as more detailed hospital records become available, and analyses can be updated to cover more granular assessment related to covid-19 severity status.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 3, 2020. .in conclusion, a molecular signature of perturbed blood biomarker levels is associated with the risk for both severe pneumonia and covid-19 hospitalisation, in samples collected a decade before the pandemic. a multibiomarker score that captures the molecular signature in a single measurements is predictive of risk for severe covid-19, even when adjusting for existing disease conditions. if the risk elevation observed in the upper tail of the multi-biomarker score extend from severe pneumonia to severe covid-19, then it provides tantalising evidence to support screening applications for identification of seemingly healthy high-risk individuals, including targeted social distancing and eventual prioritisation for early vaccination. even if the positive predictive value of the multi-biomarker score is modest, so that many people classified to the high-risk category will not develop severe covid-19, the socioeconomic cost of targeting this group for personalised shielding should be balanced against the immense costs of wider lock-downs and the dire health consequences of the alternative.in early december 2019, the coronavirus disease (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) first emerged in wuhan, china. as of may 10th, 2020, a total of over 4 million covid-19 cases and 280,000 deaths have been reported globally, reflecting the raised infectivity and severity of this virus. amongst hospitalised covid-19 patients, there is a high prevalence of established cardiovascular disease (cvd). there is evidence showing that covid-19 may exacerbate cardiovascular risk factors and preexisting cvd or may lead to cardiovascular complications. with intensive care units operating at maximum capacity and such staggering mortality rates reported, it is imperative during this time-sensitive covid-19 outbreak to identify patients with an increased risk of adverse outcomes and/or myocardial injury. preliminary findings from covid-19 studies have shown the association of biomarkers of acute cardiac injury and coagulation with worse prognosis. while these biomarkers are recognised for cvd, there is emerging prospect that they may aid prognosis in covid-19, especially in patients with cardiovascular comorbidities or risk factors that predispose to worse outcomes. consequently, the aim of this review is to identify cardiovascular prognostic factors associated with morbidity and mortality in covid-19 and to highlight considerations for incorporating laboratory testing of biomarkers of cardiovascular performance in covid-19 to optimise outcomes.prognostic value of cardiovascular biomarkers in covid-19: a reviewsepsis is one of the leading fatal causes of critical injured and ill patients all over the world. despite recent advances in comprehensive management of trauma patients, sepsis is still a life-threatening condition with poor outcome. the risk factors of patients for the development of sepsis usually refer to their physiological characteristics, underlying illnesses and clinical treatment backgrounds. the patients with one or more of these factors are susceptible to sepsis. the most vulnerable populations for sepsis are the elderly and infants, patients with chronic diseases, patients with severe trauma and burns, those who are immunocompromised or receiving immunosuppressive therapy, and malnourished and debilitatedbiomarkers are molecular indicators that help doctors diagnose illnesses, predict the outcome or identify which people are susceptible. biomarkers, should be some quantifiable measurements of biological homeostasis and by defining the normal status can provide a frame of reference for predicting abnormal or pathogenic processes [2] , and make an impact on clinical decision making in time. most commonly proposed sepsis and infection biomarkers including c-reactive protein (crp), procalcitonin (pct) [5, 6] , cytokines (tnf-α, il-1, il-6, il-10, osteopontin) [7, 8] , chemokines [macrophage migration inhibitory factor (mif), high-mobility-group box 1 (hmgb1)] [9, 10] , soluble receptor [soluble triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 1 (strem-1), soluble urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (supar)] [11, 12] etc.given the complicated pathophysiology in sepsis which involves hundreds of mediators or single molecules, it is unlikely to identify one single biomarker which is able to satisfy all the existing needs and expectations in sepsis research and management. crp, for example, is frequently used to assess the presence of infection and sepsis [2] , and there is a positive correlation between its plasma level and the risk of organ dysfunction and death [13, 14] . however, plasma concentrations of crp may increase during minor infection and do not adequately reflect the severity of infection, or remain at a high level for several days, even overstay the infection [2] . besides, crp may experience an increase during the inflammation caused by noninfectious etiologies, such as tumor, tissue necrosis or operation, which explains its nonspecificity as an early stage sepsis biomarker. meanwhile, pct, perceived as the most potential biomarker, is listed as one of the diagnostic criteria for sepsis [15] . a recent meta-analysis of pct that included 30 studies found mean sensitivity and specificity of 0.77 and 0.79 respectively, with the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (auc) was 0.85 [16] . although pct was thought as a helpful biomarker for early diagnosis of sepsis in critically ill patients, it was not suitable to be recommended as the single definitive diagnostic test [16] .therefore, some researchers have put forward that combinations of biomarkers may overcome the limitations mentioned above. in a prospective cohort study including 151 patients with systemic inflammatory response syndrome (sirs), kofoed et al. [17] found that the aucs of six biomarkers-supar (0.5), strem-1 (0.61), mif (0.63), pct (0.72), neutrophil count (0.74), crp (0.81)-for detection of a bacterial cause of inflammation had ranged from 0.5 to 0.81. with method reported by xiong et al. [18] , which discussed the statistical estimation of the optimum linear combination test and the associated maximum area under the roc curve, kofoed got the combined auc of the six-marker test at 0.88. consequently, the six-marker test had a better diagnostic accuracy in detecting bacterial versus nonbacterial causes of inflammation, and significantly greater than that of each single marker. similarly, in another prospective research among the critically ill patients [19] , a 'bioscore' combining the polymorphonuclear neutrophil (pmn) cd64 index together with pct and strem-1 serum levels was put forward to diagnose sepsis and had a better performance with an auc of 0.97 than that of each individual biomarker, and was externally confirmed in the validation cohort with 90.9 % of patients being correctly classified by the very model. although the combination of biomarkers do improve diagnostic sensitivity and specificity, due to the factors of time-consuming, economic cost, the amount of sample, the feasibility of biomarker detection method and so on, it has a limited application in clinical practice and still needs further prospective studies conducted in multicenter on cost-effectiveness.circulating dna, including nuclear dna (ndna) and mitochondrial dna (mtdna), can either actively release or be released passively into the blood stream after rupture or necrosis of host cells [20, 21] . these nucleic acids released in the plasma during sepsis could serve as danger associated molecular patterns (damps) [22] , which make them potential biomarkers for the very condition [23, 24] . a clinical study [22] found that plasma cytokine concentrations, as well as ndna and mtdna levels of septic shock patients were increased at the onset of septic shock and remained elevated. and during the first 5 days of septic shock, ndna levels consistently correlated with plasma cytokine concentrations as well as with the shock-related parameter norepinephrine infusion rate and markers of organ damage (total bilirubin and creatinine). these findings not only indicate a relationship between plasma ndna levels and the inflammatory response, but also demonstrate that ndna levels are associated with markers of shock and organ damage in septic shock patients.genomics, a discipline in genetics and an emerging field, explains physiological or pathophysiological events from the point of view of complete set of dna, including recombinant dna, dna sequencing methods, and bioinformatics to sequence, assemble, and analyze the function and structure of genomes. sepsis can be regarded as a polygenic syndrome initiated by infection. genetics plays a crucial role in both susceptibility and response to infection [25] , and genetic predisposition influences clinical outcomes of infectious diseases [26, 27] .a gene polymorphism is defined as regular occurrence (>1 %) of two or more alleles at a particular chromosome location. several polymorphisms of genes broadly involved in inflammation, immunity, and coagulation have been linked with susceptibility to sepsis, or outcome of sepsis [25] , and have become the focus of most gene association studies of sepsis as well. snp, the most common type of polymorphisms, is a substitution, deletion, or insertion of a single nucleotide occurring in approximately 1 per 1000 base pairs of human dna. snp can lead to an altered protein, a change in the amount of normal protein expression, or no discernible change in protein function [28] . study of snp genotypes in sepsis helps identify potential markers of susceptibility, severity, and clinical outcome. extensive researches on snp genotyping of main genes cd14 [29] [30] [31] [32] , toll like receptors (tlrs) [27, 33] , lipopolysaccharide-binding protein (lbp) [34] , cytokines [26, 33, 35, 36] and coagulation factors [37, 38] -have provided valuable information for sepsis. for example, burn patients with tlr4 and tnf-α polymorphisms were 1.8 times more likely to develop severe sepsis, but none of them were significantly associated with mortality [33] . tlr1 snps are associated with increased mortality in patients with gram-positive sepsis after traumatic injury, which may represent a novel marker of risk for death in critically injured patients [27] . and most recently, it was found that there was a new association between vascular endothelial growth factor (vegf) +936 cc genotype and the risk to develop acute kidney injury (aki) in severe sepsis patients [35] . genome-wide snp genotyping assays allow to detect hundreds of thousands of snps accurately in a single experiment [39, 40] and are expected to be of great applicative prospect in finding novel sepsis susceptibility-associated snp genotypes.in order to evaluate the validity of these studies and translate this concept to the bedside, several important factors have to be kept in mind: potential confounding variables should be recognized and matched; positive association studies and replicate studies should be validated and analyzed on the basis of the primary hypothesis other than multiple comparisons; large scale collaborations and studies on sepsis susceptibility-associated snp genotypes need to be performed for the sake of possible new risk factors at the genetic backgrounds of sepsis development [25, 41] .genes concerning immunity and inflammation are subject to epigenetic regulation [25] , which refers to heritable changes in gene expression that are not related to direct dna sequence changes [42] . dna methylation and histone post-translational modifications play vital roles in the epigenetic control [43] and gene expression, and strongly impact on the host defense responses.sepsis induces epigenetic changes in dendritic cells and lymphocytes rendering the host immune deficiency for a long period after the initial sepsis challenge [44] [45] [46] . late-phase immunosuppression of sepsis is strengthened by a postmortem study [47] . by suppression of proinflammatory gene products and subsequent immune cell activation and proliferation, epigenetic mechanisms are put forward to have an influence on the very stage of sepsis, which may not only provide a better understanding of septic mechanism but also yield important biomarkers [48] .dna methylation, the addition of methyl group to cytosine or adenine nucleotide, is now replacing the biological markers with their high specificity, sensitivity and prognostic efficacy. a retrospective investigation has showed that calcitonin-related polypeptide α (calca) gene promoter methylation varied with different types of preterm bacterial sepsis [49] . based on this finding, another study demonstrated that global dna methylation varied significantly among newborns with sepsis and those without sepsis [50] . more specifically, a recent study analyzed the cpg methylation status in the epigenome of septic and non-septic babies [51] or icu patients [52] . given biological and clinical significance, they found 81 differentially methylated cpgs located in 64 genes, and a panel of differentially methylated protocadherin β (pcdhb) genes that play vital role in leukocyte cell adhesion and wnt signaling pathway. these genes play vital role in calcium dependent cell to cell adhesion and other immunological processes like antigen processing and presentation. in sepsis, suppression of leukocyte cell adhesion and migration may exaggerate disease severity and poor outcome due to multiple organ dysfunctions. therefore, this study provides some novel insights into the role of dna methylation in neonatal sepsis. however, further studies are called for exploring the clinical relevance as well as related therapeutic approaches of the observed findings.all the above mentioned sepsis biomarkers are derived from the development of genomics technology and summarized in table 1 . the immune responses involved in sepsis are so complicated that the exact molecular mechanism remains to be fully elucidated [53] . the balance between pro-inflammatory responses and anti-inflammatory responses is closely related to the expression and regulation of relevant genes [54] . hence, evaluating the key gene expression profiles by high throughput dna chip may reveal the immune status of septic patients. researchers have found specific changes of gene expression with microarray in certain organs and tissues of septic mice model, which including heart [55] , liver, spleen [56] , leucocytes [57] and so on. accordingly, lukaszewsk recruited 92 icu patients who had the risk of developing into sepsis [58] . the mrna expression levels of il-1β, il-6, il-8, il-10, tnf-a, fasl and ccl2 in their blood leukocytes were measured on a daily basis by means of real-time reverse transcription pcr (rt-pcr), and analyzed with a nonlinear technique (neural network analysis). the data correctly predict the onset of sepsis in an average of 83.09 % of patient cases between 1 and 4 days before clinical diagnosis with high sensitivity and selectivity (91.43 and 80.20 %, respectively). sutherland et al. [59] evaluated transcriptional profiles in circulating white blood cells of icu sepsis patients, post-surgical patients and healthy controls with a microarray and multiplex tandem (mt)-pcr. a panel of 42-gene expression markers was identified, by which the prediction of sepsis within a mixed inflammatory population had an auc between 86 and 92 %. sepsis has a unique gene expression profile that is different from uninfected inflammation and becomes apparent prior to the clinical manifestations of sepsis for 0-48 h [60] . in that case, the specific gene expression profile, which may involve the function of innate immunity, cytokine receptors, t cell differentiation as well as the protein synthesis, may make a reference for early diagnosis of sepsis.however, an important limitation of transcriptomics is that it only partially reflects the steady-state mrna abundance, and the degree of mrna abundance is influenced by multiple factors, and does not provide any direct information about gene end products (proteins), nor post-translational modifiers of protein function [61] . when it comes to the sample used as rna source, there is a contradiction. for the whole blood approach, it may be difficult to interpret the confounded data of rna for the reason of the heterogeneity among blood cell populations. as for the cell-specific approach, there is a possibility to miss relevant expression information from other cells due to the complexity of clinical sepsis [61] . it highlights the necessity of linking theory to clinical practice.micrornas (mirnas) is a class of short rnas with 18-25 nucleotides in length which regulate gene expression in a post-transcriptional manner via sequence-specific interaction with target sites in mrna [62] , associated with various physiological and pathological processes. the levels of mirna in serum and plasma are consistent among individuals of the same species, resistant to rnase a digestion, and stable even after the freeze-and-thaw and a long term of storage [63, 64] . the stability of mirna makes it a potentially useful candidate for diagnostic and other clinical applications. although the source of circulating mirna is still unclear, it has been proved that there is a link among a range of diseases, such as circulating mirna and cancer [65, 66] , trauma [67, 68] , acute pancreatitis [69] , and hepatitis [70] .when it comes to sepsis, by using genome-wide mirna profiling with microarray in peripheral blood leukocytes and quantitative rt-pcr, vasilescu [71] found that mir-150 levels were significantly reduced in both leukocytes and plasma of sepsis patients and had a negative correlation with the level of disease severity measured by the sequential organ failure assessment (sofa) score, which made it a biomarker of early sepsis. similarly, zeng [72, 73] investigated the levels of mir-150 and mir-143 in peripheral blood leukocytes in sepsis patients with rt-pcr, and found that the expression levels of mir-150 and mir-143 were significantly decreased in sepsis patients and could reflect the severity of sepsis in certain degree, which not only made it a marker to reflect the situation of inflammatory response, but also made it a prognostic marker in sepsis. recently, higher serum mir-133a levels were found among sepsis patients in icu [74] . as they were significantly correlated with disease severity, classical markers of inflammation and bacterial infection, as well as organ failure, high mir-133a levels were considered as independent biomarkers for unfavorable prognosis of critically ill patients.however, given that the pathophysiological process of sepsis involves a variety of tissues and organs, a simple screen for mirna differentially expressed in leukocytes may omit those secreted by other cells. wang et al. [75] used genome-wide microarray to identify differential serum mirnas in survival and non-survival sepsis patients, and then further validated the differential expressions of mir-297 and mir-574-5p by rt-pcr in a larger group. the serum mir-574-5p together with sepsis stage and sepsis-related organ failure assessment scores has a better predictive capability for the death of sepsis patients. in addition, serum mir-146a and mir-223 were found significantly reduced in septic patients compared with sirs patients and healthy controls which might serve as new biomarkers for sepsis with high specificity and sensitivity [76] . due to our knowledge on serum mirnas is still at a primary stage, the expression level of circulating mirnas at different stages of sepsis and their potential correlation with injured organs need further investigation.to sum up, from the point of view of gene transcription, mirna may undertake the task of diagnosing sepsis in an early stage and evaluating the prognosis, as well as becoming the new target for sepsis therapy.as discussed above, epigenetic factors not only include histone modifications and dna methylation, but also contain non-coding rnas(ncrnas), which have diverse size and can be generated from intergenic regions, introns, or enhancers [45] . lncrnas are transcripts longer than 200 nucleotides and lack protein-coding capacity. peng et al. [77] first discovered the widespread differential expression of lncrnas in response to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) virus infection. accordingly, there is a possible link between lncrnas and the host defense response against infection. lncrna has the potential to become new class of biomarkers and new therapeutic target for infectious diseases. however, as the functions of lncrnas remain largely unexplored, there is a need for future studies on their regulatory role in infection.all the transcriptomics-based biomarkers mentioned above are outlined in table 2 .proteome is the complete set of proteins that can be expressed by the genetic material of an organism. proteomics is the analysis of the expression, localizations, functions, and interactions of proteomes. compared to other immunologic tests, proteomics is a novel method with advantages of high throughput, high sensitivity and specificity. the development of proteomics has allowed for a better understanding of the molecular bases concerning the identification of cell signaling, modifying protein, post-translation modification pathway, as well as the characterization of specific biological markers [78] .proteomics has irreplaceable clinical significance and an expansive application prospect in studies of sepsis biomarkers. in a rabbit sepsis model by intravenous injection of pseudomonas aeruginosa at 24 h after scald, 11 discrepant expression proteins from lymphocyte were found by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight mass spectrometry(maldi-tof ms). they are related with the folding, assembling, transportation and degradation of proteins, signal transmission, inflammation, immunization, energy metabolism, the proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis of cells [79] . in a recent research, 41 differential expressed proteins in the neutrophils from acinetobacter baumannii sepsis rats were identified using two-dimensional electrophoresis and mass spectrometry [80] . they included antioxidant proteins, signaling proteins, cytoskeleton and regulatory proteins, energy metabolism and protease protein, which may play a key role in such kind of sepsis and provide potential clues in early diagnosis and treatment of sepsis.in clinic, ykl-40 was identified with proteomics analysis on a significantly higher expression level in serum samples from sepsis patients and considered as a possible biomarker of sepsis [81] . paugam-burtz et al. [82] used plasma profiling coupling proteinchip array with surface-enhanced laser desorption ionization time-of-fly mass spectrometry (seldi-tof ms) to analyze the plasma of postoperative patients, and found that a combination of five plasma protein peaks may have potential as diagnostic biomarkers of postoperative sepsis in patients undergoing liver transplantation. even so, these proteins remain to be identified and validated in more clinical trials.although many potential sepsis biomarkers have been revealed by genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics, the changes of cellular metabolism in sepsis should be paid attention. metabolomics is an emerging omics technology following genomics and proteomics and focuses on the metabolic products with a molecular weight less than 1000 kd under the physiological or pathological status. it can analyze the biochemical events of cells, tissues or organs and evaluate the disease and its severity. the research methods of metabolomics mainly include nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr), gas chromatography/mass spectra (gc/ms), high performance liquid chromatography/mass spectra (hplc/ms).the development of sepsis involves the reactions of multiple systems on various levels, which has a significant influence on the expression levels and activities of metabolic enzymes. and by detecting the concentration and ratio changes of those metabolites involved, a better understanding of condition and prognosis of sepsis may be achieved at an early stage [83] . metabolic profile of the serum from septic rats with cecal ligation and puncture was achieved with the help of nmr and lc/ms [83] . in the septic rats, especially the non-survivors, many free fatty acids showed a lower level which may be consumed greatly for energy supply in sepsis and may be related with the prognosis of sepsis. moreover, there was a rise of some polyunsaturated fatty acids in the very group, which may have a relationship with the increased anti-inflammatory effect. based on the metabolic profile analysis, a model for outcome predication was built with high sensitivity and specificity, which provided a novel method for sepsis prognosis judgment. nmr-based metabolic profiling revealed the difference of metabolites of energy metabolism and inflammation in lung tissue, bronchoalveolar lavage (bal) fluid, and serum samples between the septic rat and the control rat [84] . in septic rats, creatine concentration increased in all the three types of samples, whereas alanine and phosphoethanolamine concentrations increased only both in lung tissue and in serum. myoinositol increased in lung tissue but decreased in bal fluid. in addition, acetoacetate increased whereas formate decreased in serum. and with the construction of a predictive model for diagnosis of sepsis using partial least-squares discriminant analysis, the preliminary goal of sepsis diagnosis was achieved.the possible sepsis biomarkers screened out from the application of proteomics and metabolomics technologies are summarized in table 3 . sepsis involves sophisticated pathophysiologic changes among various organs and different systems, so that comprehensively identifying sepsis biomarkers and understanding sepsis molecular mechanism from the perspectives of omics may provide valuable information about a more macroscopical and authentic state following infection.the most important issue involved in the researches of sepsis biomarkers is the criteria of septic cases. the golden standard of infection, currently, still depends on the results of clinical microbiology laboratory, which, however, due to the severity of the disease, the load and type or growth capacity of pathogens, and the use of antibiotic treatment may show a negative result while patients has clinical manifestation of infection [85] . or false positive results may present for the reason of contamination. therefore, whether this gold standard is appropriate in sepsis needs further reflection and investigation.there is a lack of effective and united assessment methods for sepsis biomarkers, especially in the multi-centered or multi-index researches. valid evaluation needs to be performed to pick out the ideal diagnostic indicators, those both of high sensitivity and specificity in the field of data statistics and of great practical use in clinical practice.majority studies of sepsis only focus on a single set of omics technology (table 1 ) rather than apply the combination of multiple omics approaches. since different omics may display sepsis mechanism at various levels of a specific molecule or a particular group of sepsis-associated molecules, the comprehensive application of two or more omics may provide integrated information of potential sepsis biomarkers. mapit algorithm (multi analyte pathway inference tool), for example, enables principled integration of epigenomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics data for cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and biomarker discovery [86] .last but not the least, as mentioned above, the lack of a clear insight of the pathophysiology of sepsis process will, to some extent, put off the sepsis biomarker researches [2] . but with the application of state-of-art technology and exploration in a novel view, the progress in sepsis biomarkers will promote awareness and understanding of sepsis.s ince the discovery in 1953 by james d. watson and francis crick that dna and rna provide the code to life, there has been a global effort to understand how the genome sequences of numerous organisms are related to health and disease.the rapidly advancing field of diagnostics, tests used to detect a medical condition or causative pathogen responsible for an infection, will drastically change the practice of veterinary medicine in the near future. the ability to detect nucleic acids has had and still has a major impact on diagnostic processes in clinical medicine. 1 classical pathogen detection and identification are based on culture methodology, biochemical tests, and microscopy. the culture method is still a core technology in many clinical laboratories because it can provide important information about the viability of the pathogen and its susceptibility to therapeutic agents. likewise, the historic gold standard for diagnosing viral infection has been selective cultivation followed by electron microscopy. recovery of the live virus remains a very slow, technically demanding, and expensive diagnostic tool.the development of rapid, accurate, and sensitive diagnostic methods for detecting disease pathogens is fundamental for treating, controlling, and eradicating infectious disease. rapid scientific and technological developments have revolutionized the possibilities of diagnosing and treating disease. researchers now have tools for observation at the level of the atom, to sequence entire genomes, and to understand the molecular basis of disease. 2 recent biotechnological developments in microtechnologies and nanotechnologies have led to the proliferation of new, rapid diagnostic tests that hold promise for the improved management and control of infectious disease in animals. emerging technologies are rapidly being adapted to improve our ability to de-tect new etiological agents, to provide rapid, accurate diagnostic tests for previously difficult infections, and to develop new response-based paradigms for diagnostic testing. molecular tools in particular are advancing toward laboratory-on-chip and fully integrated technologies that are capable of same-day detection and pathotyping of agents in clinical specimens. future diagnostic technologies that are rapid, portable, low cost, and of greater sensitivity/specificity will aid the veterinarian in the early disease detection in a point-of-care setting.scientific advancements over the previous 2 decades have enabled the sensitive detection and characterization of bacterial and viral nucleic acids. amplification technologies (e.g., polymerase chain reaction [pcr] , nucleic acid sequence-based amplification [nasba] ) allow for specific detection of genetic targets. furthermore, technological improvements in sequence determination systems allow for organisms to be fully characterized as to genotype, subtype, variant, mutants, and resistance patterns.for the veterinary clinical laboratory, commercially standardized assays are not readily available. most laboratories offering nucleic amplification tests (nat)-based diagnostics use methods developed inhouse or those adapted from research publications. there is no standardization among these in-house assays or an official regulatory body to monitor quality assurance. differences in laboratory experience and technique, primer and probe combinations, methods of nucleic acid isolation, and control standards contribute to the reproducibility and variability observed among laboratories. 1 assays must be precise and reproducible and have positive and negative controls in place to prevent invalid test results. it is also recommended that these assays have an internal control to validate nucleic acid isolation and to test for amplification inhibitors.in a blind study, veterinary laboratories offering nat diagnostics for psittacine circovirus were evaluated. 3 the findings of this investigation revealed that accuracy was 100% for 2 laboratories, 95% for 2 laboratories, and 71% for 1 laboratory, whereas 1 laboratory had a test specificity of 20%. 3 the authors concluded that although results from most laboratories were accurate, both false-positive and false-negative results were reported by at least 2 laboratories. they also concluded that 1 laboratory may be generating large numbers of falsely reported results. veterinarians must realize that the accuracy of re-sults depends completely on the accuracy of the operating standards of the individual laboratory. laboratories should always strive for the highest standards of assay precision. differences in assay precision make it difficult to compare data from different laboratories without defined standards.another consideration in nat-based diagnostics concerns sample quality. preservation of sample integrity is essential for accurate test results, especially if detection or quantification of rna is desired. unlike dna, rna is unstable and is readily degraded by naturally occurring endonucleases (rnases) that are present in the environment and tissues. samples for rna testing should be handled with gloves to prevent contamination with rnases present on the skin. samples for rna testing should be promptly submitted to the laboratory or stored in a freezer at ϫ80°c until forwarded for testing. samples may also be treated with buffers designed to minimize rna degradation, with several commercial additives being available for this purpose, but their use varies among laboratories. it is best to consult the specific laboratory for their protocol for sample submission. although dna tends to be more stable than rna, naturally occurring endonucleases that degrade dna do exist. test samples should be aseptically collected and refrigerated or frozen until submission. the ability of pcr to detect extremely low levels of dna in a submitted patient sample results in the very real potential of falsepositive test results due to dna contamination.pcr is a technique that started as a research tool and was eventually integrated into medical diagnostic applications. in 1971, kleppe demonstrated that dna could be artificially replicated in vitro with a dna polymerase enzyme. 4 combined with methods allowing for the synthesis of dna oligonucleotides, kary mullis developed the technique of pcr in 1983 and won the nobel prize in chemistry for his work. 5 pcr has become one of the most widely used technologies in veterinary research and molecular diagnostics of infectious disease. the wide range of applications include the detection of dna or rna derived from infectious bacterial, viral, mycoplasmal, parasitic, protozoal, or fungal organisms; evaluation of specific genetic defects; and quantization of cytokines and cellular growth factors. pcr testing can be used on a wide range of samples, including tissue from biopsies or necropsies, blood, feces, tissue, soil, cerebrospinal fluid, and swabs of mucosal surfaces. pcr uses the highly specific molecular recognition ability of watson-crick base pairing to provide the selectivity needed for a nucleic acid probe to bind to a targeted dna sequence and allow for its exponential amplification. specific fragments of dna are replicated by cyclical heating and cooling through repeated temperature stages in a thermal cycler unit (fig 1) . each cycle can double the amount of existing target dna. repeatedly amplifying the target sequence over 30 to 40 cycles theoretically allows for millions (2 30 ) of dna copies to be produced. pcr assays are thus extremely sensitive. they are capable of detecting femtograms (10 ϫ15 g) of target dna sequence in a large mixture, or up to a microgram (10 ϫ6 g) of nontarget dna. the dna obtained at the end of the reaction can be used for a variety of applications, including sequencing, cloning, or as a probe for in situ hybridization.the nested pcr consists of 2 sequential pcr amplifications. the product from the first-round pcr is used as the template for a second pcr amplification. a second set of primers, internal to the first set, amplify a smaller fragment of dna within the first-round product. in regular pcr, primers may bind to incorrect regions of the dna, giving unexpected amplification products. the benefit of nested pcr is that increased specificity is achieved through confirmation of the correct primer binding during the first pcr amplification process. the nested pcr is more sensitive than conventional single-round qualitative pcr.the implementation of nucleic acid technology into routine diagnostics has greatly advanced with the introduction of real-time pcr. 1 real-time pcr amplification uses the detection and quantification of a fluorescent reporter molecule whose signal increases in proportion to the amount of target amplification product generated. basic methods involve the detection of a dna-binding dye, such as sybr green (molecular probes, eugene, or usa). the dye intercalates between double-stranded dna formed in the pcr reaction and, when exposed to an excitation source, fluoresces. a laser scanner detects the fluorescence emitted by dye-impregnated dna strands formed through the pcr amplification. software traces this fluorescence as a running graph as the amplification reaction in real time (fig 2) .a more specific strategy for real-time assays includes the use of a confirmatory probe sequence that matches part of the amplification product. these real-time amplicon detection technologies include taqman (applied biosystems, inc., foster city, ca usa) or hydrolysis probes, 6 molecular beacon technology, 7 and hybridization probes. 8 fluorescence is only detected if the probe is bound to the amplified target, thereby enhancing specificity to an already highly specific assay. these probes do not react with primer-dimers or other nonspecific products that may be generated during the pcr reaction as may occur with sybr green reactions. however, a welldesigned and optimized sybr green amplification is a very effective testing technology. unlike taqman probes, the sybr green reporter remains intact so a melt curve analysis can be performed on the amplification product. melt curve analysis measures the dissociation characteristics of doublestranded dna during heating. melt curve analysis is sensitive enough to detect single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snp) and can distinguish between homozygous and heterozygous gene alleles by the dissociation patterns produced (fig 3) . the advancement of this technology to produce highresolution melt analysis will provide higher sensitivity for snp detection within entire dye-stained amplicons for genomic analysis.the main advantage of real-time detection is that it accurately quantifies the number of rna or dna copies present in the test sample. real-time technologies can measure dna presence over a large dynamic range, providing important information regarding the magnitude of viral involvement within a test sample. this information is helpful in distinguishing clinically active infections from transient environmental exposures. quantification also aids in the treatment of patients with chronic infectious disease and monitoring disease progression and resolution. 9 standard pcr techniques cannot be used to detect the presence of rna-based viruses in clinical samples. the direct amplification of rna in pcr systems is not possible because of the polymerase enzyme's inability to synthesize dna from an rna template. the inability to synthesize dna from an rna template is overcome by the use of a reverse-transcriptase (rt) enzyme before the pcr reaction. in rt-pcr, rna is converted into a complementary dna (cdna) strand by an rna-dependent dna polymer-ase (reverse transcriptase). the cdna produced is then used as a template in a conventional pcr reaction. it is important that all genomic dna within the test sample be destroyed before the rt-pcr to prevent masking the presence of cdna derived from the rt step.in addition to diagnosing rna viral infections in an individual patient, rt-pcr has been applied to monitoring disease in flocks and large groups of animals. environmental air-sampling, referred to as "sniffing," was paired with real-time rt-pcr to detect exotic newcastle disease virus in commercial poultry operations in 2003. 10 the same approach was successfully used to detect h6n2 influenza in commercial quail. this methodology offers the advantage of detecting virus in contaminated environments by collecting airborne particulates, including virus comingled with dust and debris, without having to handle individual birds.pcr currently is still the main target amplification technique used in both research and diagnostic laboratories. a second target amplification technique, known as nasba, was specifically developed for the quantitative amplification of rna targets such as retroviruses and other rna viruses. 11,12 nasba's main advantage is that it works at isothermic conditions and can give quicker and more sensitive results than pcr. it has been used to develop rapid diagnostic tests for several pathogenic viruses with singlestranded rna genomes, including influenza a, 13 footand-mouth disease virus, 14 and severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-associated coronavirus. 15loop-mediated isothermal pcr (lamp) is a 1-step amplification reaction that amplifies a target dna sequence with high sensitivity and specificity under isothermal conditions. lamp uses a dna polymerase with inner and outer primers that recognizes 6 separate regions within a target dna sequence. the assay has high specificity because the amplification reaction only occurs when all 6 regions within the target dna are correctly recognized by the primers. 9 lamp exhibits less sensitivity to inhibitory substances present in biological samples than regular pcr.lamp has been applied to pathogens that cause food-borne diseases. testing kits that use this technology are commercially available for detecting salmonella spp., legionella spp., listeria spp., verotoxinproducing escherichia coli, and campylobacter spp.many amplification methods, including pcr, ligase chain reaction, nasba, and strand displacement amplification, are used in commercially available diagnostic test kits. these diagnostic test kits are promoted as providing a rapid, sensitive, and specific detection of important pathogens, especially those that are not readily identified by more conventional methods. conventional detection and identification of noroviruses are performed by electron micros-copy, which is less sensitive and more time consuming than nat diagnostics.molecular-based testing for multiple pathogens in a large number of animals is expensive. the development of new variations of pcr have allowed for simultaneously performing multiple tests on a single diagnostic sample, thereby affording some savings on a per-test basis. in multiplex pcr, multiple primer pairs are used to amplify more than one gene or pathogen in a single pcr reaction. multiplex assays must be carefully designed for specific primer selection. primers selected must be to regions that are uniquely different and characterized by low affinity for primer-to-primer interactions.nucleic amplification technologies will continue to be a benchmark for pathogen detection in veterinary diagnostics. currently, there are 3542 reference sequences for 2416 viral genomes and 40 reference sequences for viroids in genbank, an open-access public database of nucleotide reference sequences (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/viruses/ viruses.html).the exponential replication of dna afforded by the pcr process allows for excellent diagnostic sensitivity and specificity. however, the instability and variability inherent in molecular enzymatic processes limit the application of this technology outside an institutional setting to a research facility or dedicated molecular laboratory. new technologies such as the lab-on-a-chip have been developed and have potential in veterinary point-of-care diagnostics. defined as a miniaturized analytical laboratory constructed on a small chip, this technology has promising applications when combined with nat diagnostic processes. both pcr and lamp assays have been used to facilitate the development of labon-a-chip-based nat devices. 16 such devices can offer molecular-based testing in a rapid, effective, low-cost, and disposable automatic format as a pointof-care diagnostic tool.the concept of the dna or oligonucleotide array began in the mid-1980s as a derivative of the southern blot technique in which dna fragments are linked to a substrate and probed with a known gene or target dna sequence. the "probe" refers to the dna that is immobilized on a solid support such as a glass slide or a silicon wafer, whereas "target" refers future veterinary diagnostics to the pool of nucleic acids whose identity or abundance is being detected.both high-density microarrays for high-throughput screening applications and lower-density microarrays have been developed for diagnostic applications. 17 microarray technology represents an important tool for the investigation of various areas of biology, mainly because of its ability to simultaneously detect and analyze thousands of different genes in a single trial.a dna microarray is a miniaturized form of dot blot in a predefined, ordered fashion at a high density. 17 it consists of an arrayed series of thousands of microscopic spots of dna oligonucleotides, each containing picomoles (10 ϫ12 moles) of a specific dna sequence. the dna spots (gene chips) are attached in an equidistant, ordered arrangement to a solid surface, such as a glass, plastic, or silicon chip. alternative microarray platforms include polyacrylamide gel pads, microsphere beads, 3-dimensional films, and solid-state electronics. 18 microarrays may have from a hundred to thousands of test sites that can range in size from 10 to 500 m. dna arrays are different from other types of microarrays only because they either measure dna or use dna as part of the detection system.hybridization is performed with corresponding probes attached to the solid support. these can be cdnas, oligonucleotides of varying length, or genomic sequences that are either radioactively or fluorescently labeled. artificial single-stranded dna or rna ligands, short oligonucleotides or peptide molecules that can be generated against amino acids, drugs, proteins, and other molecules are called aptamers. 19 aptamers bind to a specific target molecule with high affinity and selectivity ranging from the micromolar to the nanomolar level, and they can discriminate between closely related targets. 16, 20 a high-density array can be generated by applying aptamers to the substrate with robotic pins or inkjet technology, or by an in situ photolithographic synthesis process. these techniques allow for the production of a high-density chip containing thousands of short probes targeted at different loci within a single gene or multiple genomes. high-density microarrays may have up to 106 test sites in a 1 ϫ 2 cm 2 area. 17 the core principle of dna microarrays is based on hybridization probing, the property of complementary nucleic acid sequences to specifically pair with each other by forming hydrogen bonds between nucleotide base pairs. hybridization occurs between 2 cdna sequences such as the nucleic acid probes immobilized on the solid surface of a chip and the mobile dna, cdna, or messenger rna (mrna) sample. a high number of complementary base pairs in a nucleotide sequence allows for tighter noncovalent bonding between the 2 strands to occur. probetarget hybridization is usually quantified through the detection of a fluorophore, silver, or chemiluminescence-labeled target. after the hybridization step is complete, the microarray is scanned. the fluorescent tags are excited by a laser, read by a microscopic camera, and computer integrated into a digital image of the array. software analyzes each microarray spot calculating the red-to-green fluorescence ratio and subtracting out background data. the nature and relative abundance of nucleic acid sequences in the target are determined. dna microarrays have been used for the detection of infectious and genetic disease, cancer diagnostics, and forensic and genetic identification purposes. microarray systems are very definitive and highly scalable because hundreds to tens of thousands of possible dna elements can be interrogated in a single experiment.examination of animal and zoonotic pathogens typically focuses on 3 objectives: (1) determining the presence or absence of a pathogen; (2) determining pathogen viability; and (3) enumerating the pathogenic agents of a specific disease. dna microarrays are well suited for determining the presence or absence of specific pathogens. dna microarrays also permit relatively rapid interrogation of a clinical sample against thousands of genetic targets, allowing for simultaneous detection and discrimination among hundreds of pathogenic agents of veterinary interest. 18 however, dna microarrays are not very useful in inferring pathogen viability.the first important step in microarray-based pathogen detection is probe selection and design. many issues associated with probe design for dna microarrays can impact the overall fidelity of the assay and particularly the levels of specificity and sensitivity. one of the first applications of a bacterial high-density dna probe array was for the diagnostic capability of identifying mycobacteria spp. 21 using rt-pcr and a dna microarray based on the mycobacterial heat shock protein, this technology was used for the rapid identification of different mycobacterial species in mixed infections 22 and array-based genotyping of mycobacterial organisms. 23 other applications to bacterial infections have included the diagnosis of salmonella spp., escherichia coli o157:h7, mycoplasma hyopneumoniae, gene profiling of pasteurella multocida, mycobacterium avium subsp, paratuberculosis spp., rhodococcus equi, borrelia burgdorferi, staphylococcus aureus enterotoxin genes and clostridium perfringens toxin genes, bacillus anthracis, c. perfringens, brucella spp., bordetella pertussis and b. parapertussis, and actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae. 24 microarray technology has also been used to generate a "lipopolysaccharide array" against the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria. monoclonal antibodies specific for escherichia coli o111, e. coli o157, francisella tularensis, and salmonella enteric serovar typhimurium o antigens were used to evaluate the assay. the detection limit of antibodies was reported to be 10 ng/ml, which is 100-fold more sensitive than conventional immunofluorescence assays. 24the diagnosis of viral diseases requires the identification of the viral pathogen in the clinical sample and a subsequent correlation between the identified virus and the clinical disease. conventional methods of viral detection include isolation and in vitro culture, and immunological methods such as direct fluorescence antibody or enzyme immunoassay. with some viral disease agents, identification is readily accomplished. other viruses (e.g., norovirus), however, are refractory to in vitro culture. immunological methods, dependent on the quality and availability of antibodies, may also be ineffective for identifying viruses with constantly evolving serotypes. although pcr has revolutionized viral diagnostics by increasing detection sensitivity and specificity, the maximum number of viruses detectable in a single assay is relatively small. in diseases where different viruses are present or where no etiologic agent has been identified, the value of these conventional methods may be limited.unlike pcr technology where the target agent must be known to use specific test primers, microarrays can allow for the rapid diagnosis of multiple pathogenic agents in disease outbreaks and epidemics of unknown etiology. one of the first studies in multiple pathogen detection used a microarray chip to discern 2 viral pathogens, porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus and foot and mouth disease virus. 25 the microarray detection device demonstrated rapid and accurate detection of these 2 specific viruses. in another study, a low-density microarray, using 15 capture-oligonucleotides targeting the conserved influenza matrix gene, accu-rately subtyped h1n1, h3n2, and h5n1 influenza a viruses in less than 12 hours. 26, 27 researchers led by joseph derisi of the university of california at san francisco have combined genome databases of sequenced viruses with dna microarray technology. 28 using available sequence data from viral genomes, they designed a long oligonucleotide viral microarray. the microarray was capable of simultaneously detecting hundreds of viruses in a single clinical sample. the approach used randomized primers in an rt-pcr to amplify any viral rna that was present in the clinical sample. the pcr product was then hybridized to the microarray comprising 1600 probes, representing nearly 140 respiratory virus genomes. viruses that were represented on the microarray were readily detected and identified by specific hybridization to the appropriate oligonucleotides. this methodology enabled the simultaneous detection of hundreds of viruses, including essentially all respiratory tract viruses. this microarray system greatly expanded the spectrum of detectable viruses in a single assay while simultaneously providing the capability to discriminate among viral subtypes. similarly, sengupta and colleagues developed microarrays with 476 probes to distinguish among various influenza viruses. 29 although initial efforts were focused on only a few hundred viruses, derisi and colleagues devised a microarray representing all known human, animal, aquatic, and plant viruses called the virochip. the most highly conserved genomic sequences from within viral families were chosen for representation on the microarray. viruses represented included double-and single-stranded dna viruses, retroviruses, and both positive-and negative-stranded rna viruses. dna fragments of virtually every virus ever discovered, about 22,000 different viral sequences, were represented on the virochip.the virochip greatly accelerates the ability of researchers to diagnose viral infections and identify new viral epidemics within a very short time. this technology can help to rapidly identify known viruses and classify new ones based on their genetic makeup. the virochip has been credited with the rapid recognition of a novel coronavirus in 2003, the etiologic agent responsible for sars. 30 although the virochip represents sequences from known referenced viruses, equally important is its potential to facilitate viral discovery in diseases of unknown etiology. as new viruses evolve, they still maintain certain characteristic-conserved regions in the viral genome. by using highly conserved sequences from all known viral taxonomy, the viro-chip can identify similar sequences in previously future veterinary diagnostics unknown agents and newly evolved viruses within recognized families.proventricular dilation disease (pdd) has been diagnosed in psittacine birds for the past 40 years, but the underlying etiologic cause has not been identified. although the disease exhibits characteristics of a viral infection and numerous viral etiologies have been proposed, confirmation of a definitive agent remained elusive. in 2008, kistler and coworkers used the virochip to interrogate samples from 2 pdd case/control series collected on 2 different continents. 31 tissues from birds with confirmed pdd displayed a novel bornavirus signature in 62.5% of the pdd cases and none of the control tissues. the bornavirus-positive samples were further confirmed by virus-specific pcr testing and the complete genome sequenced. currently, 7 genotypes of the avian bornavirus have been identified.microarray-based viral detection offers a powerful alternative for determination of viral subtypes. classic serotyping of viruses is tedious and limited by availability of antisera. conserved array elements are capable of broadly detecting many, if not all, viral serotypes. unique hybridization patterns are often observed for different viral serotypes, which enables rapid identification.because of the high resolution of microarray hybridization, it will see future application in the study of viral pathogenesis and diagnosis of veterinary diseases. microarray hybridization is a viable approach for detecting unsequenced or uncharacterized viruses and novel virus discovery. it can be used to differentiate among viral subtypes and provide important information on how a new virus relates to those that have been classified. application of this type of information can provide clues about viral origin and possible treatment strategies. this comprehensive and unbiased analysis of viral prevalence in a given biological sample also increases the feasibility of introducing molecular testing for viruses that are easily detected using classical diagnostic testing methods. 1when target nucleic acids are abundant, then direct microarray interrogation of pathogen targets is achievable in the absence of amplification. 18 direct hybridization strategies involve extracting rna or dna from the sample and applying the material directly to a microarray without additional amplification. direct hybridization provides the least bias in gene detection, but also has the lowest level of ana-lytical sensitivity. another strategy bypasses these limitations and yields an extremely broad-reaching and unbiased detection strategy. it uses microarrays composed of carefully selected viral sequences, coupled to a random pcr amplification. one approach is to amplify one or more universal genes (e.g., 16s rrna, 18s rrna, 23s rrna genes) and to screen for pathogen-specific polymorphisms. greisen and coworkers were one of the first groups to amplify fragments of the 16s rrna gene using group-specific pcr primers and, with southern blots that had pathogenspecific probes, identified pathogenic bacteria in cerebrospinal fluid. 32 microarrays can be used in a similar fashion to interrogate pcr products to distinguish between multiple pathogens. a second pcr strategy is to use multiplex pcr to amplify a number of discreet, pathogen-specific genetic markers that are subsequently detected on a dna microarray.simultaneous detection of multiple pathogens should be viewed in the context of an entire analytical process that spans sample collection to final testing. 18 physical differences between target organisms often require very different strategies to extract nucleic acids for analysis after which the dna microarray can then serve as the actual detection device.the reader is referred to the review by wang for an encompassing review of microarray technology. 33 in the area of microarrays for microbiological applications, several general reviews are available. specific reviews are available on dna microarray analyses of host-pathogen interactions 34 and the use of microarrays for the molecular diagnosis of mycobacteria spp. 35 generalized reviews in the medical-related areas include microarrays for disease gene discovery, 36 microarrays in medicine, 37 and microarrays for molecular pathology. 38early methods of dna sequencing, determining the nucleotide order of a dna segment, gene, or genome, were costly and slow. although the first sequence of a human gene locus was published in 1990, 39 it took 10 years to report the sequence of the entire human genome in 2000. 40 the recent development of cost-effective, high-throughput sequencing now allows for efficient, full sequencing of an organism's genome. as dna sequence data have become more available, the field of comparative genomics has rapidly progressed. attention has turned to generating whole genome assemblies and genomics resources for veterinary species. in july 2005, a publicly accessible annotated genome assem-bly of the domestic dog, 41 and subsequently a draft sequence of the domestic cat, 42, 43 were released. with complete genome sequences now available for the dog, cat, and horse, 39 the tools are now available to research very specific questions about animal genomes and cancer.dna microarrays have technologically advanced genomics research. 44 dna microarrays are used to detect dna or rna (most commonly as cdna after rt) and are referred to as gene expression analysis or expression profiling. 26 gene expression analysis is based on the assumption that cells react to changes in their environment by increasing or decreasing transcription of appropriate genes. these changes in expression levels can be detected or quantified by using specific scientific methodology such as realtime rt-pcr and microarray technology.the use of a distinct dna array for gene expression profiling was first described in 1987 to identify genes whose expression was modulated by interferon. 45 determining the level, or volume, at which a certain gene is expressed is called microarray expression analysis. miniaturized microarrays were first applied to expression profiling in 1995. 46 in veterinary medicine, genome libraries have allowed for the development of new, high-density microarrays to facilitate whole genome and gene-targeted profiling at high resolution and throughput. 47 new, high-density microarrays have rapidly advanced our knowledge and understanding of pet and food animal genomes and have fostered the development of a rapidly growing class of molecular diagnostics focused on diagnostic testing for genetic traits encoded by genomic dna.scientists can use a microarray to examine the expression of hundreds or thousands of genes within a single sample, in a single assay. through computer analysis, the amount of mrna bound to each site on the array is precisely measured, generating a profile of global gene expression within the cell. once researchers have characterized the expression patterns of various genes involved in many diseases, the expression pattern of cdna from an individual can be hybridized to determine if it matches the expression pattern of a known disease. if a gene is over expressed in a certain disease state, then more sample cdna, compared with control cdna, is detected. in microarray comparative genomic hybridization, the increased or decreased expression of a particular gene(s) is determined. a change in the number of copies of a particular gene may correlate to a certain disease state. microarrays may also be used in veterinary diagnostics by comparing gene expression of infected cells or tissues with that of uninfected cells or tissues. expression profiling can also identify genes whose expression is changed in response to disease-causing agents. 48 revealing how multiple genes work together to produce physical and chemical responses and analysis of patterns of coordinated gene expression can help identify genes involved in the development of various diseases.a canine-specific microarray using mrna and expressed sequence tag sequences has been developed. 49 the elucidation of these biological networks (e.g., disease, development, nutrition) and identification of associated molecular mechanisms will allow for the development of more precise diagnostics for these processes. 49dna microarrays can be designed specifically for genotyping, thereby enabling them to measure single base pair changes at many thousands of points throughout a genome. dna microarrays are useful for genotyping point mutations, single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), and short tandem repeats (strs) among alleles within or between populations. 50 snp technology has been diversely applied in areas such as analyzing forensics, measuring disease predisposition, evaluating germ line mutations in individuals and somatic mutations in neoplasias, diagnosing infectious and genetic disease, and diagnosing cancer. once an snp pattern is associated with a particular disease, snp microarrays can be used to test an individual for that disease expression pattern. a determination can be made if the individual is susceptible or at risk of developing that specific disease condition.in sheep, diagnostic microarrays are used to determine specific snps that predispose animals to scrapie, a prion protein disease. individuals with these snps accumulate the prion protein disease cellular protein within their central nervous system. 51initial microarray platforms available for veterinary oncology were genomic and cdna microarrays generated by binding dna fragments onto a glass or silicon surface. more recently, high-density oligonucleotide arrays, where short dna sequences are synthesized directly on the surface of a "chip," have allowed for thousands of features to be represented. dna copy number variation, gene expression levels, and genetic alterations can be determined at a substantially increased resolution.high-density microarrays represent a powerful tool for comparative genomic studies. microarraybased comparative genomic hybridization merges molecular diagnostics with traditional chromosome analysis. 52, 53 applications for high-density microarrays have been extended to many areas of medicine and medical genetics. 54 new syndromes have been discovered, and the phenotypes of existing disease conditions have been expanded.a comparative study of canine chronic myelogenous leukemia showed that dogs diagnosed with chronic myelogenous leukemia also present with a functionally active genetic translocation previously identified in humans. 55 this study resulted in the first molecular cytogenetic test for the presence of a clinically significant genomic alteration in a veterinary cancer.several tests are now available for canine patients to identify oncogenes and clonal lymphocyte populations. 56 these tests can be placed into 3 broad categories: (1) detection of individual mutations in oncogenes, (2) detection of chromosomal translocations, deletions, and duplications, and (3) detection of clonality in lymphoma and leukemia through unique antigen receptor genes of b-and t-cells. each of these testing methods has been used in veterinary medicine on an experimental basis and is now being offered by several laboratories. 56the original emphasis on microarrays was on dna technologies. researchers have exploited the diversity of this technology to further extend applications to the development of protein, antibody, and carbohydrate microarrays. macbeath and schreiber 57 developed the first small-molecule microarray in 1999 and the first protein microarray in 2000. soon afterward, other array types were developed, such as cell arrays, carbohydrate arrays, and proteome arrays.newer microarray formats that developed at the turn of the 21st century provide a host of other biomolecules that can be presented on a chip, including proteins (e.g., whole proteomes, enzymes, antibodies), 58,59 small molecules (e.g., drug-like molecules, peptides, carbohydrates), 60,61 and even whole cells and tissues for simultaneous, multiplexed experimentation. 62within the last decade, protein microarrays have entered the field of proteomic research. 63, 64 pro-teomics is the term used to describe the study of proteins expressed by a genome. technologies that had previously been established for dna microarrays were adapted to the generation of protein arrays with glass slides being initially used as a solid support in planar microarrays. bead arrays or liquid array systems rely on the use of different bead types that can be distinguished either by color, size, or shape. currently, protein microarrays are highly miniaturized and parallelized solid-phase assay systems that use a large number of different capture molecules immobilized in microspots. protein microarray technology has enormous potential for in vitro diagnostics and disease monitoring.protein microarray technology has enormous potential for application within the veterinary diagnostic testing arena. antibodies in an immunoassay format have been widely used and are well established as highly sensitive tools for disease detection. with monoclonal antibody production, it is possible to produce pure and highly specific antibodies against almost any type of antigen. as a next-generation tool, protein arrays in their role as miniaturized, multiplexed immunoassays are perfectly suited for generating a maximum of diagnostically relevant information from very minute samples. 65 protein microarrays offer unparalleled throughput, minimal reagent consumption, and sensitive simultaneous detection of multiple targets. 58 currently, there is rapid advancement of antibody microarrays that have been developed for clinical, biothreat, and point-of-care applications. early applications included the development of a protein microarray with 35 antibodies, which was used to subtype the 20 most common salmonella serovars, 66 and a similar microarray was developed for e. coli. 67 lipopolysaccharide, carbohydrate-based, and whole-cell microarrays have also been used for antibody-based detection of pathogens such as francisella tularensis. 68, 69 liquid array technology has been adapted to the detection of avian influenza (ai) virus antibody in commercial poultry. 70 the assay uses recombinant ai virus nucleoprotein conjugated to microspheres to detect the influenza-specific antibody. the ai virus liquid array has a 99.3% sensitivity and a 94.7% specificity. this liquid array format can theoretically detect 100 different analytes in a single assay. therefore, this technology has the potential to simultaneously detect and subtype all influenza hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins, as well as antibodies specific to the other relevant avian diseases.protein microarrays with high pathogen proteome content offer a valuable platform for highthroughput serology. these antigen microarrays have been used to identify seropositive individuals by using the presence of serum antibodies to detect exposure to a specific pathogen. zhu and coworkers monitored the antibody profiles of patients with sars using protein microarrays containing 82 purified coronavirus proteins. 71 immunoreactivity against the coronavirus nucleocapsid proteins remained high for 120 to 320 days postinfection, which provided a means to check for exposure long after infection has occurred. the integration of dna and protein-based microarray methods may extend the range of rapid clinical diagnostic testing.in protein expression analysis, proteins or biomarkers from complex biological samples are identified and correlated with diagnostic patterns that are unique to specific cancer and disease conditions. the main challenge in the development of biomarker diagnostics is the biological variability among patient samples as well as the large dynamic range of biomarker concentrations. both disease and cancer biomarker discovery (oncoproteomics) has been studied extensively using proteomics. biomarkers have been identified that correlate with bladder cancer, breast cancer, colorectal cancer, esophageal cancer, gastrointestinal stromal tumors, glioma, hepatocellular carcinoma, leukemia, lung cancer, lymphoma, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, prostate cancer, and urothelial carcinoma. 72 protein microarrays designed with hundreds of copies of protein-coding oligonucleotides or "bio-barcodes" can serve to amplify the protein target and are capable of detecting proteins down to attomolar concentrations. 73 besides protein expression analysis, protein microarrays can also be used to determine the functional analysis of proteins, including protein interaction involving immobilized proteins or peptides, low molecular weight compounds, dna, oligosaccharides, tissues, or cells. protein microarrays have been developed for the detection of allergen-specific immunoglobulin e reactivity and detection of specific auto antibodies associated with autoimmune diseases. in the field of autoimmune disease diagnostics, multiplexed assays are currently entering the diagnostic market, 74 and in the future, sets of tumor marker panels may also be applied to monitor treatment therapy for specific disease processes. immunoassay panels have been developed for fertility, cardiac disease, tumors, cytokines and growth factors, cell adhesion molecules, thyroid function, and drug residues. virtually every biological component from diverse small molecules, macromolecules (e.g., dna, proteins), and entire living cells have been placed on microarrays.a biomarker is "a characteristic that is objectively measured and evaluated as an indicator of normal biologic processes, pathogenic processes, or pharmacologic responses to therapeutic intervention." 75 research regarding biomarkers associated with disease has greatly advanced in both the human and veterinary medical fields. the challenge of this information is to determine which marker or combination of markers is optimal for the condition to which they are applied. evidence from research studies suggests that using multiple markers may be superior to using single markers alone. multiple marker combinations provide information of greater diagnostic and prognostic value than any single marker alone.the most promising use of veterinary biomarkers are those used to evaluate cardiovascular disease in dogs and cats. [76] [77] [78] currently, circulating natriuretic peptides are regarded as the most promising markers used in the evaluation of such patients. other markers include those of myocyte injury typified by troponins, markers of myocyte stress (adrenomedullin), matrix metalloproteinases, markers of endothelial function, and markers of inflammation (c-reactive protein). 79 concentrations of some of these substances are known to change in response to heart failure and the treatment of cardiac disease in veterinary patients. 76, 77 clinical application of biomarkers in the future includes the detection of subclinical diseases, diagnosis of acute or chronic syndromes, risk determination, therapy selection, and monitoring of disease progression or response to treatment. 78 presently, most biomarker testing takes place at dedicated laboratories, thereby increasing the expense of the test and the time needed to perform the test. the development of biosensor technology will enable biomarker testing to be accomplished in a smaller, faster, cheaper, and portable format.a biosensor can be generally defined as a device that consists of a biological recognition system and a transducer. a biosensor is a compact analytical device that integrates a biological element on a solid-state surface, enabling a reversible biospecific interaction with an analyte. 80 the interaction of the analyte with the bioreceptor produces an effect measured by the transducer, a device used to convert the information into a measurable signal. the biological component of a biosensor can include any molecule used for biomolecular recognition. biosensors have been de-signed using specific binding proteins, lectins, nucleic acids, membranes, whole cells, antibodies, or antibody fragments. biosensors that detect the immunological interaction between a specific antibody and antigen are referred to as immunoreaction-based biosensors or immunosensors. 80 some biosensors use aptamers, single-stranded dna or rna oligonucleotide sequences that recognize various target molecules with high affinity and specificity. these ligand-binding oligonucleotides mimic properties of antibodies in a variety of diagnostic formats.there are 2 main types of biosensors: biocatalytic and bioaffinity-based biosensors, and they are primarily categorized on the detection principle applied. biocatalytic sensors use enzymes to catalyze a signaling biochemical reaction, and bioaffinity-based sensors monitor the binding event itself. transducers convert the biological interaction to a detectable signal and can be based on electrochemical (e.g., potentiometric, amperometric, conductometric), optical, microgravimetric, or thermometric (calorimetric) principles.biosensors have been designed using carbon nanotubes and nanoparticles for signal amplification. combining the molecular specificity of biological recognition with an operationally simple transducer, extend these small units' diagnostic capability toward portability and ease of use. recent developments in immunosensors have produced solid state systems that allow for rapid and continuous monitoring of antibody-antigen reactions in real time.the specificity of the biosensor system is determined by the immobilized detection molecule. 20 innovative strategies using biomarkers represent alternative strategies for reliable cancer testing and for detecting clinical markers predictive of cardiovascular and other diseases. biosensors using antibodies or dna/rna strands can detect infectious disease agents and be used for hormone and drug assays. 20, 81 currently, most biomarker testing takes place at a dedicated, centralized laboratory, but in the future this technology will provide a means of rapid, convenient, and economical testing at the "point of patient care." in cancer, there is a strong connection between early detection and positive patient outcome, thereby improving patient survival and disease prognosis in many cases. in addition to changes within the host genome, complex molecular alterations such as over or under expression of a protein can occur during the course of tumorigenesis. 82 biosensors can detect these changes and can analyze molecular biomarkers for tumor diagnosis and classification, monitor response to treatment, and detect recurrence of the disease. cancer biosensors have been developed in a panel format for the simultaneous detection of different cancer biomarkers. 83, 84 because most cancer biomarkers are not specific to a particular tumor, the use of an array to detect multiple markers increases the diagnostic value of their definitive diagnosis. 85 recently, biosensors have been developed to detect breast cancer, ovarian cancer, gastrointestinal tract carcinoma, chronic myelogenous leukemia, and prostate cancer. 20 prostatespecific antigen is the most reliable tumor marker to detect prostate cancer in its early stages. the recently developed biosensors for prostate-specific antigen detection are sensitive to a limit of 4 pg/ml. 86 the importance of inflammatory markers in the early detection of cardiovascular disease has been demonstrated. 81 biosensors are being developed to detect c-reactive protein, cardiac troponin, myoglobin, and natriuretic peptide in a sensitive and efficient manner. based on a competitive immunoassay in a portable biosensor, good correlation between salivary cortisol and levels of "free" cortisol in serum has been demonstrated. 87a nucleic acid biosensor is an analytical device that integrates an oligonucleotide with a signal transducer. 88 the nucleic acid probe is immobilized on the transducer and acts as the biorecognition molecule to detect dna/rna fragments. several dnabased biosensors have recently been developed for the detection of virus-related sequences and other infectious agents. 19 dna or rna ligands can also be synthesized to be used to detect amino acids, drugs, proteins, and other molecules. dna or rna ligands can bind to their targets with affinity ranging from the micromolar to the nanomolar level and can discriminate between closely related targets. 20 there is a growing need for small, fast, efficient and portable biosensors.the analysis of thousands of small molecules (metabolites) (e.g., sugars, organic acids, amino acids, nucleotides) by means of a global approach is referred to as metabolomics. combined with pattern recognition processes, metabolomics defines a metabolic phenotype (metabotype) in the study species. 89 this approach combines high-throughput sample analysis with computer-assisted pattern recognition techniques whereby the full metabolite profile (metabolome) of a cell, tissue, or organism is determined. metabolomics is a powerful investigative tool for studying the biochemical effects of disease and screening for potential pharmacologic agents. alterations in the metabolic profile often present much earlier in the course of disease than induced histopathological changes. metabolomics can be a sensitive, early indicator of a disease process, and because metabolites are conserved across species lines, screening patterns can be applied to a wide range of species. 89 the application of metabolomics in veterinary medicine is in its infancy. whitfield and colleagues used metabolomics to distinguish canine congenital portosystemic vascular anomalies from acquired hepatopathies. 90 other early applications include the analysis of cadmium toxicity in rodents, 91 assessment of sublethal stress in aquatic organisms, 92 and neurotransmitter deficits in cerebral tissue from a mouse model of human batten disease. 93 although current applications to the field of veterinary medicine are rare, metabolomics use in early preclinical safety assessment make it a rapidly developing tool in the field of drug investigations. metabolomics enables a noninvasive systems assessment of a broad spectrum of biologic responses by an individual to the effects induced by therapeutic compounds, which could impact all stages of veterinary drug research and development.molecular theranostics is an emerging area in which molecular diagnostic tools are used to provide rapid (less than 1 hour), accurate, and informative diagnostic microbiology assays. conventional microbial culture and sensitivity testing methods require at least 2 days' time because of the reliance on growth and isolation of microorganisms. veterinarians must frequently treat patients empirically with broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents, which may not be needed or may not be effective. the common use of broadspectrum antimicrobials is associated with an increasing rate of microorganism resistance, which may complicate patient treatment. early diagnosis and treatment of diseases reduce the risk of the patient developing long-term disease complications. for some diseases, a prompt treatment will also reduce further transmission of the disease to other animals or humans.assays based on the detection of nucleic acids offer enormous potential for the rapid and accurate diagnosis of microbial infections. this assay-based testing can be extended to include the detection and characterization of genes or mutations associated with antimicrobial resistance and virulence. 94 advances in genomics and proteomics will provide the essential nucleotide or amino-acid sequence data required to design accurate assays. efficiency will also depend on the development of rapid, simple, and efficient methods for microbial nucleic acid or protein extraction from a variety of clinical samples. finally, rapid and specific assays, and the ability to detect all or most targeted microorganisms in multiplex target amplification systems, or signal amplification technologies, are needed. this will help future technologies reach a level of analytical sensitivity appropriate for testing directly from clinical samples without previous enrichment, thereby leading to more judicious antimicrobial usage and a concurrent reduction in antimicrobial-resistant organisms. 94 to be useful, diagnostic methods must be accurate, simple, and affordable.introduction. bacterial infection remains the major infectious cause of death in children (1) . identifying the small number of children with serious bacterial infection (sbi -microbiologically confirmed bacterial infection with systemic symptoms) amongst the majority with viral infections remains difficult, as clinical features are unreliable. laboratory markers including white cell count, neutrophil proportion and c-reactive protein (crp) have the strongest predictive value in children with clinically obvious sbi, rather than in the more numerous group with clinically uncertain infection status (2) . blood cultures, considered the gold standard for diagnosing sbi, are unhelpful for early antibiotic decisions as results are not immediately available, and are often negative if pre-admission antibiotics have been administered. in the uk there has been a 30% increase in hospital admission for children with probable infection (3) , and the majority of children admitted with fever are discharged without a pathogen diagnosis. many children with self-limiting viral illnesses are admitted to hospital and receive unnecessary antibiotics whilst awaiting the results of cultures, contributing table 1 . demographic and clinical data of recruited subjects. table footnote: ns -not significant (p>0.05); iqr -interquartile range; n/a -not applicable; picupaediatric intensive care unit; wbc -white cell count; a not all patients had samples collected for virological investigation; b some patients had both respiratory and non-respiratory viruses detected. the identified bacterium is listed for patients with definite bacterial infection. two age comparisons were significant: the probable bacterial median age was higher than the definite viral group (p<0.01), and the definite viral group were younger than the controls (p<0.05). the proportion of children with male sex or with caucasian ethnicity (mode ethnicity) was not significantly different between groups. severity of illness, as indicated by the number of children requiring picu admission, inotrope use and ventilation, was highest in the definite bacterial group and lowest in the definite viral group. deaths in each group were not significantly different.to the spread of antibiotic resistance (4). there is an urgent need for new biomarkers that can reliably identify sbi. we identified lipocalin-2 (lcn2, neutrophil gelatinaseassociated lipocalin, ngal) and neutrophil collagenase (matrix metalloproteinase-8, mmp-8) as potential protein candidates to distinguish bacterial pneumonia from viral pneumonia in african children (5) . here, we validate the diagnostic performance of these markers in a cohort of uk children with confirmed, probable or possible sbi versus viral infection and healthy controls.methods. patient recruitment. between july 2009 and april 2012, we recruited acutely ill febrile children (age <17 years) presenting with illness of sufficient severity to warrant blood tests. the study had approval of the st mary's research ethics committee (rec 09/h0712/58). written, informed consent was obtained. pathogen diagnosis. bacterial diagnostics included culture of blood and (when clinically indicated) cerebrospinal and pleural fluid, and pneumococcal antigen detection in blood or urine. respiratory or nasopharyngeal secretions were screened for viruses by nested pcr, including rsv, coronavirus, adenovirus, parainfluenza 1-4, influenza a+b, bocavirus, metapneumovirus and rhinovirus. patient categorisation and selection. patients were assigned to clinical categories corresponding to likelihood of infection after evaluation of all clinical, radiological and laboratory data ( figure 1 ). patient categories were 'definite bacterial' (db), 'probable bacterial' (pb), 'uncertain bacterial or viral' (u), 'probable viral' (pv) or 'definite viral' (dv). db children had microbiologically confirmed bacterial infection identified at a sterile-site, irrespective of the crp value. as there were only 4 patients in the pv category, analysis was not carried out on this group. controls (c) were recruited in out-patients. after categorising, patients were prioritised for biomarker estimation based on the quantity of available plasma, and the chronological order of recruitment to give 5 groups as follows: 42 (db), 34 (pb), 33 (u), 42 (v), 40 (c). biomarker measurement. heparinised blood samples were kept at 4c pending plasma recovery by centrifugation and storage at -80c. lcn2 and mmp-8 were measured using commercially available immunoassays (rd systems, uk) following manufacturer's instructions, by laboratory personnel blinded to the diagnostic group of each sample. presence of visible haemolysis and the number of previous plasma freeze-thaw cycles prior to eia had no systematic effect on measurement. the coefficient of variation for these measurements was 8.26% (calculated from 28 samples with 2 replicates). crp and creatinine values contemporary with research blood sampling were obtained from hospital data for 156 children. crp was measured by elisa in controls (rd systems, uk). statistical analyses. diagnostic performance of clinical markers was assessed using the area under the receiver operating characteristic (auroc) curves to compare the sensitivity and specificity of selected markers. cut-off values were chosen based on highest sensitivity and specificity to predict outcome (supplementary table 1 ). the diagnostic performance of biomarkers was assessed by logistic regression, using lcn2, crp and mmp-8 as independent variables and the condition to diagnose as the dependent variable. a chi-square statistic was used to test for equality of the au-roc (stata 11, stata corporation) (6) . laboratory measures and ages in each patient group were compared using kruskal-wallis tests and dunn's pairwise comparisons. frequency variables including sex, ethnicity and severity of illness were compared using the fisher exact or chi-square test of independence, using prism 5 (graphpad software inc).results. patient groups. table 1 shows the demographic features of the patient groups. ethnicity and gender did not differ significantly. children in the dv group were younger than those in pb and c groups, as expected for viral respiratory infection. the proportion of children with severe illness was higher in the db than dv group. lcn2 and mmp-8 are associated with sbi. concentrations of plasma lcn2 and mmp-8 were lowest in controls, and increased stepwise with likelihood of sbi (table 1) . crp, lcn2 and mmp-8 discriminated patients in the db and dv or c groups ( figure 2a ). we derived roc curves for crp, lcn2, mmp-8 for all 191 patients, and for neutrophil proportion and white cell counts in 175 patients with available values, based on the comparison of the db group with the other febrile patients (combined pb, u and dv groups) (figure 2b ). lcn2 used as a continuous variable predicted confirmed sbi with an auroc of 0.88 (95% ci: 0.82-0.94), matching the auroc for crp (0.89 [95% ci: 0.84-0.94]). mmp-8, neutrophil proportion and white cell count predicted confirmed sbi less well than lcn2 and crp (auroc 0.80, 0.71 and 0.69 respectively) ( figure 2b ). lcn2 performance is not confounded by creatinine concentration. as lcn2 levels increase with renal damage (7), we determined whether renal impairment influenced the diagnostic performance of lcn2. creatinine levels contemporaneous with research bloods were available for 162 children (median and iqr: 39 and 34-50 µmol/l), and did not significantly differ between clinical groups (kruskal-wallis, p=0.36). the adjusted logistic regression analysis indicated that prediction of sbi by lcn2 was not affected by creatinine concentration (supplementary table 1 ). combination of lcn2 and crp to predict sbi. crp was used as a benchmark to evaluate the performance of lcn2 to predict confirmed sbi in 191 patients with available crp and lcn2 data. the auroc of lcn2 and crp were strongly associated with confirmed sbi. both biomarkers were highly correlated (r = 0.40, p<0.001). however, when both proteins were included into a logistic regression model, the combination was significantly superior to either marker alone (au-roc 0.92 [95%ci: 0.88-0.96]) (figure 3 and supplementary  table 1 ). lcn2 and crp in uncertain cohorts. without a sensitive gold-standard test for detection of sbi, the majority of sbi is 'missed', therefore we correlated lcn2 and crp biomarker concentrations with clinical suspicion of sbi. there was a stepwise increase in biomarker concentration with increasing suspicion of sbi: from c, dv, u, pb, to b (table 1, figure  4 ). we derived cut-off values for lcn2 and crp based on the concentration that showed the highest sensitivity and specificity to discriminate confirmed bacterial infection (db) from other febrile patients (supplementary table 1 ). the sensitivity and specificity of lcn2 to predict db were 83.3% and 82.5%. crp had sensitivity and specificity of 85.7% and 83.8%. when the threshold value for lcn2 was applied to the other groups, there was a stepwise increase in prediction of sbi: 2 of 40 (5%) (c), 6 of 42 (14%) (dv), 9 of 33 (27%) (u), 15 of 34 (44%) (pb). the sensitivity and specificity of both markers combined (equal or greater than their 7th decile) was 90.4% and 86.5%. children admitted with acute infection, sick enough to warrant blood tests, were recruited after presentation and before diagnostic studies were completed, at st mary's hospital, london and university hospital nhs foundation trust, southampton, uk. detailed clinical and laboratory data were recorded. healthy controls were recruited in out-patients. after excluding patients with proven or possible inflammatory conditions or mycobacterial disease, two independent paediatric infectious disease clinicians with access to all clinical and diagnostic data categorised patients as follows. children with a clinical syndrome in keeping with sbi (sepsis with shock or severe focal infection) were categorised as 'definite bacterial' (db) only if pathogenic bacteria were detected at a usually sterile site such as blood or csf, and not including surface swabs, endotracheal secretions or bronchoalveolar lavage samples; otherwise these patients were categorised as 'probable bacterial' (pb). children with a clinical syndrome in keeping with viral infection, not displaying any bacterial features were categorised as 'definite viral' (dv) if a matching virus was identified, or otherwise as 'probable viral' (pv). children without detected sterile-site bacteria and with inconclusive clinical features of viral or bacterial infection were classified as 'uncertains' (u). we set a threshold of 60mg/l for the maximum crp as a minimum for inclusion into the pb group, or a maximum for inclusion in the pv and dv groups. inclusion in the db group was irrespective of crp. patients failing the crp threshold were categorised as 'uncertain' (u), alongside the other patients in this group with inconclusive clinical features. controls (c) had no current or recent (previous two weeks) infectious symptoms or immunisations, and no identified or probable chronic infectious or inflammatory conditions. crp: c-reactive protein. wcc: white cell count discussion. this study shows that lcn2 is a sensitive and specific biomarker associated with sbi in children with febrile illness and has potential to guide antibiotic treatment decisions. the best diagnostic performance was achieved by combining lcn2 and crp (auroc of 0.92).lcn2 is a 21-kd glycoprotein secreted by neutrophils, hepatocytes and renal tubular cells and it is usually found at low concentration ( 20 ng/ml) in biological fluids (8) . the role of lcn2 in the innate defence against bacterial infection has been attributed to its ability to interfere with bacterial iron uptake through competition with the bacterial siderophore enterobactin (9, 10). the role of lcn2 as a potential marker of bacterial infection as described in previous studies (5, 11). similarly, lcn2 gene expression has been shown to discriminate bacterial from viral infection, with 22-fold increased expression in bacterial patients compared to controls (12) . un- like crp, the diagnostic performance of lcn2 is unaffected by age: lcn2 gene expression is central to an immunemetabolic network implicated in neonatal bacterial infection (13) . in comparison with crp, lcn2 has a much shorter half-life (<20 minutes) (14) , rising more rapidly than crp in a study in neonates (15) and responding more rapidly to successful antibiotic treatment (11) . although a fast turnover is a desirable quality for a biomarker to monitor infection and treatment, it is also a diagnostic limitation when patients have received prior antibiotic treatment at the time of diagnosis. lcn2 has recently emerged as a biomarker of acute kidney injury (7) . we investigated if the association of lcn2 with sbi was confounded by impaired renal function. adjusting the analysis for creatinine concentration did not affect the diagnostic performance of lcn2 to predict sbi, which suggests that neutrophils are the likely source of lcn2. the diagnostic performance of lcn2 exceeded that of mmp-8, previously proposed as a paediatric sepsis biomarker (16) . in this study we have defined patient groups by a gradient from low-to high likelihood of sbi. this has the advantage to capture the real world situation in which the majority of patients have no definitively confirmed or excluded infection. the clinical group most likely to have sbi was defined by a positive blood culture (gold standard) and we used this variable as our predicted outcome to evaluate the diagnostic performance of lcn2 and mmp-8. thus, it was not possible to compare diagnostic value of lcn2 to the gold standard; instead, we used crp for comparison as the measurement of this biomarker to guide antibiotic treatment is commonly used in secondary and tertiary care. we have shown that the biomarker concentration of lcn2 and mmp-8 was proportional to the estimated likelihood of sbi, with unconfirmed patients tending to have intermediate levels (47% of pb group had lcn2 > 175.3 ng/ml threshold). we did not compare the levels of lcn2 or mmp-8 to crp in the groups with diagnostic uncertainty, as this comparison would be confounded by the use of the crp result to allocate the patients to clinical groups (pb, u, dv). procalcitonin is a promising biomarker of bacterial infection with kinetics comparable to those of lcn2 and it shown a modest advantage over crp in the prediction of sbi (17), but we did not have these data for comparison. unless a biomarker is identified which discriminates sbi and non-sbi patients at non-overlapping concentrations, children with intermediate, 'grey' clinical markers of bacterial infection will remain as the group in whom the biomarkers are least effective, but most needed. the potential for lcn2 alone or in combination with crp to improve the rapid identification of children with sbi at an early time, before culture results are available, could benefit clinical decision-making for children presenting with febrile illness, and improve antibiotic coverage in the easily missed minority of children with an sbi. the potential for lcn2 to improve antibiotic management decisions in febrile children should be evaluated in clinical trials. introduction. bacterial infection remains the major infectious cause of death in children (1) . identifying the small number of children with serious bacterial infection (sbi -microbiologically confirmed bacterial infection with systemic symptoms) amongst the majority with viral infections remains difficult, as clinical features are unreliable. laboratory markers including white cell count, neutrophil proportion and c-reactive protein (crp) have the strongest predictive value in children with clinically obvious sbi, rather than in the more numerous group with clinically uncertain infection status (2). blood cultures, considered the gold standard for diagnosing sbi, are unhelpful for early antibiotic decisions as results are not immediately available, and are often negative if pre-admission antibiotics have been administered. in the uk there has been a 30% increase in hospital admission for children with probable infection (3), and the majority of children admitted with fever are discharged without a pathogen diagnosis. many children with self-limiting viral illnesses are admitted to hospital and receive unnecessary antibiotics whilst awaiting the results of cultures, contributing table 1 . demographic and clinical data of recruited subjects. table footnote: ns -not significant (p>0.05); iqr -interquartile range; n/a -not applicable; picupaediatric intensive care unit; wbc -white cell count; a not all patients had samples collected for virological investigation; b some patients had both respiratory and non-respiratory viruses detected. the identified bacterium is listed for patients with definite bacterial infection. two age comparisons were significant: the probable bacterial median age was higher than the definite viral group (p<0.01), and the definite viral group were younger than the controls (p<0.05). the proportion of children with male sex or with caucasian ethnicity (mode ethnicity) was not significantly different between groups. severity of illness, as indicated by the number of children requiring picu admission, inotrope use and ventilation, was highest in the definite bacterial group and lowest in the definite viral group. deaths in each group were not significantly different.to the spread of antibiotic resistance (4). there is an urgent need for new biomarkers that can reliably identify sbi. we identified lipocalin-2 (lcn2, neutrophil gelatinaseassociated lipocalin, ngal) and neutrophil collagenase (matrix metalloproteinase-8, mmp-8) as potential protein candidates to distinguish bacterial pneumonia from viral pneumonia in african children (5). here, we validate the diagnostic performance of these markers in a cohort of uk children with confirmed, probable or possible sbi versus viral infection and healthy controls. tests. the study had approval of the st mary's research ethics committee (rec 09/h0712/58). written, informed consent was obtained. pathogen diagnosis. bacterial diagnostics included culture of blood and (when clinically indicated) cerebrospinal and pleural fluid, and pneumococcal antigen detection in blood or urine. respiratory or nasopharyngeal secretions were screened for viruses by nested pcr, including rsv, coronavirus, adenovirus, parainfluenza 1-4, influenza a+b, bocavirus, metapneumovirus and rhinovirus. patient categorisation and selection. patients were assigned to clinical categories corresponding to likelihood of infection after evaluation of all clinical, radiological and laboratory data ( figure 1 ). patient categories were 'definite bacterial' (db), 'probable bacterial' (pb), 'uncertain bacterial or viral' (u), 'probable viral' (pv) or 'definite viral' (dv). db children had microbiologically confirmed bacterial infection identified at a sterile-site, irrespective of the crp value. as there were only 4 patients in the pv category, analysis was not carried out on this group. controls (c) were recruited in out-patients. after categorising, patients were prioritised for biomarker estimation based on the quantity of available plasma, and the chronological order of recruitment to give 5 groups as follows: 42 (db), 34 (pb), 33 (u), 42 (v), 40 (c). biomarker measurement. heparinised blood samples were kept at 4c pending plasma recovery by centrifugation and storage at -80c. lcn2 and mmp-8 were measured using commercially available immunoassays (rd systems, uk) following manufacturer's instructions, by laboratory personnel blinded to the diagnostic group of each sample. presence of visible haemolysis and the number of previous plasma freeze-thaw cycles prior to eia had no systematic effect on measurement. the coefficient of variation for these measurements was 8.26% (calculated from 28 samples with 2 replicates). crp and creatinine values contemporary with research blood sampling were obtained from hospital data for 156 children. crp was measured by elisa in controls (rd systems, uk). statistical analyses. diagnostic performance of clinical markers was assessed using the area under the receiver operating characteristic (auroc) curves to compare the sensitivity and specificity of selected markers. cut-off values were chosen based on highest sensitivity and specificity to predict outcome (supplementary table 1 ). the diagnostic performance of biomarkers was assessed by logistic regression, using lcn2, crp and mmp-8 as independent variables and the condition to diagnose as the dependent variable. a chi-square statistic was used to test for equality of the au-roc (stata 11, stata corporation) (6). laboratory measures and ages in each patient group were compared using kruskal-wallis tests and dunn's pairwise comparisons. frequency variables including sex, ethnicity and severity of illness were compared using the fisher exact or chi-square test of independence, using prism 5 (graphpad software inc).results. patient groups. table 1 shows the demographic features of the patient groups. ethnicity and gender did not differ significantly. children in the dv group were younger than those in pb and c groups, as expected for viral respiratory infection. the proportion of children with severe illness was higher in the db than dv group. lcn2 and mmp-8 are associated with sbi. concentrations of plasma lcn2 and mmp-8 were lowest in controls, and increased stepwise with likelihood of sbi (table 1) . crp, lcn2 and mmp-8 discriminated patients in the db and dv or c groups ( figure 2a ). we derived roc curves for crp, lcn2, mmp-8 for all 191 patients, and for neutrophil proportion and white cell counts in 175 patients with available values, based on the comparison of the db group with the other febrile patients (combined pb, u and dv groups) (figure 2b ). lcn2 used as a continuous variable predicted confirmed sbi with an auroc of 0.88 (95% ci: 0.82-0.94), matching the auroc for crp (0.89 [95% ci: 0.84-0.94]). mmp-8, neutrophil proportion and white cell count predicted confirmed sbi less well than lcn2 and crp (auroc 0.80, 0.71 and 0.69 respectively) ( figure 2b ). lcn2 performance is not confounded by creatinine concentration. as lcn2 levels increase with renal damage(7), we determined whether renal impairment influenced the diagnostic performance of lcn2. creatinine levels contemporaneous with research bloods were available for 162 children (median and iqr: 39 and 34-50 µmol/l), and did not significantly differ between clinical groups (kruskal-wallis, p=0.36). the adjusted logistic regression analysis indicated that prediction of sbi by lcn2 was not affected by creatinine concentration (supplementary table 1 ). combination of lcn2 and crp to predict sbi. crp was used as a benchmark to evaluate the performance of lcn2 to predict confirmed sbi in 191 patients with available crp and lcn2 data. the auroc of lcn2 and crp were strongly associated with confirmed sbi. both biomarkers were highly correlated (r = 0.40, p<0.001). however, when both proteins were included into a logistic regression model, the combination was significantly superior to either marker alone (au-roc 0.92 [95%ci: 0.88-0.96]) (figure 3 and supplementary  table 1 ). lcn2 and crp in uncertain cohorts. without a sensitive gold-standard test for detection of sbi, the majority of sbi is 'missed', therefore we correlated lcn2 and crp biomarker concentrations with clinical suspicion of sbi. there was a stepwise increase in biomarker concentration with increasing suspicion of sbi: from c, dv, u, pb, to b (table 1, figure  4 ). we derived cut-off values for lcn2 and crp based on the concentration that showed the highest sensitivity and specificity to discriminate confirmed bacterial infection (db) from other febrile patients (supplementary table 1 ). the sensitivity and specificity of lcn2 to predict db were 83.3% and 82.5%. crp had sensitivity and specificity of 85.7% and 83.8%. when the threshold value for lcn2 was applied to the other groups, there was a stepwise increase in prediction of sbi: 2 of 40 (5%) (c), 6 of 42 (14%) (dv), 9 of 33 (27%) (u), 15 of 34 (44%) (pb). the sensitivity and specificity of both markers combined (equal or greater than their 7th decile) was 90.4% and 86.5%. children admitted with acute infection, sick enough to warrant blood tests, were recruited after presentation and before diagnostic studies were completed, at st mary's hospital, london and university hospital nhs foundation trust, southampton, uk. detailed clinical and laboratory data were recorded. healthy controls were recruited in out-patients. after excluding patients with proven or possible inflammatory conditions or mycobacterial disease, two independent paediatric infectious disease clinicians with access to all clinical and diagnostic data categorised patients as follows. children with a clinical syndrome in keeping with sbi (sepsis with shock or severe focal infection) were categorised as 'definite bacterial' (db) only if pathogenic bacteria were detected at a usually sterile site such as blood or csf, and not including surface swabs, endotracheal secretions or bronchoalveolar lavage samples; otherwise these patients were categorised as 'probable bacterial' (pb). children with a clinical syndrome in keeping with viral infection, not displaying any bacterial features were categorised as 'definite viral' (dv) if a matching virus was identified, or otherwise as 'probable viral' (pv). children without detected sterile-site bacteria and with inconclusive clinical features of viral or bacterial infection were classified as 'uncertains' (u). we set a threshold of 60mg/l for the maximum crp as a minimum for inclusion into the pb group, or a maximum for inclusion in the pv and dv groups. inclusion in the db group was irrespective of crp. patients failing the crp threshold were categorised as 'uncertain' (u), alongside the other patients in this group with inconclusive clinical features. controls (c) had no current or recent (previous two weeks) infectious symptoms or immunisations, and no identified or probable chronic infectious or inflammatory conditions. crp: c-reactive protein. wcc: white cell count discussion. this study shows that lcn2 is a sensitive and specific biomarker associated with sbi in children with febrile illness and has potential to guide antibiotic treatment decisions. the best diagnostic performance was achieved by combining lcn2 and crp (auroc of 0.92).lcn2 is a 21-kd glycoprotein secreted by neutrophils, hepatocytes and renal tubular cells and it is usually found at low concentration ( 20 ng/ml) in biological fluids (8). the role of lcn2 in the innate defence against bacterial infection has been attributed to its ability to interfere with bacterial iron uptake through competition with the bacterial siderophore enterobactin (9, 10). the role of lcn2 as a potential marker of bacterial infection as described in previous studies (5, 11). similarly, lcn2 gene expression has been shown to discriminate bacterial from viral infection, with 22-fold increased expression in bacterial patients compared to controls (12) . un- like crp, the diagnostic performance of lcn2 is unaffected by age: lcn2 gene expression is central to an immunemetabolic network implicated in neonatal bacterial infection (13) . in comparison with crp, lcn2 has a much shorter half-life (<20 minutes) (14) , rising more rapidly than crp in a study in neonates (15) and responding more rapidly to successful antibiotic treatment (11) . although a fast turnover is a desirable quality for a biomarker to monitor infection and treatment, it is also a diagnostic limitation when patients have received prior antibiotic treatment at the time of diagnosis. lcn2 has recently emerged as a biomarker of acute kidney injury (7). we investigated if the association of lcn2 with sbi was confounded by impaired renal function. adjusting the analysis for creatinine concentration did not affect the diagnostic performance of lcn2 to predict sbi, which suggests that neutrophils are the likely source of lcn2. the diagnostic performance of lcn2 exceeded that of mmp-8, previously proposed as a paediatric sepsis biomarker (16) . in this study we have defined patient groups by a gradient from low-to high likelihood of sbi. this has the advantage to capture the real world situation in which the majority of patients have no definitively confirmed or excluded infection. the clinical group most likely to have sbi was defined by a positive blood culture (gold standard) and we used this variable as our predicted outcome to evaluate the diagnostic performance of lcn2 and mmp-8. thus, it was not possible to compare diagnostic value of lcn2 to the gold standard; instead, we used crp for comparison as the measurement of this biomarker to guide antibiotic treatment is commonly used in secondary and tertiary care. we have shown that the biomarker concentration of lcn2 and mmp-8 was proportional to the estimated likelihood of sbi, with unconfirmed patients tending to have intermediate levels (47% of pb group had lcn2 > 175.3 ng/ml threshold). we did not compare the levels of lcn2 or mmp-8 to crp in the groups with diagnostic uncertainty, as this comparison would be confounded by the use of the crp result to allocate the patients to clinical groups (pb, u, dv). procalcitonin is a promising biomarker of bacterial infection with kinetics comparable to those of lcn2 and it shown a modest advantage over crp in the prediction of sbi (17), but we did not have these data for comparison. unless a biomarker is identified which discriminates sbi and non-sbi patients at non-overlapping concentrations, children with intermediate, 'grey' clinical markers of bacterial infection will remain as the group in whom the biomarkers are least effective, but most needed. the potential for lcn2 alone or in combination with crp to improve the rapid identification of children with sbi at an early time, before culture results are available, could benefit clinical decision-making for children presenting with febrile illness, and improve antibiotic coverage in the easily missed minority of children with an sbi. the potential for lcn2 to improve antibiotic management decisions in febrile children should be evaluated in clinical trials. supplementary table 1 sensitivity and specificity of lcn2, crp and combined lcn2 and crp supplementary municipal population and family planning commission foundation, grant/award number: wx16c03 confidence interval = 4.627-425.088). these results suggest that the nlr at hospital admission is associated with in-hospital mortality among patients with covid-19.therefore, the nlr appears to be a significant prognostic biomarker of outcomes in critically ill patients with covid-19. however, further investigation is needed to validate this relationship with data collected prospectively. wuhan and was confirmed as the cause of the ncip. 5 studies have shown that the disease caused by sars-cov-2, recently named as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) by world health organization (who), could induce symptoms including fever, dry cough, dyspnea, fatigue, and lymphopenia in infected patients. in more severe cases, infections causing viral pneumonia may lead to severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and even death. 2, 3, 6 most of the initial cases of covid-19, the disease caused by sars-cov-2, were all related to huanan seafood wholesale market, which sells aquatic products, live poultries, and wild animals. 2 the first batch of cases identified later showed no exposure or even no relation to huanan wholesale market, and the human-to-human transmission was confirmed; moreover, nosocomial infections were reported in some health care workers. 3, 7 the number of fatalities due to covid-19 is escalating. however, at this time, there are no specific vaccines or treatments for covid-19. most therapy consists of empirical antibiotics, antiviral therapy (oseltamivir), and systemic corticosteroids, which may have a limited effect on a fatal outcome. evidence is now accumulating that the condition of some patients with covid-19 deteriorates rapidly. as of 20 may 2020, who's online covid-19 situation dashboard reveals there have been 4 801 202 confirmed cases of covid-19, including 318 935 deaths. thus, identifying the prognostic predictors of mortality in patients with covid-19 might be useful for assessing the disease severity and making optimal treatment decisions.the neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (nlr) has been suggested as a simple marker of the systemic inflammatory response in critical care patients. 8, 9 it has also been reported as an independent prognostic factor for noninfectious diseases, such as acute myocardial infarction, stroke, and several types of cancers. [10] [11] [12] in addition, nlr has been shown to be an independent indicator of both short-term and long-term mortality in critically ill patients. 13 therefore, the nlr is a systemic inflammatory marker and a potential predictor of clinical risk and outcome in many diseases. to our knowledge, the utility of nlr to predict mortality in patients with covid-19 has not been studied yet. based on the previous studies, we hypothesized that nlr might relate to the disease severity and mortality in patients with covid-19. in the current study, we sought to investigate whether nlr is a prognostic factor in patients with covid-19.all adult (age >18 years old) patients who were diagnosed with covid-19 according to who interim guidance were screened, and those who died or were discharged between 11 january 2020 and 3 march 2020 were included in our study. data were collected from patients who were cured and discharged, or who died without a cure. were amplified and tested. the primers used were as follows: target 1 (orf1ab): forward primer, ccctgtgggttttaca-cttaa; reverse pri-and myocardial enzymes. chest radiographs or computed tomography scan were also done for all inpatients. 15 all patients age more than 18 years, and having neutrophil and lymphocyte counts results within 24 hours after admission, were included in this study. patients who missed the neutrophil and lymphocyte records or with chronic hematological disorder were excluded.the electronic medical records of the patients were reviewed by a trained research team of physicians in wuhan third hospital & tongren hospital of wuhan university. epidemiological, clinical, laboratory, treatment, and outcome data were analyzed. patient data included demographics, medical history, exposure history, comorbidities, symptoms, signs, laboratory findings, and treatment (antiviral, antibiotic, and corticosteroid therapies, and respiratory support). all data were checked by two physicians (hc and js) and a third researcher (sn) adjudicated any difference in interpretation between the two primary reviewers.baseline characteristics were presented as median with interquartile range (iqr) for continuous variables and as number with percentage for categorical variables. comparisons between continuous variables were analyzed by the student t and mann-whitney u test based on variable distribution, and categorical variables were analyzed by the χ 2 test. the data were tested to the kolmogorov-smirnov normality test for homogeneity of variance. to assess the relationship between the nlr and inhospital mortality, we did the receiver operating characteristics (roc) curve and reported area under the roc curve. next, we grouped the patients based on the cut-off value of nlr during hospitalization. in addition, to adjust potential confounding with variables, we did a multivariate regression analysis. the following variables were considered for multivariable adjustment: age, gender, smoking status, laboratory data, comorbidities, and intensive care unit (icu) length of stay. the results were reported as hazard ratio and 95% confidence interval (95% ci). all statistical processes were performed with the statistical package for the social sciences 20.0 (spss inc, chicago, il). a two-sided p value less than .05 was considered statistically significant. nonparametric roc analysis showed that the cut-off value of the roc curve as the optimal threshold for in-hospital mortality was 11 .75, that is, when nlr was more than 11.75, the model had the strongest predictive ability, with an area under the curve of 0.945% and 95% ci of 0.917 to 0.973 (figure 1 ), sensitivity of 97.5%, specificity of 78.1%, and yoden index of 0.756. we further divided patients into two groups using nlr greater than or less than or equal to 11.75 as the criterion to compare the clinical characteristics of patients with a high nlr and those with a low nlr (table 2 ).after multivariate logistic regression analysis, high-nlr remained independently associated with in-hospital death. in addition, we found that higher levels of hs-crp, nt-probnp, and blood urea nitrogen, as well as history of hypertension, respiratory failure, digestive system diseases, and cerebrovascular diseases, were also independently associated with in-hospital mortality (table 3 ).in this study, we found there was an association between nlr and the clinical outcomes in patients with covid-19. 16 based on the roc curve analysis, the nlr showed the significant performance to predict in-hospital mortality.the cut-off level for the nlr was 11.75 ( figure 1 ). our study supports that a high nlr is a strong predictor for in-hospital mortality in pa- the first case of novel coronavirus disease 2019 was detected in wuhan, china, in late december, that broke out worldwide, affecting over 227 countries and caused approximately three lakhs deaths till date (https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/ accessed on 13/05/2020). the mortality rate remained 14.50% worldwide (https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/ accessed on 13/05/2020). world health organisation had declared covid-19 as pandemic disease (http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/health-emergencies/coronavirus-covid-19/news/news/2020/3/who-announces-covid-19-outbreak-a-pandemic). as of today (13/05/2020), the united states of america contributed the highest number of infected cases and death due to covid-19 in comparison to other populations (https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/ accessed on 13/05/2020). covid-19 infection displays a wide range of clinical manifestations. a recent study [1] highlighted cough, sputum production, diarrhoea, nausea/vomiting, and shortness of breath as more frequent clinical phenotypes in critical/non-survived covid-19 patients, and in contrast, fever and headache were less prevalent. furthermore, the pathogenesis of the diseases is regulated by several host factors. various biomolecules such as aspartate aminotransferase, creatinine, high-sensitive cardiac troponin, procalcitonin, lactate dehydrogenase, and d-dimer has been increased in covid-19 critical patients in comparison to those with non-severe infected cases [1] .the upregulation of c reactive protein (crp) has been reported during severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak in 2002 and associated with respiratory dysfunctions and death of the patients [2] . based on these observations, various studies were carried out in covid-19 patients hypothesizing crp as one of the possible biomolecules linked with the death of the infected patients. however, the observations of the reports remained contradictory.two authors, rkp and brp searched various databases (medline, sciencedirect, and scopus) to trace eligible studies for the present meta-analysis. the keywords used for the search were "covid-19, coronavirus 2019, 2019-ncov, sars-cov-2, crp, c-reactive protein, survivors, non-survivors, death, (till 10 th may 2020). the title and abstracts of the articles obtained were screened, and apposite papers were downloaded. furthermore, various preprint servers (biorxiv, medrxiv and ssrn) were also screened with the above-mentioned keywords.various inclusion and exclusion criteria were considered in the present investigation.inclusion of a report in the current meta-analysis must have a) added analysis for death and survivors, b) plasma/serum crp concentrations, c) data must be presented in mean± standard deviation (s.d) or median (interquartile range). exclusion of the articles was based on the following conditions: a) duplicate articles, b) research articles including only survivors or death cases, c) lack of crp concentrations data d) review article, summaries, or case report.two authors brs and ap extracted data such as authors' details, years of publication, population, number of covid-19 infected subjects, death and survivors, crp concentrations in mean± s.d. or median (interquartile range), significance value. details are shown in table-1 the meta-analysis was performed by comprehensive meta-analysis v3.1 software (biostat). begg's funnel plot and eggers linear regression analysis were employed to test publication bias. crp data was available in the median (interquartile range) format in most of the included reports, and those were converted into mean ± standard deviation according to an earlier report [3] . association of crp concentrations with covid-19 disease prognosis was analyzed, and the combined standard difference in means and p-values were calculated.the q test and i 2 statistics evaluated heterogeneity among included reports. based on the results of heterogeneity statistics, random (heterogeneous), or fixed model (nonheterogenous) were deployed for analysis. furthermore, a sensitivity analysis was performed to test the robustness of the meta-analysis.a total of 122 and 153 articles were obtained after searching pubmed and scopus, respectively. after screening the titles, abstracts, and full text based on inclusion and exclusion criterias, 14 articles including data of 15 different cohorts were enrolled for the present analysis. further, we found two articles related to our searched norms from preprint servers. baseline data from all eligible publications were extracted and presented in table-1. crp data in median (interquartile range) were converted into the required format of cma v3.1 software (mean ± s.d and sample number) [3] . infected patients include acute respiratory distress syndrome, acute cardiac injury, acute kidney injury, shock, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and a significant alterations in crp level have been observed in these subjects [4] . a positive correlation between crp concentrations with the lung lesion in covid-19 infected patients has been demonstrated [2] . furthermore, the induction of acute kidney damage [5] and the extent of the cardiac injury [6] has been directly linked with the crp concentrations. possibly for clearance of viral infections, immune system responded more vigorously by producing various immune molecules and production of crp [7] beyond threshold limit may lead to dysfunction of biomarkers are continuously being sought in the field of diagnostic microbiology for the laboratory diagnosis and assessment of microbial infections. these have evolved from a simple clinical index [1, 2] using nonspecific screening tests such as the white blood cell with leukocyte differential, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and the c-reactive protein to the use of pro-inflammatory cytokines/chemokines [3, 4] to most recent use of microrna (mirna) molecules [5] [6] [7] , the last of which have the greatest potential for predicting infection. a set of clinical and laboratory criteria necessary for an ideal diagnostic marker of infection have previously been proposed by ng and his colleagues [8] . according these criteria, an ideal biomarker should possess at a minimum the following characteristics: (a) biochemically, a biomarker should be stable and remain significantly deregulated in the body fluid compartment for at least 12-24 h even after commencement of appropriate treatment that may allow an adequate time window for specimen collection or storage without significant decomposition of the active compound until laboratory processing; (b) its concentration should be determined quantitatively, and the method of measurement should be automatic, rapid, easy, and inexpensive; (c) the collection of a specimen should be minimally invasive and require a small volume (e.g., <0.5 ml blood).numerous biomarkers have been found and tested in clinical practice [1] [2] [3] [4] . currently, microrna (mirna) molecules are without a doubt the biomarkers with the greatest potential capacities in the diagnostic microbiology field.the first mirna, lin-4, was inadvertently discovered in caenorhabditis elegans in 1993 by lee and colleagues [9] . however, recognition of the mirna let-7 and its ability to regulate lin-14 by ruvkun and colleagues [10] in 2000 resulted in the establishment of this new class of regulatory nucleic acids and their potential value in diagnostic microbiology.the majority of the characterized mirna is intergenic and is located in introns [11] . primary mirna transcripts, i.e., pri-mirnas, are transcribed by rna polymerase ii or polymerase iii. in the nucleus, ribonuclease drosha cleaves pri-mirnas and releases 60-80 nt stem-loop intermediate structures named pre-mirnas. the pre-mirnas are transported to cytoplasm by exportin-5 protein and then are cleaved by dicer rnase iii to form a mature double-stranded mirna. one strand of the mirna duplex is subsequently unwound and then incorporated into an effector protein complex termed rna-induced silencing complex (risc), which is responsible for the gene silencing in a posttranscriptional manner [12] [13] [14] . mature mirnas are single-stranded rna molecules of about 19-25 nucleotides in length. through partial homology to the 3′-untranscribed region (utr) in target mrnas, mirnas control of gene expression via repression of translation as well as reducing mrna levels directly.a large number of mirnas have been found in various animal and plant tissues [15] . according to mirbase 21.0 (http://microrna.sanger.org/), which is a collective registry of currently known mirna sequences and targets hosted by the sanger institute, there are currently 2588 recognized mirna sequences in the homo sapiens genome; this number is constantly growing as new mirna sequences are discovered. importantly, mirnas have been detected in human body fluids, including peripheral blood plasma; these circulating mirnas are found as extracellular nuclease-resistant entities that are strikingly stable in blood plasma [16] . such mir-nas have been found circulating not only in serum and plasma but also in other body fluids such as saliva, tears, and urine [17] . some of these mirnas appear to be enriched in specific fluids [17, 18] . these circulating mirnas subsequently have become the focus of ongoing research. the properties, origin, function, and relationship with disease of circulating mirnas have been intensively investigated [16] [17] [18] [19] . a number of important observations have been noted. circulating mirnas are present in a stable form that is protected from endogenous rnase activity [16, 19, 20] . most extracellular circulating mirnas in plasma completely pass through 0.22 micron filters but remain in the supernatant after ultracentrifugation at 110,000 g, which indicates the non-vesicular origin of these mirnas [16] . finally, circulating mirnas have been shown to co-immunoprecipitate with the 96 kda ago2 protein; this ago2 protein is part of an rna-induced silencing complex [16] and might account for the high stability of this comlex [16] . some groups also reported a higher stability of mirnas compared to mrna in samples obtained from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues [21] [22] [23] . the expression level of mirnas has been noted as consistent among individuals of the same species [19] . expression alteration of circulating mirnas has been reported to be associated with pathophysiological states including various cancers, heart disease, pregnancy, and diabetes [24, 25] . needless to say, serum, plasma, and other body fluid specimens are generally available for clinical testing. profiling hundreds of mirna requires only 200 ul of sera [20] . thus, these unique and stable characteristics of circulating mirnas potentially make them extremely useful biomarkers for disease diagnosis and prognosis. the potential use of tissue and/or circulating mirnas for diagnosing cancer was quickly recognized [12, 13, [18] [19] [20] 22] . the discovery of virus-encoded mirnas and the recognition that such mirnas played multiple roles in virus infections has resulted in their use in diagnosing viral infections [5, [26] [27] [28] .virus-encoded mirnas were recognized as having many functions in viral infections, including controls for viral replication and thus potentially limiting antiviral responses, inhibition of apoptosis, and stimulation of cellular growth [26] . moreover, unique host cell mirnas expression profiles have been revealed in response to various microbial infections [27, 28] . host mirna thus appears to play an important role in viral replication and may be used by host cells to control viral infection. the first virus-encoded mirna was described by pfeffer and his colleagues in 2004 when they identified five ebv-encoded pre-mirnas [29] . since then, hundreds of virus-encoded mirnas have been described in humans, animals, and plants. examples of human virus-encoded mirna are shown in table 1 . bewilderingly, more than 95% of the virus-encoded mirnas known today are of herpesvirus origin [30] . herpesvirus mirnas were initially determined to not be required for lytic replication, but were thought to strongly enhance viral pathogenesis, including oncogenesis, and also to promote latently infected cells [30] . subsequently, the role of herpesvirus mirnas in virus latency and persistence has been confirmed, with specific cellular mirnas being identified as inhibiting reactivation of herpesviruses, thereby promoting latent infections [31, 32] . interestingly, almost all virusencoded mirnas are encoded by dna viruses except those encoded by retroviruses, which reverse-transcribe and integrate their genetic material into host dna. aberrantly expressed circulating mirnas have been explored for the diagnosis and prognosis of several infectious diseases, including sepsis [33, 34] , hbv [35] , and hcv [36] .the interactions between viral and cellular mirnas in viral diseases and virusassociated cancers are complex [37] . viral mirnas target perfectly complementary viral mrnas as well as imperfectly complementary viral and/or cellular mrnas. viral mirnas modulate expression of host gene involved in cell proliferation and survival, stress responses, and antiviral defense pathways, which are pivotal for viral replication [26] [27] [28] [37] [38] [39] . another primary function of virus mirnas is to regulate the latent-lytic switch. during latency, the host cell maintains the viral genome, and only a limited portion of virus genome is expressed. viral gene expression is restricted, but virus mirnas and their precursors are regularly detected [38] . there is an accumulating amount of evidence that has demonstrated that virus-encoded mirnas mediate evolutionarily conserved functions (e.g., immune evasion, cell cycle control, promotion of latency, etc.) [5, [26] [27] [28] [37] [38] [39] . the mirnas themselves show poorly primary sequence conservation [39] . these phenomena raise an important question: can viral mirnas be used as the detection maker for virus infection during the latent infection phase despite the fact that little or no viral protein is being produced? further studies are needed to evaluate this hypothesis. microbial infections are known to down-modulate at least some cellular mrnas and thereby exert physiological effects [40] . microbial infections induce changes in the host mirna expression profile, which may also have a profound effect on the outcome of infection [6, 41, 42] . host mirna may directly or indirectly affect virus replication and pathogenesis. for example, liver-specific mir-122 is required for hcv replication [43, 44] . moreover, mir-28, mir-125b, mir-150, mir-223, and mir-382 are over-expressed in resting cd4+ t lymphocytes compared to their activated counterparts [45] . these mirnas are able to target sequences near the 3′ portion of hiv-1 mrna. this finding suggests that mirnas may contribute to viral latency [45] . however, it is unclear whether these mirnas are actively inhibited by viral factors or whether their deregulation is due to host responses. host mirnas expression profiles have been noted to represent specific pathophysiological states [24, 25] . theoretically, a characteristic profile should be potential biomarkers for disease diagnosis and prognosis. a number of studies have been conducted to demonstrate this theory, and promising results have been seen in a number of altered physiological states including various cancers, heart disease, pregnancy, diabetes, injury, and infection. the use of such mirna profiles in specific infection diseases will be discussed in the next sections.the roles of micrornas in hiv-1 replication and latency are being intensely investigated in order to provide new approaches to clear the viral reservoir [46, 47] . it has become apparent that cellular mirnas may play crucial roles in controlling hiv-1 infection and replication [47] . houzet and colleagues have profiled mirnas in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmcs) from hiv-1-infected patients [48] .they found the t cell-abundant mirnas (mir-223, mir-150, mir-146, mir-16, and mir-191) were downregulated three-to ninefold compared to cells from uninfected controls, depending on the disease stage of the patient [48] . triloubet et al. reported increased expression of 11 mirnas including mir-122, mir-370, mir-373*, and mir-297 in hiv-1-infected jurkat cells, whereas expression of the polycistronic mirna cluster mir-17/mir-92 (comprises mir-17-(5p/3p), mir-18, mir-19a, mir-20a, mir-19b-1, and mir-92-1) was strongly decreased [49] . two cellular mirnas, mir-196b and mir-1290, have been found to contribute to hiv-1 latency [50] . like hiv-1, human t cell leukemia virus type 1 (htlv-1) also infects cd4+ t cells. as seen with hiv-1, mirnas also play an important role in the pathogenesis of htlv-1 infection and transformation [51, 52] . two mirna profiling studies have been performed in infected cell lines and atl (adult t cell leukemia) cells [53, 54] . the studies find two common mirnas that are consistently downregulated in the context of htlv-1 infection. for both hiv-1 and htlv-1, it is clear the mirnas play a role in latency; inhibitors of these mirna could be used to activate latent retroviruses in order to assist in clearing the reservoirs of virus.the emergence of middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) in 2012 following the earlier severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) in 2002-2003 marked two instances in which a highly pathogenic coronavirus was introduced into the human population in the twenty-first century [55] . along with highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses [56] , these respiratory viruses are notable due to their potential to cause pandemics [57] . the potential role of mir-nas to diagnose these respiratory tract infections is under investigation. for example, the mirna expression profile in bronchoalveolar stem cells (bascs) infected with sars coronavirus (cov) has been determined using mirna microarray [58] . a total of 116 mirnas were found differentially expressed. upregulated basc mirnas-17*, mirnas-574-5p, and mirnas-214 are co-opted by sars-cov to suppress its own replication and evade immune elimination until successful transmission takes place. in contrast, viral nucleocapsid and spike protein targets seem to co-opt downregulated mir-223 and mir-98, respectively [58] . the mirna expression of avian influenza strains has also been investigated. differentially expressed mirnas in chicken lung and trachea infected with a low pathogenic strain of h5n3 avian influenza virus were analyzed by a deep sequencing approach [59] . a total of 73 and 36 mirnas are differentially expressed in lungs and trachea upon virus infection, respectively [59] . lung cellular "micrornaome" of mice infected by reconstructed 1918 influenza virus was compared with that of mice infected by a nonlethal seasonal influenza virus, a/texas/36/91 [60] . a group of micrornas, including mir-200a and mir-223, were differentially expressed in response to influenza virus infection, and infection by these two influenza viruses induced distinct microrna expression profiles [60] . finally, a novel avian-origin influenza a (h7n9) caused 137 human infection cases with a 32.8% mortality rate; characterization of the mirna profile in response to infection by this strain revealed significant alterations in serum mirna expression following virus infection in comparison with controls [61] . this study confirmed the potential for using serum mirna expression for the diagnosis of viral respiratory diseases.human adenoviruses are dna viruses that cause infections in both immunocompetent and immunosuppressed patients [62] . adenovirus infections are associated with viral persistence and reactivation and continue to provide clinical challenges in terms of diagnosis and treatment. adenoviruses express large amounts of noncoding virus-associated rnas able to saturate key factors of the rna interference processing pathway, including exportin 5 and dicer [63] . moreover, a proportion of the noncoding virus-associated rna is cleaved by dicer in viral mirnas. this cleaved rna results in mirnas that can saturate argonaute, which is an essential protein for mirna function that engages in transcriptional silencing processes in the nucleus [63, 64] . therefore, processing and function of cellular mirnas are blocked in cells infected by adenovirus [63] . of note is that the cellular silencing machinery is active early after infection and can be used to control the adenovirus cell cycle [63] . it is also important to realize that mirna expression has been found to fluctuate during the course of an adenovirus type 2 infection in human lung fibroblasts [65] . the mirna expression profiles from adenovirus type 3 (ad3)-infected human laryngeal epithelial (hep2) cells have been analyzed using a solid deep sequencing [66] . a total of 44 mirnas demonstrated high expression, and 36 mir-nas showed lower expression in the ad3-infected cells than in control cells [66] . the role of mirnas in adenovirus-infected cells is relevant because of the past and future use of recombinant adenoviruses as vectors for gene therapy [67] . manipulation of the viral genome allows the use of these vectors to express therapeutic mirnas or to be silenced by the rnai machinery leading to safer vectors with specific tropisms. adenovirus is known to interact with a number of different extracellular, intracellular, and membrane-bound innate immune sensing systems [68] such as toll-like receptor 4 [68, 69] . the investigation of mirnas expression during adenovirus infection is likely to provide important new insights into the scope and mechanisms of these cellular defensive responses [70] .among the human herpesviruses, cytomegalovirus (cmv) is an important human pathogen that has the potential to disseminate via the bloodstream to all organs, but only produces overt clinical disease if the viral load achieves high levels [71] .normally there is a strong immune response such that the infected individual typically remains asymptomatic [71] . over time, this immune response wains and infected individuals can become symptomatic due to a higher viral load. for this reason, mirna expression in latent and symptomatic infections is being studied [72] . wang et al. monitored the time course of cellular mirna expression in human cytomegalovirus (cmv)-infected cells using mirna microarrays and found that 49 mirnas significantly changed on at least 1 time point [73] . there were no global unidirectional changes, with changes for these mirnas sometimes being transient. fu and colleagues noted similar results in a human cytomegalovirus latent infection cell model using thp-1 cells [74] . the mir-199a/mir-214 cluster (mir-199a-5p, mir-199a-3p, and mir-214) was recently found to be downregulated in cmvinfected cells [75] . human cytomegalovirus mirna mir-us25-1-5p has been shown to inhibit viral replication by targeting multiple cellular genes during infection [75] . clearly additional studies are needed, but the use of mirnas will undoubtedly increase our understanding of the pathogenesis of cytomegalovirus.herpes simplex viruses (hsv) are evolutionarily ancient viruses that are ubiquitous, having a worldwide prevalence [76] . there are two serotypes, hsv-1 and hsv-2, both of which primarily infect humans through epithelial cells. hsv infections are extremely common; seropositivity occurs in 50-90% of adult populations [76] . the success of hsv-1 and hsv-2 as human pathogens is due to the virus first infecting epithelial cells and then entering sensory neurons via nerve termini [76, 77] . latency within long-lived neuronal cell bodies and subsequent mucocutaneous shedding is central to the survival of this neurotrophic virus [77] . the generally mild sequelae of hsv infection reflects a balance between the host and the virus in most immunocompetent persons [76, 77] . however, hsv infections of the central nervous system are recognized, but relatively rare complications of this infection [78] . the mirnas of hsv are of particular interest due to the latency of this virus as well as its role in cns infections [79] . infection of human primary neural cells with a high phenotypic reactivator hsv-1 (17syn+) can induce upregulation of a brain-enriched microrna (mirna)-146a [80] . both mir-101 and mir-132 are also found to be highly upregulated after hsv-1 [81, 82] .another factor in terms of the involvement of hsv in cns infections is the fact that mirnas are key regulators of neuroinflammation [83] . several mirnas have been found to play an important role in the microglia-mediated inflammatory response including mir-155 and mir-146a [83] . another mirna, mir-125, plays a critical role in the adaptation of microglia and macrophages to the cns microenvironment [84] . traumatic brain injury has been shown to produce profound and lasting neuroinflammation; micrornas have been implicated in the regulation of inflammation after traumatic brain injury [85] . in particular, mir-155 is induced after traumatic brain injury and is thought to play an important role in the regulation of the ifn response and neurodegeneration following brain injuries [85] . the net sum of this regulation is thought to be neuroprotective, which in turn may predispose the brain to viral infections such as herpes simplex encephalitis [86] .kaposi's sarcoma (ks)-associated herpesvirus (kshv) is the etiological agent of ks; this virus is also known as human herpesvirus 8 (hhv-8) [87] . kaposi's sarcoma is a mesenchymal tumor with poorly understood molecular and cytogenetic changes. the predicted target genes for differentially expressed mirnas include genes that are involved in cellular processes such as angiogenesis and apoptosis, which suggests a role for these mirnas in the pathogenesis of kaposi's sarcoma [88] . ks tumor cells are latently infected with kshv, which express only a subset of viral genes, among them 12 mirnas [89] . the metabolic properties of kshv-infected cells are similar to those of cancer cell and display features of lymphatic endothelial differentiation [89] . the m type k15 protein of kshv induces the expression of micrornas mir-21 and mir-31 via this conserved motif [90] , while k13 strongly stimulated upregulation of mir-146a [91] . kshv mirnas expression decrease mitochondrial biogenesis and induce aerobic glycolysis; this metabolic shift favors latency and offers a growth advantage [89] .epstein-barr virus (ebv) is a gammaherpesvirus that infects most humans during their lifetime [92, 93] ; these infections are usually asymptomatic but result in a lifelong latent infection [94] that is controlled by the host's immune system [95] . ebv also is an oncogenic herpesvirus [96] that is endemic in humans and is found in about 15% of patients with diffuse large b-cell lymphoma (dlbcl) [97] . multiple cellular functions are mediated by the mirnas of ebv [98] . for example, ebv de novo infection of primary cultured human b-cells results in a dramatic downregulation of cellular mirna expression, with 99.5% of the mirnas detected being downregulated, with an average downregulation of 19.92-fold [99] . imig et al. found that expression of hsa-mir-424, hsa-mir-223, hsa-mir-199a-3p, hsa-mir-199a-5p, hsa-mir-27b, hsa-mir-378, hsa-mir-26b, hsa-mir-23a, and hsa-mir-23b were upregulated and those of hsa-mir-155, hsa-mir-20b, hsa-mir-221, hsa-mir-151-3p, hsa-mir-222, hsa-mir-29b/c, and hsa-mir-106a were downregulated more than twofold due to ebv-infection of dlbcl [100] . cameron et al. demonstrated differential expression of cellular mirnas in type iii versus type i ebv latency including elevated expression of mir-21, mir-23a, mir-24, mir-27a, mir-34a, mir-146a and b, and mir-155. in contrast, mir-28 expression was found to be lower in type iii latency [101] .the role of mirnas in mammalian host signaling and defense against bacterial pathogens has been recognized [102] and will provide both insights and diagnostic opportunities. the use of mirna patterns for diagnosing bacterial infections is evolving [6] . helicobacter pylori is a bacterium that utilizes multiple colonization factors and virulence factors to persist in the human stomach for life [103] . this persistent colonization of the gastric mucosa results in an inflammatory process that may remain asymptomatic for decades or progress to a more serious disease such as gastric carcinoma [104] . the host immune response along with the h. pylori gene expression and mirnas is involved in this process; specific mirna patterns may prove to be useful for detecting a shift from asymptomatic carriage to gastric carcinoma [104] . in vitro infection assays have revealed that h. pylori infection can affect mirna expression profiles: specifically, mirnas such as mirna-155, mirna-16, and mirna-146a are significantly upregulated in human gastric epithelial cells during infection [105] . more recently, expression patterns of mirna in gastric mucosa infected with h. pylori using endoscopic biopsy specimens were determined by microarray. there were 31 differentially expressed mirnas between the h. pylori-infected and h. pylori-uninfected mucosa (more than twofold), and mirna expression profiling could distinguish h. pylori status, with the eight mir-nas yielding acceptable sensitivity and specificity [106] . overexpression of mir-223 has been described in h. pylori-associated gastric cancer and appears to contribute to cancer cell proliferation and migration [107] . muscle-specific mir-nas mir-1 and mir-133 were significantly downregulated in the stomachs after long-term infection with h. pylori in mouse model [108] .salmonellae cause a wide range of human infections, including gastroenteritis, bacteremia, enteric fever, and focal infections such as osteomyelitis [109] . salmonellae have been shown to render human host cells more susceptible to infection by controlling host cell cycle progression through the active modulation of host cell mirnas [110] . schulte et al. identified differentially regulated mirnas by comparative deep sequencing of a total of 14 cdna libraries prepared from the small rna population of host cells before or after salmonella infection, or in mocktreated cells [111] . in murine raw 264.7 cells, upregulation of mir-21, mir-146a/b, and mir-155 was observed after infection; they also observed significant downregulation of several let-7 family members, namely, let-7a/let-7c/let-7d/let-7f/ let-7 g/let-7i and mir-98. in hela cells, a significant upregulation of mirnas by salmonella was limited to mir-1308. in contrast, mir-21, mir-146a/b, or mir-155 remained unaffected. intriguingly, downregulation of let-7 mirnas also occurred in hela cells [111] .mycobacterium avium subspecies hominissuis is an opportunistic pathogen of immunocompromised individuals [112] . sharbati et al. performed mirna as well as mrna expression analysis of human monocyte-derived macrophages infected with several mycobacterium avium hominissuis strains using microarrays as well as rt-qpcr [113] . they that found expressions of let-7e, mir-29a, and mir-886-5p were increased in response to mycobacterial infection at 48 h [113] .the human papillomavirus (hpv) is associated with a number of oral, genital, and cutaneous conditions that may be benign or malignant [114, 115] . the association of hpv and cervical cancer is well-known because most cervical cancers contain hpv dna, notably hpv types 16 and 18 [116] . the contribution of hpv to anogenital, oral, and oropharyngeal cancers is less clear [115] . the altered expression of mirnas in these hpv-associated cancers has been investigated as a marker for possible diagnosis and therapy [117] . expressions of mir-23b, mir-34a, and mir-218 are significantly reduced by hpv e6 infection, while hpv e7 infection downregulates expression of mir-15a/mir-16-1 and mir-203 [118] .accurate determination of mirna expression levels in a specific cell, tissue, or fluids is prerequisite to assess their biological, pathological, and clinical roles in health and disease. theoretically, all mrna detection methods should be useful for mirna analysis. however, the following characteristics of mirna sequences make quantification of mirnas expression a technical challenge. firstly, mature mirna is short (only 19-25 nucleotides; nts), and mirnas within the same family may differ by a single nucleotide, which makes it difficult to design specific primers and probes and to reliably amplify or label each mirna without introducing signal bias. secondly, mirnas are heterogeneous in their gc content, which results in melting temperatures (tm) of these nucleic acid duplexes that vary widely. finally, the target sequence is present in the primary mirna transcript (pri-mirna), the precursor mirna (pre-mirna), and the mature mirna. it is therefore important to ensure that the non-active pri-mirna and pre-mirna precursor species do not contribute to the detection signal [119] . several standard methods for quantification of mrna levels have been successfully adapted to mirna including northern blotting, cloning, in situ hybridization, rt-pcr, and microarrays. in addition, emerging techniques based on colorimetric, fluorescence, bioluminescence, enzyme, and electrochemical hold immense promise for the future of mirna detection. however, technical issues must be addressed before they are included among the current standard methods [120] .northern blotting was the first technique used to detect mirnas and is considered the "gold standard" for characterizing mirna expression. the basic procedures of mirna northern blotting are similar to traditional blotting and are done as follows:(a) the small rna molecules are separated by using high-percentage denaturing urea-acrylamide gels rather than the usual agarose electrophoresis gels; (b) the small rna molecules are transferred from the gel onto a membrane; (c) the mirna molecules are fixed on the membrane through various cross-linking procedures; and (d) the membrane is hybridized with radiolabeled oligonucleotide probes. northern blotting methods are able to determine the absolute amount of mirna in a sample by blotting a dilution series of synthetic oligo mirna molecules of known concentrations in parallel with the sample. the concentration of mirna in the sample can be calculated by a standard curve obtained from the dilution series. however, short length as well as low prevalence of mature mirna molecules can lead to poor sensitivity of such routine northern analysis. it requires a large amount of total rna for each sample (generally, more than 5 μg). other disadvantages of this method include low throughput and potential environment hazards of radiolabeling. several technical modifications have been used to improve detection sensitivity. lna (locked nucleic acid)-modified oligonucleotide probes increase the affinity between lna probes and target mirna which results to at least tenfold increase of sensitivity [121] . using soluble carbodiimide cross-link method increases the efficiency of mirna that are fixed on the membrane, which can increase by 25-50-fold mirna detection sensitivity compared to the traditional uv cross-linking method [122] .the most widely used method for detection and qualification of mirna appears to be real-time quantitative rt-pcr (rt-qpcr). the small size of the mature mirna sequences as well as sequence homology between the mature and precursor mirna forms limits the direct application of conventional rt-pcr protocols to mirna detection. to solve these problems, innovative solutions have been applied for each step of rt-qpcr used for the quantitative analysis of mirnas. the first step in rt-qpcr of mirnas is the accurate and complete conversion of mirna into cdna. two different approaches for reverse transcription of mirnas have been reported. in the first approach, mirnas are reverse transcribed individually by using mirnas-specific reverse transcription primers. both stem-loop (applied biosystems co, fig. 1a ) and a linear primer (exiqon, fig. 1b) containing partial complementary sequence of 3′-end of mirna can be annealed to mirna in order to prime the reverse transcription. the double-stranded structure of the stem-loop primer prevents its nonspecific binding to pre-and pri-mirnas, thereby increasing the specificity of the assay. unlike stem-loop primer, the design of the linear primer is simpler. but the linear primer cannot discriminate mature mirna from their precursors.another approach is done as follows: mirnas are first tailed with adenosine nucleotides at 3′-end of mirna with poly(a) polymerase (fig. 1c ) or linker adaptor with t4 rna ligase 1 (fig. 1d) . then, a primer consisting of an oligo(dt) sequence with a universal primer-binding sequence at its 5′-end or a universal primer complementary to the 3′-end of the linker is used to prime reverse transcription [119] . the universal reverse primer sequence is introduced into the cdna during reverse transcription. the design of the mirna-specific forward primer is critical for the specificity and sensitivity of the rt-qpcr assay. lna modification is a widely used method for increasing the tm and the specificity of primer. each incorporated lna monomer increases the tm up to 2-8 °c, depending upon the position of the lna moiety in the oligonucleotide primer [123] .there are two approaches available for detection of rt-qpcr products. one approach uses sybr green dye whose fluorescence increases approximately 100 times upon intercalating into dsdna chain; this property is used to monitor realtime amplification products as they accumulate during the pcr reaction. one limitation of the sybr green-based method is that target pcr products and nonspecific products cannot be discriminated. therefore, a melting point analysis is usually required following the pcr amplification, which can be reached by using a duallabeled hydrolysis taqman probe. the basis for this type of taqman probe detection has been reviewed by benes [119] . the characteristics of taqman mirna assays make them ideally suited for detection of mature mirnas. moreover, these taqman mirna assays can discriminate related mirnas that differ only one nucleotide. however, the cost of the taqman probes is higher than the sybr green method, which limits its routine use in most laboratories.the rt-qpcr method has demonstrated a high sensitivity and specificity with ability to accurately detect mirnas in a single stem cell [124, 125] . only low amounts of starting material (in the range of nanograms of total rna) are needed, and quantitative results can be acquired within 3 h. this method also has a considerably larger dynamic range compared to microarray analysis. recently, the rt-qpcr technique has been adapted for increased throughput by developing a mirna pcr array that can detect hundreds of mirnas at one reaction tube. examples include the taqman low density microrna array (tlda, applied biosystems) and the rt [2] mirna pcr arrays (sabioscience, a qiagen company).another widely used high-throughput technique for analysis of the expression level of mirna molecules is microarray technology. the microarray technology was firstly applied to mirna studies in 2003 [126] . since then, numerous approaches based on different microarray platforms have been developed for mirna quantification. the basic procedures of mirna quantification using a microarray platform include (a) mirna probe design and array preparation, (b) isolation of mirna and labeling, and (c) hybridization and signal detection. a schematic flow chart of the mirna profiling microarray is shown in fig. 2 . the design of the microrna probes, isolation of microrna from samples, and the labeling of mirnas are the most critical procedures in the mirna microarray assay. the short length of mirnas makes design of the probes more difficult because the design of the probe is almost exclusively determined by sequence of the mirna itself. sequence of the mirna determines the wider tm distribution of the probes. therefore, tm normalization of the full set of probes is absolutely required since the hybridization is usually carried out at one temperature. to solve this problem, two techniques, lna utilization or adjusting the lengths of the probes, have been successfully used to normalize tm value [127, 128] . quantity of mirna is also very important for mirna microarray assay since the abundance of mirnas in total rna is very low and a relatively large amount of mirna is needed in comparison to a rt-pcr assay. conventional denaturing urea-acrylamide gel electrophoresis fig. 2 schematic flow chart of the microrna profiling microarray. a mirna microarray prepared by amine-modified microrna probes that consist of "linker" sequences (yellow) and capture sequences (blue) spotting to amine-reactive glass slides. after mirnas are isolated from samples and labeled with fluorescence dye, they are hybridized with microarray and then the expression signal can be detected by fluorescence detector combined with a commercialized kit (e.g., the mirvana™ microrna isolation kit of ambion, inc. and the purelink™ microrna isolation kit of invitrogen co) has demonstrated excellent efficiency in isolating mirna.labeling of mirna is an absolutely key step for the overall sensitivity of the microarray. many methods have been developed to label mirna, and these can be classified into two main categories: direct labeling and indirect labeling. direct labeling with fluorescent dye can be accomplished enzymatically. currently used methods include labeling through poly(a) polymerase, labeling through t4 rna ligase, guanine labeling, and labeling microrna through a rna-primed arraybased klenow enzyme assay (rake). fluorescent dye also can conjugate with adjacent 3'-oh of mature mirnas using a chemical reagent [129, 130] . indirect labeling methods include labeling through mirna reverse transcript, the rt-pcr product of mirna, or the in vitro transcript of mirna. the advantages of indirect labeling are obvious since the reverse transcription product of mirnas is more stable and easy to preserve. in addition, mirna can be amplified and labeled synchronously through pcr or in vitro transcription, which is very useful for lowabundance mirnas. although direct labeling is simple, this method has inherent problems including the fact that guanine labeling is not suitable for mirnas lacking g residues, that t4 ligase labeling can introduce base bias, and that the procedure of chemical labeling is somewhat complicated. though indirect labeling is more sensitive, this method may introduce artificial errors during the ligation and pcr amplification procedures.another microarray technique, which uses biotin-labeled mirnas to hybridize with lan probes, has been coupled to xmap suspension microspheres (luminex co) to offer more rapid and reproducible results than does solid planar array due to its favorable reaction kinetics in liquid phase. using this technique, a single nt difference can be discriminated [131] . microarray technology has proven to be standard technique for profiling mirna expression. however, due to relatively low specificity and reduced dynamic range compared to other methods, the results obtained from microarray often require the validation via rt-qpcr.next-generation sequencing (ngs) is also called massively parallel or deep sequencing and is becoming the most effective method for mirna analysis. sequence throughput of ngs is unapproachable by other mirna analysis technique since they lay dna fragments on a single chip and simultaneous sequencing up to millions of these fragments in parallel. the principle of ngs has been described in other chapter of this book and elsewhere [132, 133] . currently, three main platforms are in widespread use for mirna profiling and discovery: the roche (454) gs flx sequencer, the illumina genome analyzer, and the applied biosystems solid sequencer. the methodologies of the ngs for mirna analysis are similar and include srna isolation, library preparation, sequencing, and data analysis. in addition to increased throughput, ngs technique significantly reduces cloning biases observed with traditional capillary sequencing since sequence reads are generated from fragment libraries that don't need to be cloned and amplified.another key advantage of ngs over microarrays in mirna study is that it can profile unknown genes since no sequence-specific probes are needed for detection. currently, most novel mirnas have been discovered and characterized through ngs. ngs can also gauge mirna expression level by counting clone frequencies, which has demonstrated more sensitivity than microarrays [132] . one disadvantage of ngs to comprehensively profile mrna expression is that this technique is rather expensive compared to microarray though its cost has significantly decreased with the development of commercial platforms. another limitation of ngs is that the read length is relatively short (35-500 bp) compared to traditional capillary sequencing (1000-1200 bp). this limits their use for de novo assembly of complete genomes but makes them become the ideal instruments for mirna profiling since the length of mirnas (21-35 nucleotides) is shorter than the read length of ngs.as described above, each technique for mirna detection has its advantages and disadvantages. the method used should best fit the research goal and experimental conditions. for example, for new mirna discovery and identification, in addition to sequencing technique, cloning of mirna may be the simplest method. in situ hybridization is more suitable for location of mirna in tissue. northern blotting is very sensitive, but it is very time-consuming and not practical in large clinical studies for routine detection of the expression of hundreds of mirnas. rt-qpcr is able to detect low copy numbers with high sensitivity and specificity. when studying the expression levels of multi-mirnas simultaneously, microarray and sequencing may be the best choice. another important problem is that although each platform is relatively stable in terms of its own microrna profiling intra-reproducibility, the inter-platform reproducibility among different platforms is low [134] . an "industry standard" for analysis of mirna expression awaits further advances in both technology and computation [135] .the growing interest in developing circulating mirnas as blood-based biomarkers in the diagnostic microbiology field necessitates very careful consideration of the effects of various pre-analytical and analytical parameters on their quantification. to ensure that mirna quantification is not affected by the technical variability that may be introduced at the multiple different analysis steps and to minimize any other potential effect of non-biological variation in the quantification results, it is important to select and identify stable mirnas as normalizers and to choose the right normalization approaches.the correct quantification of mirna transcripts in clinical samples should include data normalization using both endogenous and exogenous control mirnas [136] [137] [138] . the selection of endogenous control mirnas is necessary to avoid false negative results due to a bad sample quality, but it is difficult. in this case a mirna gene that is expected to be stably expressed in all analyzed samples should be selected as an endogenous control. preferably target mrna levels should be normalized using as mirna normalizers control genes belonging to the same rna class [139] . based on the same concept, normalization of mirna levels should be based on endogenous control genes that belong to the small noncoding rna family (ncrna) of rnas, such as small nuclear rnas (snrna). it is important to note that the endogenous mirnas should meet the following characteristics in order to be used as mirna normalizer: (a) the mirna normalizer should be highly expressed in most samples, (b) the mirna normalizer should show invariable expression across the test sample, and (c) the mirna normalizer should have equivalent extraction and quantification efficiency with the target mirnas. in order to avoid misinterpreted data and to identify true changes in mirna expression levels, it is important to select the correct endogenous mirna normalizer. different algorithms can be used to select the best endogenous mirna normalizer including genorm [140] , normfinder [141] , and bestkeeper [142] . in most cases reported so far, researchers select their endogenous reference genes for mirna quantification according to reports in the literature or based on distinguishable low standard deviations (sd) in mirna microarrays data. in the majority of studies, a relative quantification (rq) step is included to compare the expression levels of target mirna gene with the expression of an endogenous reference gene, based on the δδcq approach as described by livak and schmittgen [143] . therefore, in each case different mirna normalizers should be first evaluated and then established for different sample types. the combination of several normalizers might be more appropriate than a single universal normalizer [144] . it is crucial to mention that the selection of a gene as a mirna normalizer should always follow validation screening tests on a subset of samples under analysis.the inclusion of synthetic mirnas as exogenous controls added to samples prior to any analysis step is also very important for mirna quantification. this is the only way to correct the different recovery rates for each sample during the various steps of mirna isolation and pcr amplification between individual clinical samples. exogenous synthetic mirnas have been used as external controls for data normalization of sample-to-sample variations in rna isolation [136, 137, 145] . the synthetic mirna is added to all the plasma aliquots as an exogenous mirna spiked-in control after the addition of the denaturating solution to avoid differences in template quality and warrant efficiency of the reverse transcription reaction. several synthetic mirnas have been used so far, including c. elegans mirna cel-mir-39 which is the almost widely used [136, 146] , mirnas quanto ec1 and quanto ec2 [147] , and the simian virus gene sv40 [148] . we have to point out that using only spike-in mirna controls for the quantification of mirna expression in clinical samples is not correct since in this case only the handling of experiments is considered, but not the sample quality. several studies have shown that normalization should be based on a combination of an endogenous and an exogenous control mirna, since in this case differences in mirna recovery and differences in cdna synthesis between samples are compensated [136, 137, 145] .concerning mirna profiling by using microarrays technology, the normalization methods have not been investigated in detail so far. one of the most widely used normalization methods in this case is based on the mean expression value of all mirnas [149] ; however, quantile normalization is also a popular method for largescale mrna array expression [150] [151] [152] , while rank-invariant set normalization [153] has been also used. the first normalization methods that were used with mirna array data employed centering to median values [154, 155] or scaling based on total array intensities [156] . variance stabilizing normalization (vsn) methods have also been applied to mirna array data [157, 158] . normalization procedures based on the set of invariants and quantile were the most robust over all experimental conditions tested. suo et al. and pradervand et al. evaluated the effectiveness of these methods by comparing the normalized microarray data to qpcr data. the correlation between the microarray and qpcr data tended to be low [157, 158] .although altered mirna expression profiles have been detected in various tissues or cells following microbial infection, these profiles have not yet been used as biomarkers in clinical practice because obtaining infected tissues and cells is difficult without invasive procedures. as described above, circulating mirnas in serum/ plasma seem more suitable for biomarkers that can be easily used for the diagnosis or prognosis of these infections. some potential uses will be discussed in the next section.chronic active epstein-barr virus (ebv) infection has high mortality and morbidity [92] [93] [94] . to explore the biomarkers for disease severity and prognosis, kawano et al. assessed the 12 plasma mirna expression levels encoded by ebv [159] . they found that virus-encoded mir-bart1-5p, mir-bart2-5p, mir-bart5, and mir-bart22 levels in patients with chronic active ebv infection were significantly greater than those in patients with infectious mononucleosis and in controls. plasma mir-bart2-5p, mir-bart4, mir-bart7, mir-bart13, mir-bart15, and mir-bart22 levels were significantly increased in the patients with systemic symptoms, compared with levels in patients without systemic symptoms. the levels of mir-bart2-5p, 13, and 15 showed clinical cutoff values associated with specific clinical conditions, in contrast to plasma ebv loads which can serve as the potentially biomarkers of disease severity or progress [159] .polyomaviruses are ubiquitous, species-specific viruses that belong to the papovaviridae family [160] . jc and bk polyomaviruses were first described in the 1970s and are the two most commonly recognized human polyomaviruses [160] . jc polyomavirus causes a fatal central nervous system demyelinating disease known as progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (pml) in immunocompromised individuals or individuals being treated with potent immunosuppressive therapies [161, 162] . jc polyomavirus is a dna tumor virus that has a double-stranded dna genome encoding a well-studied oncogene, large t antigen [163] . the expression of the jc polyomavirus mirnas has been investigated after infection in vitro [164] . the jc polyomavirus expressed several mirnas, jc-mirna-3p and jc-mirna-5p [164] . jc polyomavirus also encodes another microrna, jcv-mir-j1. the expression of jcv-mir-j1-5p and its variant jcv-mir-j1a-5p in 50 healthy subjects was investigated [165] . the overall detection rate of jcpyv mirna was 74% (37/50) in plasma and 62% (31/50) in urine. the detection rate was 86% (12/14) and 57% (8/14) of plasma and urine samples in seronegative subjects, while the detection rate was 69% (25/36) and 64% (23/36) in seropositive subjects. furthermore, in seropositive subjects shedding virus in urine, higher levels of urinary viral mirnas were observed, compared to non-shedding seropositive subjects [165] .bk polyomavirus is the cause of nephritis in renal transplant patients and often results in graft loss [160, 166] . bk polyomavirus is latent in the urogenital tract and is able to reactivate and replicate in the nucleus of renal epithelial tubular cells of the transplanted kidney [160, 167] . bk polyomavirus-specific bkv-mir-b1-5p, jc polyomavirus-specific jcv-mir-j1-5p, and bkv-mir-b1-3p/jcv-mir-j1-3p, sharing identical sequences between the two viruses, were analyzed from body fluids diagnosed with, or suspected of, a severe polyomavirus-associated disease [167] . the mirnas frequently amplified from human plasma, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid samples. bkv-mir-b1-5p was amplified from one-third of the samples which often contained high viral dna loads. their diagnosis and management significances in severe polyomavirus-associated diseases need further clinical evaluation [167] .diagnosis and monitoring of sepsis can be difficult because many of its signs and symptoms can be caused by other noninfectious disorders [1, 2, 4, 8] . the current gold standard for diagnosing septicemia is the blood culture, which generally takes several days or longer. other early biomarkers of sepsis are being investigated; these include acute phase proteins (c-reactive protein), cytokines (il-1, il-6, il-10 and tnf-a), chemokines (il-8, mcp-1 and g-csf), procalcitonin, and metabonomic [1, 2, 4, 8] . to date, these biomarkers have not demonstrated sufficient sensitivity and/or specificity to guide clinical management. host mirna expression profiles have been intensively studied using both in vitro or in vivo models of inflammation [33, 34, 168, 169] ; some of these studies use escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide (lps) stimulation as a trigger [170] . for example, expression of mir-146, mir-155, and mir-132 increased in human acute monocytic leukemia cell line thp-1 in response to lps stimulation [171] . upregulation of mir-155, mir-223, and mir-146a and downregulation of mir-125b, mir-144, and mir-142-5p have been observed in human monocyte-derived dendritic cells by ceppi et al. [172] . schmidt et al. screened for differentially expressed mirnas in circulating leukocytes using an in vivo model of acute inflammation also triggered by lps [170] . they found that four mirnas were downregulated (mir-146b, mir-150, mir-342, and let-7 g) and one was upregulated (mir-143).vasilescu et al. profiled genome-wide mirnas by microarray in peripheral blood leukocytes of sepsis patients and found that mir-150, mir-182, mir-342-5p, and mir-486 expression profiles differentiated sepsis patients from healthy controls [33] . moreover, mir-150 levels were significantly reduced in plasma samples of sepsis patients and correlated with the level of disease severity. finally, these investigators noted that the plasma levels ratio for mir-150/interleukin-18 can be used for assessing the severity of the sepsis. more recently, wang et al. have analyzed seven mirnas expression levels in patients diagnosed with sepsis, systemic inflammatory response syndrome (sirs), and healthy controls using a rt-qpcr assay [34] . they determined serum mir-146a and mir-223 were significantly reduced in septic patients compared with sirs patients and healthy controls. the areas under the receiver operating characteristic curve of mir-146a, mir-223, and il-6 were 0.858, 0.804, and 0.785, respectively.with approximately nine million new cases of tuberculosis (tb) each year, tuberculosis remains a global scourge [173, 174] . moreover, the emergence and increase in highly resistant strains as well as the emergence of functionally untreatable tb have made the diagnosis and control of tb particularly important [175] . the gold standard for the diagnosis of tb continues to be the growth of mycobacterium tuberculosis in selective media, but this culture in clinical specimens requires long incubation time (3-12 weeks) due to the slow growth of m. tuberculosis [173] . the diagnostic usefulness of interferon-gamma-releasing assays has been reviewed, the t-spot. tb assay has proven to be a helpful adjunct test for diagnosing tb [176] . additional accurate, tuberculosis-specific biomarkers are needed [177] . human and mycobacterial mirnas are being evaluated for their usefulness as tuberculosisspecific biomarkers [7, 178, 179] . studies have shown that mir-155 and mir-155* in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmcs) isolated from active tb (atb) patients exhibited characteristic expression under purified protein derivative (ppd) challenge [180] . mirna expression profiles have been shown to be different in pbmcs from patients with active tb, latent tb infection (ltb), and healthy controls [181] . differences in mirna expression of whole blood between tb and sarcoidosis (sarc) were also detected [182] . the expression levels of mirnas in serum samples from 30 patients with active tuberculosis have been profiled [183] . ninety-seven mirnas were differentially expressed in pulmonary tb patient sera compared with healthy controls (90 upregulated and 7 downregulated). following rt-qpcr confirmation and receiver operating characteristic (roc) curve analysis, three mirnas (mir-361-5p, mir-889, and mir-576-3p) were shown to distinguish tb-infected patients from healthy controls and other microbial infections with moderate sensitivity and specificity (area under curve (auc) value range, 0.711-0.848). multiple logistic regression analysis of a combination of these three mirnas showed an enhanced ability to discriminate between these two groups with an auc value of 0.863 [184] . fu et al. also explore the potential roles of circulating mirnas in active pulmonary tuberculosis infection. they found that 59 mirnas were downregulated and 33 mirnas were upregulated in the tb serum compared to their levels in the control serum. interestingly, only two differentially expressed mirnas were increased not only in the serum but also in the sputum of patients with active pulmonary tuberculosis compared to the levels for the healthy controls. their results indicated that upregulated mir-29a could discriminate tb patients from healthy controls with reasonable sensitivity and specificity [185] . zhang et al. employed qpcr assay to detect the expression level of mir-183 in blood from tb patients and healthy individuals. expression level of mir-183 was found to be increased in serum samples from tb patients, compared with healthy controls. further analysis revealed that mir-183 level is positively associated with the activity of macrophages from tb patients [186] . references 158-163 don't make sense in that the topics in these references are not about tb.pertussis, also known as whooping cough, is caused by bordetella pertussis (b. pertussis) [187] . despite high levels of vaccination, b. pertussis continues to circulate in asia, europe, the united states, australia, and other countries, making pertussis a reemerging disease [188] [189] [190] [191] [192] . it is clear that the diagnosis of pertussis is still relevant despite ongoing efforts to improve pertussis vaccines [192] . the serum mirna profile in pertussis patients was investigated in order to explore its potential as a novel diagnostic biomarker for pertussis [193] . serum mirna profile in pertussis patients was analyzed using a mirna array; 50 mirnas were overexpressed, and 81 were under-expressed in the serum of pertussis patients [193] . expression levels of seven candidate mirnas were further evaluated by real-time rt-qpcr. a panel of five mirnas (mir-202, mir-342-5p, mir-206, mir-487b, mir-576-5p) was confirmed as being overexpressed in pertussis patients [193] . risk score and receiver operating characteristic (roc) curve analysis showed that the area under the curve of the five-member mirna profile was 0.980. at an optimal cutoff value (0.707), this panel of mirnas yielded a sensitivity of 97.4% and a specificity of 94.3%. these data suggest that this five-member serum mirna profile may serve as a new biomarker for pertussis diagnosis with high specificity and sensitivity [193] .varicella, also called chickenpox, is a highly contagious disease caused by varicellazoster virus [194] [195] [196] . although varicella vaccination has become routine for all children at 12-15 months of age in the united states, germany, australia, and korea [196] , outbreaks of varicella are still seen in the community [194] . expression levels of mirnas in serum samples from 29 patients with varicella were analyzed using tlda [197] . the array results showed that 247 mirnas were differentially expressed in sera of the varicella patients compared with healthy controls (215 upregulated and 32 downregulated) . through the following rt-qpcr confirmation and receiver operating characteristic (roc) curve analysis, five mirnas (mir-197, mir-629, mir-363, mir-132, and mir-122) were shown to distinguish varicella patients from healthy controls and other microbial infections with moderate sensitivity and specificity [197] . li et al. found that six mirnas, including mir-190b, mir-571, mir-1276, mir-1303, mir-943, and mir-661, exhibited significant higher expression levels (more than fourfold) in herpes zoster (hz) patients, compared with those of healthy controls and herpes simplex virus (hsv) patients [197] . the altered mirna could be potentially used as biomarkers to test for latent hz infection [198, 199] .novel human influenza a virus strains continue to emerge and evolve from avian influenza strains and result in yearly epidemics and occasional pandemics [200] . the latest of these zoonotic avian influenza a strains to infection humans is the h7n9 avian influenza strain [201, 202] . mirna regulates host immune response and pathogenesis during influenza a infection and modulated viral replication [203] . serum mirna profile in response to h7n9 virus infection has been characterized using tlda [61] . upon infection, a total of 395 mirnas were expressed in the serum pool of patients, far beyond the 221 in healthy controls. among the 187 commonly expressed mirnas, 146 were upregulated and only 7 were downregulated in patients. further analysis by quantitative rt-pcr revealed that the serum levels of mir-17, mir-20a, mir-106a, and mir-376c were significantly elevated in patients compared with healthy individuals. roc curves were constructed to show that each mirna could discriminate h7n9 patients from controls with auc values ranging from 0.622 to 0.898, whereas a combination of mir-17, mir-20a, mir-106a, and mir-376c obtained a higher discriminating ability with an auc value of 0.96. these findings reveal significant alterations in serum mirna expression following influenza virus infection [61] and confirm the great potential of circulating mirnas for the diagnosis of influenza and other viral diseases [5, 203] .infection with hiv-1 leads to a systemic destruction of t cells and diminished cellmediated immunity resulting in a wide range of opportunistic infections as well as cancers [204] . although treatment with antiretroviral therapy increases the survival of hiv-infected individuals, it does not result in eradication of infection [205] . moreover, efforts to vaccinate against hiv-1 have not been successful [206] . hiv-1 is known to persist in resting t cells and also may persist in different cell types [205] . understanding the role that mirnas may play in the pathogenesis of hiv-1 may allow different approaches to both antiretroviral therapy and vaccine development [45] [46] [47] 207] . studies have shown the different expression pattern of mirnas in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmcs), cd4 + t cells, cd8 + t cells, and monocytes from hiv-1-infected subjects [207] . for instance, wang et al. have reported that four mirnas (mirna-28, mirna-150, mirna-223, and mirna-382) showed different expression levels between monocytes and macrophages in hiv infection [50] . a cohort of 128 plasma samples from hiv-1-infected subjects and 37 samples from healthy donors have been analyzed in the light of hiv-1-infected patients with low (<200 cell/μl), medium (200-350 cell/μl), and high (>350 cell/μl) cd4+ t cell count (ltc, mtc, and htc). of the 754 host mirnas (excluding endogenous controls) incorporated in the array, 232, 346, 316, and 258 mirnas were detected in plasma of healthy controls, ltc, mtc, and htc groups, respectively. a total of 297 mirnas differentially expressed in ltc subjects, of which 273 were upregulated and 24 were downregulated compared to healthy controls. similarly, a total of 257 mirnas (236 upregulated and 21 downregulated) were differentially regulated in mtc subjects compared to healthy controls. however, in the htc group, only 127 mirnas (85 upregulated and 42 downregulated) were differentially regulated compared to healthy controls. fifteen mirnas (mir-29a, mir-223, mir-27a, mir-19b, mir-151-3p, mir-28-5p, mir-766, mir-30a-3p, mir-136*, mir-125b, mir-18a, mir-769, mir-942, mir-1197, and mir-518b) were randomly selected for further analysis. among these, seven mirnas (mir-1197, mir-766, mir-136*, mir-151-3p, mir-518b, mir-769, and mir-942) were commonly dysregulated in all three groups. the other eight mir-nas were upregulated expression in ltc, and mtc groups compared controls. a combination of nine mirnas (mir-29a, mir-223, mir-27a, mir-19b, mir-151-3p, mir-28-5p, mir-766, mir-30a-3p, and mir-136*) were found to distinguish the hiv-1-infected patients from healthy controls with sensitivity of 96.1% and specificity of 97.3% and auc = 0.994 [208] . seven of them were significantly associated with cd4 + t cell count and thus have a great potential to serve as biomarkers for monitoring the hiv immune status.hepatitis b virus (hpv) infects the liver and causes acute and/or chronic liver diseases that may progress to cirrhosis of the liver or to hepatocellular carcinoma [209] . hbv infection is also known to modulate the expression of host cellular mirnas, which then participate in development of hbv-related liver diseases [210, 211] . the mirna profiles in chronic hepatitis b patient tissues or in hbv-expressing cells have been reviewed by liu et al. [212] . li et al. profiled serum mirnas of healthy controls, hbv-, hcv-, and hbv-positive hepatocellular carcinoma (hcc)affected individuals by solexa sequencing followed by validation with quantitative rt-pcr assay [34] . these investigators successfully identified 13 mirnas that are differentially expressed in hbv serum. this 13-mirna-based biomarker accurately discriminated not only hbv cases from controls and hcv cases but also hbv-positive hcc cases from control and hbv cases. for example, when using four markers (mir-375, mir-10a, mir-223, and mir-423) to separate the control and hbv groups, the auc was 99.9 ± 0.1% (sensitivity, 99.3%; specificity, 98.8%). similarly, two markers (mir-92a and mir-423) could separate the control and hcv groups with a high specificity and sensitivity (auc, 99.6 ± 0.4%; sensitivity, 97.9%; specificity, 99.4%). the control and hbv-positive hcc group could be clearly separated by five markers (mir-23b, mir-423, mir-375, mir-23a, and mir-342-3p; auc, 99.9 ± 0.1%; sensitivity, 96.9%; specificity, 99.4%). similarly, the hbv and the hbv-positive hcc group could be separated by two markers (mir-10a and mir-125b; auc, 99.2 ± 0.6%; sensitivity, 98.5%; specificity, 98.5%) [34] .another study profiled mirna expression on pooled sera obtained from identified groups of chronic asymptomatic carriers (asc), patients with chronic hepatitis b (chb) and hbv-associated acute-on-chronic liver failure (aclf), as well as healthy controls (hc) using applied biosystems taqmanarray assay [213] . a total of 37 mirnas were amplified from hc, whereas 77, 101, and 135 were amplified from asc, chb, and aclf, respectively. the expression levels of most mirnas were also upregulated in hbv-infected patients when compared to hc. furthermore, the level of mirnas in the chb serum was upregulated most in hepatitis b e antigen-positive patients. the expression of mir-122, the most abundant mirna in liver tissue, was significantly higher in hbv-infected groups than in hc. the expression of mir-223 was similar between hc and asc but increased significantly in chb and aclf. the expression levels of mir-122 and mir-194 correlated negatively with the age of patients with chb or aclf.hepatitis c virus (hcv) also infects the liver and causes hepatitis, cirrhosis of the liver, and hepatocellular carcinoma [214] . mirnas are thought to regulate multiple aspects of hcv live cycles; certain mirnas appear to serve as essential mediators for interferon-based antiviral therapy [215, 216] . in an in vitro acute hcv infection model, 108 human mirnas were identified whose expression levels changed for more than 2.0-fold in response to hcv infection [217] . marquez et al. measured mir-122 and mir-21 levels in hcv-infected human liver biopsies relative to uninfected human livers and correlated these with clinical patient data [218] . they found that mir-21 expression correlated with viral load, fibrosis, and serum liver transaminase levels, while mir-122 expression inversely correlated with fibrosis, liver transaminase levels, and patient age. morita et al. has described hepatic mir-122 expression that was weakly and positively correlated with the serum hcv load but was not correlated with hcv load in the human liver [219] .bihrer et al. found that sera from patients with chronic hcv infection contained higher levels of mir-122 than sera from healthy controls [36] . serum mir-122 levels correlated well with markers of liver inflammatory activity, that is, the serum levels of alanine leucine transaminase (alt) and aspartate transaminase, and the histologic activity index (hai) score. in patients with persistently normal alt levels, serum mir-122 levels did not differ from healthy controls. there was no correlation of serum mir-122 levels with serum albumin, international normalized ratio, liver fibrosis, or serum hcv rna. thus, serum mir-122 appears to act as a biomarker of necroinflammation in patients with chronic hepatitis c infection.enteroviruses are common causes of human infections with a diverse array of clinical features ranging from gastroenteritis to meningoencephalitis and myocarditis to pleuritis [220] . the role of mirnas in the pathogenesis of enterovirus infections are becoming appreciated although not yet fully understood [221] . a comprehensive mirna profiling in ev71-infected hep2 cells using deep sequencing has been performed [222] . a total of 64 mirnas were found whose expression levels changed for more than twofold in response to ev71 infection [222] . ho et al. found that upregulation of mir-141 upon enterovirus infection can facilitate viral propagation by expediting the translational switch [223] . host serum mirna levels in patients with hand-foot-and-mouth disease caused by enterovirus 71 (ev71) and coxsackievirus 16 (cva16) as well as in other microbial infections and in healthy individuals have been compared [224] . among 664 different mirnas analyzed using a mirna array, 102 were upregulated and 26 were downregulated in sera of patients with enteroviral infections. expression levels of ten candidate mirnas were further evaluated by quantitative real-time pcr assays. a receiver operating characteristic (roc) curve analysis revealed that six mirnas (mir-148a, mir-143, mir-324-3p, mir-628-3p, mir-140-5p, and mir-362-3p) were able to discriminate patients with enterovirus infections from healthy controls with area under curve (auc) values ranged from 0.828 to 0.934. the combined six mirna using multiple logistic regression analysis provided not only a sensitivity of 97.1% and a specificity of 92.7% but also a unique profile that differentiated enteroviral infections from other microbial infections. expression levels of five mirnas (mir-148a, mir-143, mir-324-3p, mir-545, and mir-140-5p) were significantly increased in patients with cva16 versus those with ev71 (p < 0.05). combination of mir-545, mir-324-3p, and mir-143 possessed a moderate ability to discrimination between cva16 and ev71 with an auc value of 0.761. these data indicate that sera from patients with different subtypes of enteroviral infection express unique mirna profiles. serum mirna expression profiles may provide supplemental biomarkers for diagnosing and subtyping enteroviral hand-foot-and-mouth disease infections [224] .cytomegalovirus (cmv) is an important human pathogen that is often asymptomatic until the infected individual becomes immunosuppressed [71] . cmv mirna is currently under investigation [72] . plasma levels of 11 human-and 3 cmv-encoded mirnas were quantitated by real-time pcr in 13 infants with congenital cmv infection. the levels of mir-183-5p and mir-210-3p were significantly higher in patients with congenital cmv infection than in control infants. the results indicated that plasma mirnas could be associated with the pathogenesis of congenital cmv infection and could be used as disease biomarkers [225] .ebola virus (ebov) is a filovirus that initially infects dendritic cells and macrophages, which leads to lethal infections in humans and primates [226] . ebov mir-nas have been identified and may serve as biomarkers for the diagnosis and therapy of ebola viral infections [227] . ebov-induced changes in circulating mirna populations of nonhuman primates and humans have been investigated [228] . eight mirnas, including hsa-mir-146a-5p, hsa-mir-18b-5p, hsa-mir-21-3p, hsa-mir-22-3p, hsa-mir-29a-3p, hsa-mir-432-5p, hsa-mir-511-5p, and hsa-mir-596, can correctly categorize infection status in 64/74 (86%) human and nonhuman primates samples [228] .dengue is currently regarded as the most prevalent and rapidly spreading mosquitoborne virus [229] . efforts have been made at increasing our understanding of the pathogenesis and immunology of this viral infection [230, 231] . among these advances in knowledge are the roles of mirnas in dengue [232] . expression levels of mirnas in serum samples from three patients with dengue virus type 1 (denv-1) and three healthy volunteers were separately analyzed using mirna pcr arrays [210] . the expressions of the five selected mirnas were verified by rt-qpcr. serummir-21-5p, mir-146a-5p, mir-590-5p, mir-188-5p, and mir-152-3p were identified as promising serum indicators for dengue infection [233] .parasitic infections continue to have high morbidity and mortality rates on humans. newly recognized insight has resulted from genetic studies [210] and microrna studies [234] [235] [236] . the expression levels of circulating mirnas were also analyzed in filarial-, toxoplasma gondii-, and plasmodium vivax-infected patients [237] [238] [239] . these studies proved that altered plasma or serum mirnas were useful as the biomarker for the detection of parasite infection. for example, serum mir-223 could serve as a potential new biomarker for the detection of schistosome infection and the assessment of the response to chemotherapy. plasma mir-451 and mir-16 are relevant biomarkers for malaria infection. mir-71 and mir-34 discriminated onchocerca volvulus-infected samples from uninfected samples.circulating mirnas have been investigated as the diagnosis or prognosis marker for microbial infections. studies on host mirna profiles for microbial infections are underway. host mirna profiles have a considerable way to go before they will be ready for use in clinical practice. several issues remain to be clarified in this field: (a) source material should be fixed. plasma, serum, whole blood, and isolated exosomes or microvesicles have been used as the source for mirna profiling. advantages and disadvantages of each source should be considered prior to selecting the source. (b) though differences in circulating mirnas between males and females have not been found with the exception of differences associated with pregnancy [240, 241] , mirna levels in plasma, and serum from a large number of normal individuals of both genders and various ages, even the same individual over time should be extensively studied. (c) no acknowledged reference genes have been found in serum/plasma. commonly used endogenous controls, such as mir-16, are dysregulated in some diseases; rnu6b is degraded in serum. spiking into rna isolation processes with synthetic exogenous mirna only acts as a normalizers for differences in recovery between samples. (d) the methods of mirna quantification including rna isolation should be standardized since inter-platform reproducibility among different platforms is low. (e) it seems to lack of specificity using single mirna as biomarker since the mirna commonly regulated in various disease. a panel of mirnas would be a best choice.background s100a12, also referred to as calgranulin c, belongs to the calgranulin subfamily of the highly conserved s100 proteins [1, 2] . the s100 superfamily of ef-hand proteins has a high ca 2+ -binding capacity and binding sites for other divalent cations such as zn 2+ and cu 2+ ; oligomerization in the presence of ca 2+ and zn 2+ has been shown to be essential for the target protein interaction and function of s100a12 [3] [4] [5] .intracellular s100a12 protein is mainly localized to the cytosol, and a number of different target proteins of s100a12 suggest that this protein has regulatory functions [6] [7] [8] . extracellular s100a12 has cytokine-like effects and functions as a phagocyte-specific danger-associated molecule (alarmin), with a central role in immune responses [9] . s100a12 plays a role in host defense against microorganisms and parasites [10] by sequestering essential trace elements such as cu 2+ [3] , and the protein also has chemotactic properties especially for monocytes and mast cells [6, 11, 12] . s100a12 has also been suggested to counteract tissue damage by competing with matrix metalloproteinases (mmps) for zn 2+ -binding [13] . the s100a12 protein is a ligand for the pattern recognition receptor rage (receptor for advanced glycation end products) and activates the nuclear factor kappa b (nf-kb) pathway [6, 14] , a mechanism linked to the pathogenesis of autoimmune disorders such as inflammatory bowel disease (ibd) in humans [6, 15, 16] .in human medicine, s100a12 has been reported to be a sensitive and specific marker of localized inflammatory disease processes, such as gastrointestinal inflammation, and to be increased in fecal samples from patients with ibd (active crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis) [16, 17] . recent studies suggest that fecal s100a12 concentrations may also be clinically useful as a biomarker of inflammation in dogs [18, 19] . in dogs with chronic idiopathic gastrointestinal inflammation (ibd), fecal canine s100a12 concentrations were increased and correlated with the severity of clinical disease, endoscopic changes observed in the intestine and the severity of histologic lesions in the colon [18] . higher fecal s100a12 concentrations were also shown to be associated with a negative outcome in dogs with ibd [19] . the role of s100a12 as a biomarker of inflammation is currently an area of intensive research in both human and veterinary medicine, and targeting the rage-s100a12 axis may also open new therapeutic avenues.only very few studies have been published about the effect of enteric parasite infections [20] or enteropathogenic viruses [17] on fecal s100a12 concentrations in humans, and the role of s100a12 in parasite and viral infections is difficult to study using a traditional rodent animal model due to the lack of s100a12 in rodents [21] . although the function of s100a12 may be species-specific, the existence of a homologue of this calgranulin protein in dogs [22] appears to render the dog an ideal model for studying s100a12 biology and the rage-s100a12 axis in human patients.to the authors' knowledge, the possibility of an effect of gastrointestinal pathogens on fecal s100a12 concentrations in dogs has not yet been evaluated and reported, but this information will also be important for any further evaluation of the clinical utility of fecal s100a12 as a biomarker in dogs with ibd. based on the literature available [10, 17, 20] , we hypothesized that infections with enteric parasites -but not enteropathogenic viruses -are associated with increased fecal canine s100a12 concentrations, and that these etiologies need to be ruled out when using fecal s100a12 as a biomarker in dogs with ibd. thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of the presence and numbers of selected endoparasites and viral agents that are frequently encountered and known to cause gastrointestinal signs in dogs on fecal canine s100a12 concentrations in a large cohort of puppies. because biomarkers can be affected by patient physiological factors such as age, sex, or size [23] , the effect of these parameters was also evaluated.a total of 307 purebred dogs ≤ 13 weeks of age from several (n = 33) french breeding kennels (from a total of 67 litters) were included in this study. these dogs were apparently healthy, with the exception that some dogs had an abnormal fecal consistency. details about the characteristics of these dogs, some of which were included in a previous study, have been published [24] . the breeders' consent was obtained prior to enrollment of dogs and fecal sample collection.a fecal specimen was collected from each dog after natural defecation and was prepared and stored as previously described [24] . depending on the mean adult body weight of their respective breed, puppies were categorized into small breed dogs (≤ 25 kg average adult body weight) or large breed dogs (> 25 kg average adult weight) [25] . for each puppy, fecal quality was evaluated by a single operator (ag) using a 13-point semiquantitative scale (1-13 from liquid to dry consistency) as previously described [25] . thresholds for an abnormal fecal consistency were applied dependent on breed size and age: feces with a score of ≤ 5 were considered abnormal for large breed puppies regardless of age, whereas for small breed puppies, fecal scores ≤ 6 and ≤ 7 were classified as abnormal for 4-to 5-week-old puppies and for older puppies, respectively [25] . following stool collection, a rectal swab was collected from each dog for viral pathogen analysis [24] .fecal samples were tested for the major enteropathogens causing diarrhea in weanling puppies (toxocara canis, cystoisospora spp., giardia spp., canine coronavirus and canine parvovirus type 2) as previously described [24] .briefly, an aliquot (approximately 5 g) of each fecal sample was used for routine fecal examination using the standard mcmaster flotation technique and a second aliquot (approximately 100 mg feces) was used to quantify giardia spp. antigen (prospect-giardia microplate elisa kit, remel, france) per gram of wet feces [24] .the fecal material obtained via rectal swab was tested for the presence of ccv-rna and cpv2-dna by qrt-pcr and qpcr, respectively [24, 25] . results from duplicate pcr analyses from the extracted dna (i.e. 2 pcr assay were performed for each fecal extract) were expressed semi-quantitatively as virus loads. puppies were classified as infected by cpv2 and ccv if viral loads were > 10 10.3 and > 10 9.3 copies, respectively [24, 25] .another single-spot fecal aliquot (0.8 ± 0.2 g) from each dog was separated and stored frozen (-20°c) until shipped to the gastrointestinal laboratory at texas a&m university, where this set of samples was processed within 4 weeks and analyzed within 7 months. fecal s100a12 concentrations were measured in 6 batches of all specimens using an established and validated species-specific in-house 125 i-radioimmunoassay [26] . all samples were analyzed using the same batch of 125 i-labelled s100a12 and other assay reagents.assumptions of normal distribution and equal variances of numerical data were tested using a shapiro-wilk w and a brown-forsythe test, respectively. all summary statistics are reported as medians and interquartile ranges (iqr) or as percentages.statistical analyses were performed using nonparametric two-group (wilcoxon rank-sum) or multiplegroup comparisons (kruskal-wallis test), non-parametric correlation analysis (spearman's ρ correlation coefficient) and association testing between nominal variables (likelihood ratio or fisher's exact test, as appropriate).multivariate mixed (restricted maximum likelihood, or reml) models using log-transformed fecal s100a12 concentrations were constructed to evaluate the effect of different parameters (where p < 0.2 in univariate analyses) on fecal s100a12 concentrations. sex, breed size, fecal score and the presence of enteropathogens were entered as fixed effects, whereas litter nested in kennel was considered as a random effect [24] . statistical significance was set at a p < 0.05. commercially available statistical software packages (jmp® v13.0, sas institute, cary, nc, usa; prism® v7.0, graphpad software, san diego, ca, usa) were used for all statistical analyses.puppies included in this study [median age (range): 7 (4−13) weeks; 152 females/126 males (sex not documented in 29 dogs)] were of 29 different breeds (all pure-bred dogs), the most common being labrador retrievers (n = 57) and german shepherd dogs (n = 41). there were 78 small breed dogs (25%) and 229 large breed dogs (75%). fecal scores ranged from 1-12 (median: 8, iqr: 6-9), with small breed dogs having significantly higher fecal scores (median: 9, iqr: 7-10) compared to large breed dogs (median: 7, iqr: 6-8; wilcoxon ranksum test: z = 3.641, p = 0.0003).positivity for tested gastrointestinal parasites ranged between 21 and 41%, whereas the study prevalence for both viruses evaluated reached approximately 20% (table 1) .there was an association between an abnormal fecal score and the presence of c. canis (likelihood ratio test: χ 2 = 5.78, df = 1, p = 0.0163) as well as an infection with cpv2 (likelihood ratio test: χ 2 = 26.36, df = 1, p < 0.0001).the presence of c. canis was associated with breed size and cpv2 infection (likelihood ratio test: χ 2 = 16. 16, df = 1, p < 0.0001 and likelihood ratio test: χ 2 = 29.46, df = 1, p < 0.0001).fecal s100a12 concentrations ranged from < 24−14,363 ng/g (median: 24 ng/g, iqr: 24−121 ng/g), with 20/307 dogs (6%) having a fecal s100a12 concentration above the upper limit of the reference interval (i.e. > 745 ng/g).univariate analysis revealed significantly higher fecal s100a12 concentrations in dogs infected with cystoisospora spp. (wilcoxon rank-sum test: z = 2.070, p = 0. 0384). however, there was no significant difference between those dogs infected or not with either c. canis (wilcoxon rank-sum test: z = 1.382, p = 0.1668) or c. ohioensis-complex (wilcoxon rank-sum test: z = 1.082, p = 0.2790) (fig. 1, table 2 ). neither the presence of t. canis (likelihood ratio test: χ 2 = 1.60, df = 1, p = 0.2064) nor giardia spp. (likelihood ratio test: χ 2 = 0.36, df = 1, p = 0.5498) was significantly associated with increased fecal s100a12 concentrations (fig. 1, table 2 ). also, the numbers of c. canis (ρ (301) = 0.08; p = 0.1956), c. ohioensis (ρ (301) = 0.08; p = 0.1721) and t. canis (ρ (301) = 0.06; p = 0.3451) did not correlate with fecal s100a12 concentrations. fecal s100a12 concentrations were affected by ccv (wilcoxon rank-sum test: z = -2.115, p = 0.0345) or cpv2 infection (wilcoxon rank-sum test: z = 2.202, p = 0.0277) in univariate analysis (fig. 2 , table 2 ).age and sex were not found to affect fecal s100a12 concentrations (kruskal-wallis test: χ 2 = 1.377, df = 2, p = 0.5025 and wilcoxon rank-sum test: z = -1.382, p = 0.1670, respectively) ( table 2 ), but the semiquantitative fecal score and fecal s100a12 concentration were inversely correlated (ρ (298) = -0.28, 95% ci: -0.35--0.12; p < 0.001). breed size was also significantly associated with fecal s100a12 concentrations (wilcoxon rank-sum test: z = 4.879, p < 0.0001) (fig. 3 , table 2 ).on multivariate analyses, only the effect of fecal score (f (1, 268) = 23.418, p < 0.0001) and breed size (f (1, 53) = 11.655, p < 0.0019) remained significant ( table 2) . significance remained only for breed size (f (1, 51) = 14.54, p = 0.0004) when evaluating the same parameters in multivariate models not including the parameter fecal score.to the authors' knowledge, the present study is the first to evaluate fecal s100a12 concentrations in apparently healthy dogs shedding enteropathogens (i.e. parasites, viral agents, or both). these preliminary data are important for further studies evaluating fecal s100a12 concentrations in dogs with chronic gastrointestinal diseases and are also of comparative relevance given the limitations of studying the effects of similar enteropathogens on fecal s100a12 concentrations in humans.this study showed that fecal s100a12 concentrations in puppies are not affected by an infection with toxocara canis or giardia sp. in contrast, the presence of the parasite genera cystoisospora spp. -independent of their number or subspecies -as well as an infection with the viral pathogens ccv or cpv2 were shown to be associated with alterations in fecal s100a12 concentrations on univariate analysis but not in a multivariate model. thus, infections with enteropathogens evaluated in this study are not primarily associated with alterations in fecal s100a12 concentrations, whereas the concentration of 1 univariate analysis of fecal s100a12 concentrations and endoparasite shedding in apparently healthy puppies (n = 307). a dogs shedding cystoisospora spp. had significantly higher fecal s100a12 concentrations than dogs not infected with these organisms (wilcoxon rank-sum test: z = 2.070, p = 0.0384). no significant difference in fecal s100a12 concentrations was seen between dogs shedding b t. canis (wilcoxon rank-sum test: z = 0.922, p = 0.3565) or c giardia spp. (wilcoxon rank-sum test: z = 0.605, p = 0.5450) and those dogs from which these enteropathogens were not isolated. boxes: interquartile range (iqr); vertical lines within boxes: medians; whiskers: determined by the outermost data points or values computed as (25th quartile: -1.5 × iqr) or (75th quartile: +1.5 × iqr). *significant difference at p < 0.05; ***significant difference at p < 0.0001 table 2 evaluation of patient characteristics, opportunistic pathogen shedding, and fecal s100a12 concentrations in dogs included in this study (n = 307). p-values in bold font indicate a significant effect (p < 0. fecal s100a12 is affected by the fecal score which reflects the overall health of the digestive tract. this is important for further studies evaluating fecal s100a12 concentrations in patients with suspected chronic gastrointestinal inflammation [27] . these findings are consistent with the results of a previous investigation in asymptomatic children showing fecal s100a12 concentrations to only have a tendency to be increased with concurrent giardia duodenalis and helminth infections [20] . also, the concentrations of fecal s100a12 measured in the study by garzón et al. [20] were comparable to those concentrations detected in our study. our results further agree with a previous study in adult people revealing no differences in fecal s100a12 concentrations in patients with viral gastroenteritis caused by norwalklike virus or rotavirus [17] . no difference in fecal s100a12 concentrations were detected between puppies testing positive for enteropathogens (except for cystoisospora spp., ccv and cpv2 in univariate analysis) and those dogs testing negative in this study. this was still an unexpected finding given that s100a12 has been shown to have filariostatic or filaricidal properties (anti-parasite mechanism) through its binding to parasite paramyosin [10, 28] and the fact that s100a12 can be expressed in eosinophils in humans [29] . however, though endoparasites are more likely to be associated with eosinophilic or mixed inflammation [30] , whether s100a12 expression in eosinophils is also induced or up-regulated in the context of inflammation in dogs has not been investigated. also, experimental infection in cattle with echinococcus granulosus was associated with a strong s100a12 response [31] . however, infection with e. granulosus results in a more granulomatous type of inflammation although other cells were also shown to express s100a12 at the site of infection-associated inflammation. these findings further suggest that limiting the availability of transition metal ions (i.e. ca 2+ , zn 2+ and mn 2+ ) is not the table 2 evaluation of patient characteristics, opportunistic pathogen shedding, and fecal s100a12 concentrations in dogs included in this study (n = 307). p-values in bold font indicate a significant effect (p < 0.05) (continued) fig. 2 univariate analysis of fecal s100a12 concentrations and the detection of viral agents in apparently healthy puppies (n = 307). a dogs infected with cpv2 had significantly higher fecal s100a12 concentrations than dogs not infected with these organisms (wilcoxon rank-sum test: z = 2.202, p = 0.0277). b an infection with ccv produced significantly lower fecal s100a12 concentrations compared to dogs from which these viral agents were not isolated (wilcoxon rank-sum test: z = -2.115, p = 0.0345). boxes: interquartile range (iqr); vertical lines within boxes: medians; whiskers: determined by the outermost data points or values computed as (25th quartile: -1.5 × iqr) or (75th quartile: +1.5 × iqr). *significant difference at p < 0.05; ***significant difference at p < 0.0001 mechanism of action to combat parasite or viral infections as opposed to infections with bacterial pathogens [32] or at least that s100a12 may not play a significant role in it. though not demonstrated for s100a12, antimicrobial activity against e. coli has been shown for canine calprotectin [33] . correlation of fecal s100a12 concentrations with only the fecal score and breed size suggests that fecal s100a12 concentrations are not primarily influenced by any single endoparasite or viral pathogen that were evaluated in this study. however, diarrhea in puppies is often multifactorial [24] and other factors that can influence the fecal score (e.g. stress, diet change, or other environmental factors) may also affect fecal s100a12 concentrations in dogs. the effect of dietary factors (e.g. diet type, feeding practices, dietary supplements, amount of milk ingested by suckling) on fecal s100a12 concentrations could not be evaluated in this study due to the large variety of these factors and the fact that the quantity of milk ingested cannot be determined. however, the association between fecal score and fecal s100a12 concentrations could also reflect an infection with another enteropathogen or enteropathogens for which puppies in this study were not evaluated. small breed size was another significant factor for having an increased fecal s100a12 concentration in this study. contrary to this, large breed size has been previously shown to be a determinant of lower fecal consistency [25] , and this variable had been taken into account when interpreting fecal scores (normal/abnormal) in this study. thus, one possible explanation for small breed dogs having a higher frequency of abnormal stools in this study could be an undetected infectious cause or environmental factors. however, lack of an ability of the 13-point scoring system [25] to sufficiently differentiate fecal qualities may also explain this finding, though this scoring system has been validated for use in puppies and appears to be superior to the 5point system [34] that is often used to differentiate fecal qualities. the relationship between fecal s100a12 concentrations, fecal score, and breed size as well as its clinical implication, and whether the current results also translate to those in adult dogs, warrants further research.age has previously been reported to have no effect on the fecal concentrations of s100a12 [26] , but dogs in that former study were significantly older (0.8-11.1 years; median: 4 years) than the dogs included in the present study (4-13 weeks; median: 7 weeks). hence, age was also evaluated as a potential influencing factor as an age-related effect has been demonstrated for fecal calprotectin concentrations (another s100/calgranulin protein complex) in dogs [24] . in contrast to fecal calprotectin, age did not have an effect on fecal s100a12 concentrations in dogs, similar to previous findings in older puppies and adult dogs [26] . the reason for this difference between fecal calprotectin and fecal s100a12 is unknown. possible explanations could be that s100a12 leakage into the still maturing gastrointestinal tract is negligible and that s100a12 production may be more specific to cells of the inflammatory response compared to calprotectin. however, these hypotheses need to be further investigated.a reference interval for fecal canine s100a12 concentrations has been previously established (≤ 745 ng/g) using samples from older puppies and adult dogs [26] . using this reference interval in puppies appears to be reasonable given that 6% of the dogs in the present study had a fecal s100a12 concentration above the upper limit of the reference interval. this fraction is similar to the fraction of the reference population (5%) that would be expected to have a fecal s100a12 concentration above the upper limit of the reference interval established by fig. 3 univariate analysis of fecal s100a12 concentrations and the influence of fecal score and breed size in apparently healthy puppies (n = 307). a dogs with an abnormal fecal score had significantly higher fecal s100a12 concentrations than dogs with a normal fecal score (wilcoxon rank-sum test: z = 5.749, p < 0.0001). b small breed dogs had significantly higher fecal s100a12 concentrations than dogs of large breed size (wilcoxon rank-sum test: z = 4.879, p < 0.0001). boxes: interquartile range (iqr); vertical lines within boxes: medians; whiskers: determined by the outermost data points or values computed as (25th quartile: -1.5 × iqr) or (75th quartile: +1.5×iqr). *significant difference at p < 0.05; ***significant difference at p < 0.0001 using the central 95th percentile [35] . also, the upper limit of the reference interval of 745 ng/g in dogs is almost identical to that recently reported for children (750 ng/g) [36] , suggesting that fecal s100a12 concentrations in dogs are comparable to those in people. as opposed to rodents [21] , the s100a12 protein is encoded in the canine genome [22] . thus, diseases in dogs appear to be an ideal model -and one that is superior to rodent models -for studying s100a12 biology and the rage-s100a12 axis in humans. hence, future studies into the function and diagnostic utility of the s100a12 protein, as well as the s100a12-rage axis in chronic inflammatory conditions and their proposed use as novel selective therapeutic targets, should benefit from the present and also future studies in dogs.we acknowledge that this study has some limitations. first, the small sample size in the analyses of subgroups of dogs carries the potential for type ii error. secondly, spot fecal samples were used for the detection of enteropathogens and also for measuring fecal s100a12 concentrations, but the biological variation and distribution of these enteropathogens and the s100a12 protein in fecal specimens in healthy dogs and dogs with gastrointestinal disease has not yet been reported. lastly, histopathologic evaluation of gastrointestinal mucosal biopsies to determine whether enteropathogen shedding, a decreased fecal score, or both are associated with any clinically relevant mucosal lesions (i.e. quality and severity of inflammation) was not performed in the dogs in this study.we conclude that shedding of the enteropathogens cystoisospora spp., toxocara canis, giardia sp., ccv and cpv2 does not appear to primarily affect fecal s100a12 concentrations in dogs. thus, the presence of any one of these endoparasites or viral agents appears to be an unlikely cause of altered fecal s100a12 concentrations, but the fecal score as an indicator of the overall digestive health is reflected by the fecal s100a12 concentration. these preliminary data are an important starting point for further studies evaluating fecal s100a12 concentrations in dogs or when using fecal s100a12 concentrations as a biomarker in patients with chronic idiopathic gastrointestinal inflammation. in addition, the dog could be considered as an alternative model for studying s100a12 biology in humans.abbreviations ccv: canine coronavirus; cpv2: canine parvovirus type 2; en-rage: ragebinding protein; ibd: inflammatory bowel disease; iqr: interquartile range; mmps: matrix metalloproteinases; nf-kb: nuclear factor kappa b; rage: receptor of advanced glycation end products; reml: restricted maximum likelihood; s100a12: s100a12 proteinthe disease (covid-19) related to novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) has caused tens of thousands of deaths and is becoming a severe threat to global health. however, diagnosis and prognosis of covid-19 are still facing serious challenges. the current "gold standard" method to diagnose sars-cov-2 infection is based on the detection of viral rna (n gene) in nasal swab samples with rt-pcr. however, pcr-based diagnosis is prone to false negatives due to the uncertainties in sample collection and the molecular mechanism of the test and is unable to track the immune response to the viral infection 1 . earlier sars-cov related research 2, 3 and most recent studies on sars-cov-2 4, 5 have shown that sars-specific antibodies, such as igg, igm, and iga, can be detected in serum as early as seven days after viral infection (3-5 days after the symptoms appear) and can last for several years after recovery 1 . similar immune response should also occur after a successful vaccination (>7 days after vaccination) 2, 3, 6 . therefore, virus-specific antibodies in serum and secretory mucus (e.g., saliva and sputum) can be used as diagnostic markers for viral infection and for the evaluation of patient's adaptive immune responses (either from virus infection or from vaccination). as such, sars-cov-2-specific antibodies are currently listed among the diagnostic markers in the "covid-19 diagnosis and treatment plan (provisional 7 th edition)" published in china. in addition to sars-cov-2 specific antibodies, the viral antigen (such as the spike protein or s protein) in circulating blood can be used for the prognosis of covid-19-related viremia 1, 7 . as one of the most commonly used targets for vaccine development, the serum concentration of the s protein is also a potential marker for early-stage vaccine responses, especially for sub-unit vaccines 8 .unfortunately, the existing antibody detection methods are still far from adequate. the gold nanoparticle based lateral flow assay (e.g., paper-based test strips) is very popular in rapid detection of igg/igm antibodies (especially for point-of-care diagnostics) 9-14 . although fast (5-20 minutes), it provides only yes/no information and has very limited sensitivities, making this method very easy to generate false positives/negative and impossible to track the patients' immune response to infection, treatment, and vaccination. conventional elisa (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay), on the other hand, can provide quantitative, accurate, and sensitive results, but it involves complicated and expensive instruments and long assay time (2-3 hours) 5, 15 . in addition, samples need to be sent to centralized labs, which significantly increases the turn-around time.in this work, we present a microfluidic elisa technology for rapid (15-20 minutes), quantitative, and sensitive detection of sars-cov-2 biomarkers using sars-cov-2 specific igg and viral antigen -s protein, both of which are spiked in serum, as a model system. we also characterized various humanized monoclonal igg and identified one with a high binding affinity towards sars-cov-2 s1 protein that can serve as the calibration standard of anti-sars-cov-2 s1 igg in serological analyses. furthermore, we demonstrated that our microfluidic elisa platform can be used for rapid affinity evaluation of monoclonal anti-s1 antibodies. the microfluidic elisa device is highly portable and requires only 10 l of samples for each channel, which can be easily collected from a drop of fingertip blood. therefore, our technology will greatly facilitate rapid and quantitative analysis of covid-19 patients and vaccine recipients at point-ofcare.a detailed description of the automated elisa system and corresponding capillary sensor arrays can be found in our previous publications 16, 17 . a photo of the capillary sensor array can be found in figure 1 (a). it is made of polystyrene using the injection molding method. the sensor array has 12 channels, each of which has an inner diameter of 0.8 mm and approximately 8 l volume, and acts as an elisa reactor.the chemiluminescent substrate (supersignal™ elisa femto substrate, 37075), the ultrapure™ dnase/rnase-free distilled water (10977023), and the superblock™ (pbs) blocking buffer (37515) were purchased from thermo fisher. the elisa coating buffer (1× pbs, dy006), concentrated wash buffer (wa126), and concentrated reagent diluent (10% bsa in 10× pbs, dy995) were purchased from r&d systems. the human serum was purchased from millipore sigma (h4522-20ml). human-cell-expressed sars-cov-2 spike s1-his recombinant protein was provided by sino biological (40591-v08h). the human-cell-expressed sars-cov spike s1-his recombinant protein was purchased from creative biolabs (vang-wyb7337). the recombinant cr3022 therapeutic antibody was purchased from creative biolabs (mro-1214lc).the humanized chimeric antibodies d001, d003, and d006 were developed and provided by sino biological (catalog number: 40150-d001, 40150-d003, and 40150-d006). the anti-polyhistidine antibody that was used in polyhistidine-mediated s1 protein immobilization (see figure s1 ) was purchased from thermo fisher (ma1-21315). the horseradish peroxide (hrp) conjugated secondary antibody used in the igg detection experiment was from the detection antibody in thermo fisher's human total igg elisa kit (88-50550-22). the hrp conjugation of cr3022, d001, d003, and d006 antibodies were carried out with abcam's hrp conjugation kit (ab102890) with a molar ratio of antibody : hrp = 1 : 4.the illustrations for the reactor preparation protocol and the elisa protocols can be found in figure s2 . for all steps, the working solution of the wash buffer and reagent diluent were diluted with ultrapure™ dnase/rnase-free distilled water to achieve 1× working concentration.in the first step of the reactor preparation process ( figure s2 (a)), the working solution of the capture antibody (i.e., d001 in s1 detection experiments) or the anti-his antibody (in igg detection and antibody affinity experiments) were prepared by diluting the stock solution with the elisa coating buffer (1× pbs, ph = 7.4) to achieve final concentrations of 10 μg/ml. note that for the anti-s1 igg detection and antibody affinity experiments, the second incubation step was used for blocking plus s1 protein immobilization (with 2 μg/ml of s1-his protein dissolved in 1% bsa).for the s1 protein detection, this step is used for blocking only (with 1% bsa in 1× pbs).for the anti-s1 igg detection experiments (see figure s2 (b) for the detailed protocol), various concentrations of monoclonal antibodies were prepared by diluting the stock solutions with 50 times diluted human serum (the serum was diluted with 1× reagent diluent, which correlates to 1% bsa). the working solution of the detection antibody (in this case, the hrp-conjugated secondary antibody) was prepared by diluting the stock solution 250 times in 1× reagent diluent.for the s1 detection experiments (see figure s2 (c) for the detailed protocol), various concentrations of the s1 proteins were prepared by diluting the stock solution with 10 times diluted human serum. the working solution of the detection antibody (i.e., hrp-conjugated d003) was prepared by diluting the stock solution 1000 times in 1× reagent diluent. the final concentration of the detection antibody was 1 µg/ml.for the antibody affinity experiments, various concentrations of hrp-conjugated monoclonal antibodies were prepared by diluting the stock solution in 1× reagent diluent.the signal intensities of the microfluidic elisa were measured with the chemiluminescent imaging method, using a cmos camera (see figure 1 (b) for an example of the chemiluminescent signals). to enhance the dynamic ranges of the elisa, multiple exposures with adjustable exposure time were applied. all chemiluminescent intensities (cl intensity) were normalized to three seconds of exposure time. detailed explanations about the chemiluminescent imaging and the multiple exposure approaches can be found in our previous publications 18 .the receptor binding domain (rbd) in the spike protein (located in the s1 subunit) on a coronavirus is responsible for binding to the membrane receptors on the target cell. it plays a critical role in the coronavirus cell entry process. for a patient infected by a coronavirus, his/her immune system will develop antibodies to bind and block the rbd of that specific coronavirus.out of all types of neutralization antibodies, igg has the longest lifetime in a person's circulating blood. it is used as a biomarker for the evaluation of patient's adaptive immune responses and the degree of recovery). in addition, as the major active ingredient, the concentration of sars-cov-2 s1 specific igg can be used as the indicator for the strength of the convalescent plasma [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] .for these reasons, igg that binds specifically to sars-cov-2 s1 protein (especially the rbd)is the first biomarker that we aim to detect. the mechanism of igg detection is illustrated in figure   2 (a). first, s1 protein is immobilized on the capillary inner surface through a poly-histidine mediation approach (see figures s1 and s2(a) for details). then, s1 specific igg in the sample (such as serum) is attracted to the surface through immunosorbent reaction. finally, the hrpconjugated detection antibody is used to visualize the binding of the immobilized igg. to ensure detection specificity, a monoclonal detection antibody that binds specifically to the fc domain on human igg was used. according to the protocol in figure s2 (b), the entire assay was completed in 15 minutes.to validate the feasibility of our assay, we selected three recombinant and humanized monoclonal anti-sars-cov-2 s1 antibodies as the positive control antibodies. the first antibody, cr3022, is a therapeutic human igg originally developed against the s1 protein of sars-cov. it was recently reported to have cross-reactivity towards the s1 protein of sars-cov-2 [24] [25] [26] . the second and the third antibodies, d001 and d006, are humanized chimeric iggs (the precursors of d001 and d006 were originally raised in mouse and rabbit, respectively) that are specific to the s1 protein of sars-cov. based on the preliminary results conducted at sino biological internally, they were also believed to have high binding affinities towards the s1 protein of sars-cov-2. in order to mimic the actual clinical situations, we decided to use 50 times diluted human serum as the solvent of the igg antibodies (50-1000 are the typical dilution factors of serum in actual serological analyses). to evaluate the differences in antibody's affinity towards sars-cov-2 s1and sars-cov s1, we performed a side-by-side study with these two types of s1 proteins for all three clones of antibodies.the corresponding results are shown in fig. 2(b)-(d) . in general, the chemiluminescent intensities are proportional to the concentration of the spiked-in monoclonal antibodies. all these three antibodies are still detectable at 4.7 ng/ml with both types of s1 proteins. for d001 and d006, the signal for both types of s1 proteins is very similar, indicating that the antibodies' binding affinity towards sars-cov-2 s1 and sars-cov s1 should be very similar (d006 may have a slightly higher affinity towards sars-cov-2 s1 than sars-cov s1). however, for cr3022, the signal for sars-cov-2 s1 is systematically lower than that for sars-cov s1, indicative of a weaker affinity of cr3022 towards sars-cov-2 s1 than sars-cov s1, which agrees with recently published findings about cr3022's binding ability 24, 26 .the entire dynamic ranges of these three antibodies against sars-cov-2 s1 can be found in fig. s3 . the linear dynamic range in the log-log scale for cr3022, d001, and d006 are 7-500 ng/ml, 2-1000 ng/ml, and 2-1000 ng/ml. the corresponding slope in the linear range is 0.64, 0.83, and 0.81, respectively. as a negative control, a human igg isotype does not generate any detectable signal within the entire range of detection (0.7-4800 ng/ml). due to the narrow linear dynamic range and relatively low binding affinity, cr3022 should not be used as the calibration standard of anti-sars-cov-2 s1 igg. the remaining two antibodies, d001 and d006, are nearly the same in terms of the dynamic range and affinity towards sars-cov-2 s1. however, d006 has a better specificity for sars-cov-2 s1 compared to sars-cov s1. therefore, d006 may be a better candidate as a calibration antibody.in addition to anti-s1 igg, s1 protein itself may also be a marker in the prognosis of covid-19. it may appear in blood for the patients who develop coronavirus viremia and the people who receive certain types of coronavirus vaccines (especially subunit vaccines). recent evidence indicates that the viral proteins may also exist in mucus samples such as the saliva. to detect the s1 protein, we employed a standard sandwich elisa format, as illustrated in fig. 3(a) , in which a monoclonal sars-cov-2/sars-cov s1 rbd-specific antibody (d001) was used as the capture antibody and another s1 rbd-specific antibody (d003) was used as the detection antibody sars-cov-2/sars-cov. to reduce the number of steps as well as the total assay time, we directly conjugated hrp molecules on the detection antibody. according to the protocol in figure   s2 (c), the entire assay was completed in 20 minutes.same as in the igg detection experiment, we performed a side-by-side study with the s1 proteins from sars-cov-2 and sars-cov. to mimic actual clinical settings, we used 10 times diluted human serum as the solvent of the s1 protein, as we do not expect to see a high concentration of viral s1 protein in serum (or saliva). the entire dynamic range of the s1 detection assay is presented in fig. 3(b) . the linear dynamic range for sars-cov-2 s1 and sars-cov s1 is 0.4-1000 ng/ml and 0.2-250 ng/ml with a slope of 0.89 and 0.92 (in the log-log scale), respectively. according to figures 3(b) and (c), the detection of sars-cov s1 appears to have a higher sensitivity than sars-cov-2 s1. this is because both of antibodies (d001 and d003) used in this assay were originally raised against the rbd of sars-cov s1. a higher sensitivity in detecting sars-cov-2 s1 protein may be achieved in the future with the antibodies specifically developed against the s1 protein (or s1 rbd) of sars-cov-2.based on the studies in the previous sections, it is obvious that a good calibration standard (monoclonal human or humanized igg towards sars-cov-2 s1 protein) is essential for performing quantitative evaluation of the patient's immune response. high affinity antibodies are also essential for building a sensitive sars-cov-2 s1 elisa kit. however, due to nascence of sars-cov-2 there is no "gold standard" antibody that can be used in igg calibration or s1 antigen detection yet. consequently, it is urgent to find humanized antibodies with high binding affinities.unfortunately, traditional antibody evaluation approaches, such as plate-based elisa, bio-layer interferometry (bli), and surface plasmonic resonance (spr), suffer from long assay time (2-3 hours for plate-based elisa), small dynamic range (2 orders of magnitude for plate-based elisa), and large sample concentration and consumption (10-100 µg/ml for bli or spr) [27] [28] [29] . to address these problems, here we present a simple and rapid approach for the affinity assessment of monoclonal antibodies.the assay mechanism and the corresponding protocol are illustrated in figures 4(a) and s2(d), respectively. our assay follows a single-step elisa format. same as in the igg detection experiment, recombinant s1 proteins were first immobilized on the supporting surface (2 µg/ml), followed by the binding of igg. to reduce potential sources of errors, we directly conjugated hrp molecule with purified igg molecules (molar ratio igg : hrp = 1 : 4, with the hrp conjugation kit from abcam). the antibodies were then diluted to six different concentrations (1000 -1 ng/ml with 4× serial dilution) and then applied to the s1 protein-coated elisa reactors. the immobilized igg can be quantified after a short 6 minutes of incubation and 4 times of rinsing. although the antibodies may not reach equilibrium by the end of the incubation, the quantity of the immobilized antibody (also the signal intensity) should still have a positive correlation with the affinity of the antibody.to compare the antibody's affinity towards the s1 protein of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, we performed a side-by-side experiment for all antibodies under test 30 . the antibodies were cr3022, d001, d006, and d003. the first three antibodies were used as calibration standards in the igg detection experiments and d003 was used as the detection antibody in the s1 detection experiments. thanks to the simple protocol, our assay exhibits excellent intra-assay consistencies (see fig. s4 as an example), thus ensuring highly reliable measurements. as shown in figure 4 (b), these four antibodies have very different affinities towards the s1 protein of sars-cov-2. note that the data for 1 ng/ml are not presented because the signal is not detectable for the three antibodies except d003 (the signal for d003 is very weak, see figure s4 ). for the points within the linear dynamic ranges, the signal intensities with the strongest antibody (d003) are 6 -10 times higher than the weakest antibody (cr3022). for example, the signal intensities for these two antibodies at 250 ng/ml are 612 and 75.9, respectively. on the other hand, the lowest detectable concentration for d003 is 1 ng/ml and the lowest detectable concentration for cr3022 is 16 ng/ml. this can be another evidence for the difference in antibody's affinity. these observations agree with several recently published experiment results and our own preliminary results [24] [25] [26] and our measurements at sino biological (the equilibrium dissociation constant, kd, for cr3022 and d003 is 6-12 nm and <1 nm, respectively, based on bli measurements.in contrast, as shown in figure 4 (c) the antibodies' affinity towards sars-cov s1 can be very different from sars-cov-2 s1. for example, cr3022's binding affinity towards sars-cov s1 is stronger than its affinity towards sars-cov-2 s1. conversely, d006's binding affinity towards sars-cov s1 is weaker than sars-cov-2 s1. in addition, the pattern of calibration curves with sars-cov-2 s1 is significantly different from that with sars-cov s1. while d001, d006, and cr3022's affinities towards sars-cov-2 s1 vary significantly, they appear to be very similar to each other towards sars-cov s1. although our current method allows us to rapidly evaluate the relatively affinity among all antibodies, it is unable to extract the exact value of kd.this problem can be resolved by introducing multiple calibration antibodies with known affinities.we have demonstrated a portable chemiluminescent microfluidic elisa system that is able to conduct sensitive detection and quantification of sars-cov-2-related biomarkers in only 15-20 minutes using micro-liter sized sample volumes. the llod of 2 ng/ml for igg in serum was achieved using the humanized chimeric antibodies as the model system. we also successfully characterized different antibodies and identified an antibody candidate, d006, which can be used as the calibration antibody for quantitative evaluation of anti-sars-cov-2 s1 igg. this approach can also be extended to evaluation of therapeutic convalescent plasma. furthermore, we demonstrated sensitive detection of sars-cov-2 s1 protein (antigen) with the llod of 0.4 ng/ml. finally, we showed that our technology can be used as an alternative approach for rapid (8.5 minutes) screening and validation of monoclonal anti-s1 antibodies. our method requires only tens of nanograms, which is several orders of magnitude smaller than used traditional label-free methods (such as bli and spr), and will be useful in screening and selection of high affinity therapeutic neutralization antibodies and research-use antibodies 23, [27] [28] [29] .we will continue to optimize our assays in multiple aspects. for igg detection, we will investigate more humanized or patient-derived sars-cov-2 s1 antibodies to identify optimal calibrators with a high binding affinity and a large linear dynamic range. the differences in the antibodies' affinity against monomeric s1 (most commonly used in antibody and vaccine development) and trimeric s1 (the natural conformation of s1 on sars-cov-2 virus) can also be explored 6 . for s1 protein detection, we will improve the detection sensitivity, since the abundance of sars-cov-2 s1 may be very low in actual patient samples. based on our previous publications 17, 28 , the llod can be greatly enhanced when we replace the hrp-conjugated detection antibody with a biotinylated detection antibody once it become available. for antibody affinity evaluation, we aim to further optimize the assay's protocol (such as adjusting the incubation time and rinsing time) and employ it to evaluate more therapeutic and research use antibodies.our approach also opens a door for other covid-19 related clinical or laboratory researches.for example, the diagnostic value of the covid-19 related biomarkers in serum and saliva (especially s1 specific iga, igm, and viral antigens such as the s1 and nucleocapsid (n) proteins)is currently under intensive evaluation 8, 31, 32 . the igg detection method described in this work can be easily adapted to detect and quantify other types of antibodies such as igm and iga 31, 33, 34 . the concept for sars-cov-2 s1 protein detection can also be adapted to detect other types of viral antigens (such as the sars-cov-2 n protein), as described in figure s5 . direct detection of viral antigens in patient samples such as serum and saliva may facilitate the rapid and cost-effective diagnosis of covid-19 7, 35 . finally, the microfluidic elisa platform can be used to study the neutralization efficacy of therapeutic antibodies 23 (see figure s5 ), as well as for the recognition, evaluation, and phenotyping of natural and recombinant (fake) viral particles 36 . and sars-cov s1 protein (black circles) in 10 times diluted human serum. the averaged background is subtracted from all data points. the solid lines are the linear fit of the data in the loglog scale. the grey shaded area marks 3×standard deviation of the background. the lower limit of detection (llod) for sars-cov-2 s1 protein and sars-cov s1 is 0.4 ng/ml and 0.2 ng/ml, respectively. (c) calibration curves for s1 proteins between 0.78 and 200 ng/ml. the error bars are generated from duplicate measurements. different monoclonal humanized s1 specific igg against the s1 protein from sars-cov-2 (b) and sars-cov (c). the solid lines are the linear fit of the data in the log-log scale.background as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic rages on, there is urgent need for identification of clinical and laboratory predictors for progression towards severe and fatal forms of this illness. in this study we aimed to evaluate the discriminative ability of hematologic, biochemical and immunologic biomarkers in patients with and without the severe or fatal forms of covid-19. methods an electronic search in medline (pubmed interface), scopus, web of science and china national knowledge infrastructure (cnki) was performed, to identify studies reporting on laboratory abnormalities in patients with covid-19. studies were divided into two separate cohorts for analysis: severity (severe vs. non-severe and mortality, i.e. non-survivors vs. survivors). data was pooled into a meta-analysis to estimate weighted mean difference (wmd) with 95% confidence interval (95% ci) for each laboratory parameter. results a total number of 21 studies was included, totaling 3377 patients and 33 laboratory parameters. while 18 studies (n = 2984) compared laboratory findings between patients with severe and non-severe covid-19, the other three (n = 393) compared survivors and non-survivors of the disease and were thus analyzed separately. patients with severe and fatal disease had significantly increased white blood cell (wbc) count, and decreased lymphocyte and platelet counts compared to non-severe disease and survivors. biomarkers of inflammation, cardiac and muscle injury, liver and kidney function and coagulation measures were also significantly elevated in patients with both severe and fatal covid-19. interleukins 6 (il-6) and 10 (il-10) and serum ferritin were strong discriminators for severe disease. conclusions several biomarkers which may potentially aid in risk stratification models for predicting severe and fatal covid-19 were identified. in hospitalized patients with respiratory distress, we recommend clinicians closely monitor wbc count, lymphocyte count, platelet count, il-6 and serum ferritin as markers for potential progression to critical illness.hematologic, biochemical and immune biomarker abnormalities associated with severe illness and mortality in coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19): a meta-analysisbackground as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic rages on, there is urgent need for identification of clinical and laboratory predictors for progression towards severe and fatal forms of this illness. in this study we aimed to evaluate the discriminative ability of hematologic, biochemical and immunologic biomarkers in patients with and without the severe or fatal forms of covid-19. methods an electronic search in medline (pubmed interface), scopus, web of science and china national knowledge infrastructure (cnki) was performed, to identify studies reporting on laboratory abnormalities in patients with covid-19. studies were divided into two separate cohorts for analysis: severity (severe vs. non-severe and mortality, i.e. non-survivors vs. survivors). data was pooled into a meta-analysis to estimate weighted mean difference (wmd) with 95% confidence interval (95% ci) for each laboratory parameter. results a total number of 21 studies was included, totaling 3377 patients and 33 laboratory parameters. while 18 studies (n = 2984) compared laboratory findings between patients with severe and non-severe covid-19, the other three (n = 393) compared survivors and non-survivors of the disease and were thus analyzed separately. patients with severe and fatal disease had significantly increased white blood cell (wbc) count, and decreased lymphocyte and platelet counts compared to non-severe disease and survivors. biomarkers of inflammation, cardiac and muscle injury, liver and kidney function and coagulation measures were also significantly elevated in patients with both severe and fatal covid-19. interleukins 6 (il-6) and 10 (il-10) and serum ferritin were strong discriminators for severe disease. conclusions several biomarkers which may potentially aid in risk stratification models for predicting severe and fatal covid-19 were identified. in hospitalized patients with respiratory distress, we recommend clinicians closely monitor wbc count, lymphocyte count, platelet count, il-6 and serum ferritin as markers for potential progression to critical illness.hematologic, biochemical and immune biomarker abnormalities associated with severe illness and mortality in coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19): a meta-analysisbackground as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic rages on, there is urgent need for identification of clinical and laboratory predictors for progression towards severe and fatal forms of this illness. in this study we aimed to evaluate the discriminative ability of hematologic, biochemical and immunologic biomarkers in patients with and without the severe or fatal forms of covid-19. methods an electronic search in medline (pubmed interface), scopus, web of science and china national knowledge infrastructure (cnki) was performed, to identify studies reporting on laboratory abnormalities in patients with covid-19. studies were divided into two separate cohorts for analysis: severity (severe vs. non-severe and mortality, i.e. non-survivors vs. survivors). data was pooled into a meta-analysis to estimate weighted mean difference (wmd) with 95% confidence interval (95% ci) for each laboratory parameter. results a total number of 21 studies was included, totaling 3377 patients and 33 laboratory parameters. while 18 studies (n = 2984) compared laboratory findings between patients with severe and non-severe covid-19, the other three (n = 393) compared survivors and non-survivors of the disease and were thus analyzed separately. patients with severe and fatal disease had significantly increased white blood cell (wbc) count, and decreased lymphocyte and platelet counts compared to non-severe disease and survivors. biomarkers of inflammation, cardiac and muscle injury, liver and kidney function and coagulation measures were also significantly elevated in patients with both severe and fatal covid-19. interleukins 6 (il-6) and 10 (il-10) and serum ferritin were strong discriminators for severe disease. conclusions several biomarkers which may potentially aid in risk stratification models for predicting severe and fatal covid-19 were identified. in hospitalized patients with respiratory distress, we recommend clinicians closely monitor wbc count, lymphocyte count, platelet count, il-6 and serum ferritin as markers for potential progression to critical illness.hematologic, biochemical and immune biomarker abnormalities associated with severe illness and mortality in coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19): a meta-analysis.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has emerged as a major cause of morbidity and mortality that is placing unprecedented pressure on healthcare services across the world. 1, 2 whilst the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) responsible for covid-19 predominantly affects the respiratory tract, 3 patients with cardiovascular risk factors or established disease 4 and those with elevated cardiac biomarkers appear to be more susceptible and to have a worse prognosis. 5, 6 the mechanisms underlying these initial observations remain unclear.early case reports suggest that covid-19 can cause a wide range of cardiac conditions that include acute myocardial infarction, 7 myocarditis, 8 and takotsubo cardiomyopathy. 9 acute left and right ventricular failure may be a direct consequence of cardiac pathology, with the latter also arising secondary to elevations in right ventricular afterload due to pulmonary embolism or pneumonia. 10 virus particles have been observed in the myocardium and vascular endothelium in patients with covid-19 and cardiogenic shock. 11, 12 however, the incidence of these cardiac complications and the subsequent implications for treatment and resource allocation are unknown. consequently, there is an urgent need to better understand the interactions between covid-19 and the heart.echocardiography is well placed to help further this understanding, being inexpensive, portable, and widely accessible. however, a large systematic evaluation of echocardiography in all patients with covid-19 would be highly challenging due to the logistical considerations of testing, consumption of personal protective equipment (ppe), and the risk of further viral transmission. we therefore conducted a global survey to capture the findings of echocardiography performed on clinical grounds in patients with confirmed or a high probability of covid-19. we aim to improve our understanding of the cardiac manifestations of covid-19, and to provide insights into the characteristics of patients who would benefit most from echocardiography.this global online survey of echocardiography in patients with covid-19 was designed by the european association of cardiovascular imaging (eacvi), with input from external international experts. 13 any transthoracic echocardiogram that was performed on a patient with confirmed, or a high probability of, covid-19 in the hospital setting was eligible for inclusion. patients were imaged as part of routine care, and non-identifiable patient data were captured. as such, this audit did not require individual patient consent and this approach was approved by the european society of cardiology and by local research ethics committees.an online format was developed (https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/ 2fbffqd) that allows rapid completion of 11 questions on a smartphone by sonographers or clinicians immediately after completion of the echocardiogram. for most questions, the operator selects from several prespecified answers, with the option to select multiple answers and to provide free-text comments (supplementary material online, appendix). first, several baseline characteristics are recorded: age, sex, comorbidities, symptom severity, covid-19 status, presence of pneumonia, and the location in hospital where imaging was performed. secondly, the indication for imaging is recorded: suspected left heart failure, suspected right heart failure, chest pain with st-segment elevation on the electrocardiogram, cardiac biomarker elevation [troponin or brain natriuretic peptide (bnp)], ventricular arrhythmia, suspected tamponade, or cardiogenic shock. thirdly, echocardiographic findings are captured for left ventricular abnormalities (normal, mild, moderate, or severe systolic dysfunction, dilatation, evidence of new myocardial infarction, myocarditis, or takotsubo cardiomyopathy), right ventricular abnormalities (normal, mild or moderate, or severe systolic dysfunction, dilatation, d-shaped left ventricle, or elevated pulmonary artery pressure), or cardiac tamponade. the survey then captures whether the echocardiogram changed patient management.this prospective survey (www.escardio.org/eacvi/surveys) was distributed to the eacvi network and its wider membership, 14, 15 to a preestablished european society of cardiology database of cardiologists with an interest in cardiac imaging, and to the presidents and chairpersons of national societies and working groups in imaging across the world. it was also distributed widely on social media platforms.survey entries were excluded if there were incompatible, incomplete, or conflicting data, or if there were no echocardiographic findings recorded. in this analysis, missing values were not imputed. age was reported as median with an interquartile interval, and categorical variables were reported as frequencies (%). between-group comparisons were performed using the v 2 test or an independent samples ttest. in the primary analysis, patients with either confirmed or probable covid-19 were included. a sensitivity analysis was performed restricted to those with confirmed covid-19. a critical care setting was defined as intensive care, high dependency, or coronary care units, the emergency department, or the cardiac catheterization laboratory. a normal echocardiogram was defined as normal left and right ventricular function, with no other reported abnormalities. to evaluate associations between clinical variables and cardiac abnormalities that were more likely to be due to covid-19, an analysis was performed in patients without pre-existing cardiac disease, after excluding those with previous ischaemic heart disease, heart failure, or valvular heart disease. univariable and multivariable logistic regression models were constructed separately with an abnormal left ventricle (any degree of left ventricular dysfunction or dilatation, myocardial infarction, myocarditis, or takotsubo cardiomyopathy) or abnormal right ventricle (any right ventricular dysfunction or dilatation, a d-shaped left ventricle, or pulmonary hypertension) as the dependent variables. covariates included age, gender, scan location, symptom severity, hypertension and diabetes mellitus, and the indication for echocardiography. analysis was performed using r version 3.5.0 (r foundation for statistical computing, vienna, austria).the survey was launched on 3 april 2020. the results reported here comprise data from the first 17 days of the survey, with the last date of collection on 20 april 2020. data from 1272 patients undergoing echocardiography were collected from 69 countries across six continents where covid-19 has been reported ( figure 1 ). data were available for analysis in 1216 (96%) patients [62 (52-71) years, 70% male], of whom 813 (73%) had confirmed covid-19, and 298 (27%) had a high probability at the time of scanning ( table 1) overall, 60% of scans were performed in a critical care setting (54% intensive care, 2% high dependency unit and coronary care unit, 5% emergency room, and 1% cardiac catheter laboratory), with the remainder performed in general medicine, cardiology, respiratory, and dedicated covid-19 wards ( table 1) . correspondingly, 54% of patients had severe symptoms and 19% had evidence of pneumonia. pre-existing cardiac disease was reported in 26% of patients due to a combination of ischaemic heart disease (14%), heart failure (9%), or valvular heart disease (7%). hypertension (37%) and diabetes mellitus (19%) were also common. the most common indications for echocardiography were suspected left-sided heart failure (40%), elevated cardiac biomarkers (26%), and right-sided heart failure (20%). chest pain with st-segment elevation on the electrocardiogram (9%), circulatory shock (8%), ventricular arrhythmia (3%), and suspected cardiac tamponade (2%) were less frequent, as were other indications, such as suspected pulmonary embolism (5%), endocarditis (6%), and myocarditis (1%).compared with patients with a normal echocardiogram (n = 549, 45%), patients with an abnormal scan (n = 667, 55%) were older and had a higher prevalence of pre-existing ischaemic heart disease, heart failure, or valvular heart disease, but a similar prevalence of hypertension or diabetes mellitus. the proportion of males was similar in both groups (table 1; figure 2 , central illustration). left ventricular abnormalities were reported in 479 (39%) patients, with echocardiographic evidence of new myocardial infarction in 36 (3%), myocarditis in 35 (3%), and takotsubo cardiomyopathy in 19 (2%). left ventricular impairment was classified as mild, moderate, or severe in 17, 12, and 9% of patients, respectively. right ventricular abnormalities were reported in 397 (33%) patients, with mild or moderate right ventricular impairment in 19% and severe impairment in 6%. right ventricular dilatation (15%), elevated pulmonary artery pressures (8%), and a d-shaped left ventricle (4%) were reported less frequently. cardiac tamponade and endocarditis were reported in 11 (1%) and 14 (1%) patients, respectively. severe cardiac disease, defined as severe left or right ventricular dysfunction or cardiac tamponade, was reported in 1 in 7 patients (n = 182, 15%; supplementary material online, table s1 ).abnormalities on the echocardiogram were more common in those where the indication for imaging was chest pain with st- in 405 (33%) patients, an immediate change in management due to the echocardiogram was reported ( table 1 ). in the remaining 811 (67%) patients, no change in management was reported in 675 (56%), or it was not clear to the echocardiographer whether there had been a change in management in 136 (11%), as the individuals performing the scan were not directly involved in guiding the patients'care. an immediate change in management occurred more often in those patients with an abnormal compared with a normal echocardiogram (45% vs. 20%, p < 0.001, figure 3 ) and similarly in those with severe disease compared with those with no severe disease identified on echocardiogram (59% vs. 29%, p < 0.001; supplementary material online, table s1 ). specific changes in management reported in the free-text comments were collated into four groups. in patients in whom a change in management was reported, the echocardiogram led to changes in disease-specific therapy in 42% (171/405), such as initiating therapy for heart failure, acute coronary syndrome, tamponade, or pulmonary embolism, and commencing antimicrobial therapy for endocarditis. the echocardiogram also facilitated decisions regarding changes in the level of patient care in 8% (32/405), and guided titration of haemodynamic support in 13% (51/405). in the remaining 37% (151/405) where management changed, the change was not described. changes in management were reported in a higher proportion of patients with pre-existing cardiac disease compared with those without (38% vs. 32%, p = 0.005), and in those with elevated cardiac biomarkers compared with the remaining population (39% vs. 31%, p < 0.001).we report findings from the first international survey of echocardiography in patients with confirmed or suspected covid-19. data from 1216 patients scanned in 69 countries across six continents demonstrated left or right ventricular abnormalities in half of all patients with covid-19 undergoing echocardiography, and that these abnormalities were severe in 1 in 7 patients. the majority had non-specific patterns of ventricular dysfunction, although new myocardial infarction, myocarditis, and takotsubo cardiomyopathy were observed in a minority of patients. echocardiography was reported to directly change patient management in a third of cases including alterations to disease-specific management, haemodynamic support, and the level of care received by the patients. the simple online format of this survey allowed rapid capture of the echocardiographic findings from a large number of patients with covid-19 during the pandemic's peak. this was facilitated by our ability to disseminate and to publicize the survey via social media and through an established global network of imaging specialists. this format allowed us to keep pace with the rapid spread of covid-19 around the world. most scans were performed in the current epicentres of the outbreak: the uk, italy, spain, france, and the usa. while undoubtedly a global survey, our data remain representative of the current geographical distribution of the virus.whilst our previous understanding of how covid-19 affects the heart was limited to case reports and case series, 7-9 consistent epidemiological data have demonstrated that patients with established cardiovascular disease, risk factors, or elevated cardiac biomarkers have an increased susceptibility to infection and an increased risk of severe disease and death. [3] [4] [5] [6] severe cardiac disease was observed in 1 in 7 patients across the whole cohort and in 1 in 8 patients without pre-existing cardiac disease. this proportion rose to 1 in 5 when the indication for imaging included raised cardiac biomarkers. the proportion of abnormal echocardiograms and those demonstrating severe cardiac disease were similar after excluding patients with previously established cardiac disease (heart failure, valve disease, or ischaemic heart disease), suggesting that in this population the cardiac abnormalities relate to covid-19 infection.the pattern of cardiac injury observed in our survey appears to be consistent with the cardiovascular involvement observed in patients with other severe viral respiratory infections. [16] [17] [18] [19] right ventricular abnormalities were observed in a quarter of patients and were more common in patients with more severe symptoms of covid-19. these are likely to reflect severe respiratory disease, including the viral pneumonia itself, as well as both clinical and subclinical pulmonary thrombo-embolism. 20 left ventricular abnormalities were present in a third of patients and were predominantly non-specific in nature. further research is required to define the mechanism of this dysfunction as only occasionally were echocardiographic patterns consistent with myocardial infarction, myocarditis, or takotsubo cardiomyopathy. the latter conditions are often difficult to recognize during an isolated echocardiogram, particularly when performed in a critical care setting, and, as such, their true prevalence may have been underestimated.in a third of patients who underwent echocardiography on clinical indication, imaging was reported to result in an immediate change in patient management. this included changes in disease-specific therapies, such as pericardiocentesis or therapy for heart failure, pulmonary embolism, or acute coronary syndromes. it also contributed to decisions regarding the level of patient care, such as the admission of patients to critical care, and the need for titration of haemodynamic support. in practice, this proportion may have been underestimated as echocardiographers may not have fully appreciated the consequences of their scan at the time of imaging. in addition, a majority of patients had echocardiography performed in an intensive care unit. in this setting, optimization of management may have been previously instituted or changes in management limited by severe respiratory or haemodynamic compromise. few previous studies have reported the impact of echocardiography on changes in management, and none has been performed in a critical care setting. 21 to put our findings into context, bethge et al. report in an outpatient setting that whilst 22% of patients had abnormal findings, management changed in only 3% of patients. 22 finally, we suggest that information supporting the continuation of a management strategy may be as clinically relevant as information that leads to the initiation of an alternative strategy.the complex logistics involved in performing echocardiography in patients with covid-19 and the risk of virus transmission necessitates robust selection of patients for imaging. 23 our data do not imply that all patients with covid-19 require an echocardiogram. indeed, patients undergoing echocardiography here had clearly defined clinical indications. our data suggest that cardiac biomarkers may help improve the selection of patients for imaging, with elevated bnp and cardiac troponin concentrations independent predictors of left and right ventricular abnormalities, respectively. building on this study, there is now a need for future imaging and biomarker studies to systematically investigate the cardiovascular manifestations of covid-19, and to establish their true prevalence. the capacity-covid european registry aims to determine the role of cardiovascular disease in the covid-19 pandemic through standardized large-scale data collection. 24 imaging with echocardiography and cardiovascular magnetic resonance following recovery from covid-19 will be more readily achievable and will be well placed to define any residual cardiac damage caused by the condition. similarly, studies investigating whether cardiac biomarkers can better direct clinical imaging and improve patient outcomes would be welcome.our study suffers from the usual limitations associated with an observational survey. whilst by design we sought to conduct a rapid survey capturing key echocardiographic findings during the pandemic's peak, this limited the amount and granularity of the data we could capture. we are reliant on operator-reported findings, as is common in clinical practice, and acknowledge that definitive assessment and core lab verification of cardiac function with echocardiography in critically ill patients is challenging. a proportion of the data was collected from free text-fields, and as such may be biased and represent an underestimate of these findings or clinical variables. additionally, this two multivariable logistic regression models examined the associations of clinical covariates with abnormal left ventricular or abnormal right ventricular findings on echocardiography. categorical covariate data comprised only those answers that were pre-defined in survey questions and were selected a priori based on clinical relevance. *those with mild symptoms were the referent group for symptom severity. bnp, brain type natriuretic peptide. survey is subject to substantial case selection bias. for example, we do not know the prevalence of abnormalities in those who did not undergo scanning. in view of the complex logistics around scanning, echocardiography was probably limited to those with clear clinical indications or those with increased disease severity. furthermore, the use of echocardiography has probably decreased in the current pandemic due to concerns over viral transmission, and this may further contribute to the selection of patients for scanning. we did not capture patient outcomes, but many of the relevant outcomes have yet to occur. finally, there were relatively few data from certain countries, including china. as the survey continues, we will seek to better target and gather more information from these countries, with further reports to follow.in this global survey, cardiac abnormalities were observed in half of all covid-19 patients undergoing echocardiography. abnormalities were often unheralded or severe, and imaging changed management in one-third of patients.supplementary material is available at european heart journal -cardiovascular imaging online.stratification. [3] [4] [5] [6] there is mounting evidence that in critically ill patients, there are characteristics of hyperinflammation, which consist of elevated serum c-reactive protein (crp), procalcitonin (pct), d-dimer, and hyperferritinemia. these findings suggest a possibly crucial role of a cytokine storm in covid-19 pathophysiology. 7 laboratory biomarkers to forecast the severity of covid-19 are essential in a pandemic, because resource allocation must be carefully planned, especially in the context of respiratory support readiness. in the present study, we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to investigate the association between several biomarkers, including serum crp, pct, d-dimer, and serum ferritin, and the severity of covid-19.search strategy and study selection a systematic literature search was carried out using the search engines pubmed and europepmc with the search terms: (a) 'covid-19' or 'sars-cov-2' and 'characteristics'; (b) ('covid-19' or 'sars-cov-2' and 'characteristics') and ('mortality' or 'severe'), medline, english, and human. additional records were also searched from preprint servers. we excluded duplicates after compiling the results of the initial search. two independent authors (mal and ih) sorted the potential articles by screening titles/abstracts. after exclusion of unrelated records, we screened the full text of potential articles for relevance based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. the search was finalized on 8 april 2020. the study was conducted in accordance with the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses guideline.we included research articles in which samples were adult patients with covid-19 with data for serum crp, pct, d-dimer, and serum ferritin, and reported the data based on the presence or absence of clinically validated definitions of mortality, severe covid-19, ards, and intensive care unit (icu) care. we excluded review articles, commentaries, letters, original researches with <20 samples, case reports, non-english language articles, and pediatric populations (<17 years old).two independent authors (ih and rp) performed data extraction from the included studies using standardized forms that contained author, year, study design, age, gender, cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), the need for icu care, serum crp, pct, d-dimer, serum ferritin, and severe covid-19.the outcome of interest in this meta-analysis was a composite poor outcome, which consisted of mortality, severe covid-19, ards, and need for icu care. the definition of ards in this study was in accordance with the who interim guidance of severe acute respiratory infection. 8 in this study, severe covid-19 follows the definition of the who-china joint commission on covid- 19. 9 statistical analysis for the quantitative analysis, we used the software review manager 5.3 (cochrane collaboration) and stata version 16. to calculate the effect estimates for dichotomous variables, we used the mantel-haenszel formula to generate the risk ratio (rr) and its 95% confidence interval. for the continuous variables, we used the generic inverse variance method to calculate the effect estimate in the form of standardized mean difference (smd). to account for inter-study variability, a random-effects model was used, regardless of heterogeneity.in this meta-analysis, all p values reported were two-tailed with the statistical significance set at ⩽ 0.05. a restricted-maximum likelihood random-effects meta-regression analysis was performed for several potentially confounding covariates, including age, gender, hypertension cardiovascular disease, and respiratory comorbidities. the pooled effect estimate for each component of the composite poor outcome was then assessed in the subgroup analysis. funnel-plot analysis was performed to evaluate qualitatively the risk of publication bias. regression-based egger's test was performed to evaluate quantitatively the presence of small-study effects.initial record searches yielded 313 records. after removal of duplicates, 300 records remained. journals.sagepub.com/home/tar 3 after assessing titles/abstracts according to the data of interest, we excluded 253 records and sorted 50 potential records. the potential records were then assessed for their eligibility to be included in this systematic review. a total of 20 articles was excluded because there was no outcome of interest, i.e. mortality, severe covid-19, ards, or need for icu care. five other studies were also excluded because there were no dichotomous data for crp, pct, and d-dimer, or continuous data for serum ferritin. thereby, 25 studies were included in the qualitative and quantitative synthesis (figure 1 ), which comprised 5350 patients. (table 1) .this meta-analysis of 13 studies showed that an elevated serum crp was associated with an increased composite poor outcome [rr 1.84 (1.45, 2.33), p < 0.001; i 2 : 96%, p < 0.001] (figure 2 (a)). [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [25] [26] [27] [28] 31 subgroup analysis showed that an elevated crp was associated with an increased risk of severe covid- pooled analysis of a single cutoff point of ⩾10 mg/l resulted in a sensitivity of 51% (18-84%) and a specificity of 88% (70-95%). summary of receiver operating characteristic (sroc) curve analysis (with prediction and confidence contours) demonstrated an area under curve (auc) of 0.84 (0.80-0.87) (figure 2(b) ). a crp ⩾10 mg/l has an likelihood ratio (lr) + of 4.1 and an lr-of 0.5. the meta-analysis of 11 studies showed that an elevated d-dimer was associated with an increase in composite poor outcome [rr 2.93 (2.14, 4.01), p < 0.001; i 2 : 77%, p < 0.001] (figure 4(a) ). 16 meta-regression analysis demonstrated that the association between an elevated crp, pct, d-dimer, serum ferritin level, and the composite poor outcome was not significantly affected by gender, age, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and copd (p > 0.05).the funnel-plot was qualitatively asymmetrical for d-dimer, pct, crp, and ferritin. regressionbased egger's test showed no indication of smallstudy effects for d-dimer (p = 0.073) and ferritin (p = 0.372) on the composite poor outcome. there was indication of small-study effects in the association between pct (p = 0.003), crp (p < 0.001), and a composite poor outcome.this meta-analysis showed that elevated serum crp, pct, d-dimer, and serum ferritin levels were associated with an increased composite poor outcome that comprises mortality, severe covid-19, ards, and the need for icu care in patients with covid-19. the effect estimate was not significantly modified by gender, age, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and copd.in the systemic hyperinflammation phase of covid-19 proposed by siddiqi and mehra, 35 there is a significant elevation of inflammatory cytokines and biomarkers, such as interleukin (il)-2, il-6, il-7, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor, macrophage inflammatory protein 1-α, tumor necrosis factor-α (tnf-α), crp, ferritin, pct, and d-dimer. this stage consists of the most severe manifestation of the cytokine storm, in which excessive hyperinflammation may lead to cardiopulmonary collapse and multi-organ failure. 35, 36 crp is an acute phase inflammatory protein produced by the liver that may be elevated in several conditions, such as inflammation, cardiovascular disease, and infection. 37 in our meta-analysis of 13 studies, an elevated crp was associated with severe covid-19, the need for icu care, but journals.sagepub.com/home/tar 7 not with mortality. although there is no general agreement on a cutoff point to determining the severity of covid-19, the majority of the studies used a ⩾10 mg/l cutoff. our sroc analysis showed the diagnostic value of serum crp ⩾10 mg/l for a composite poor outcome in covid-19 (51% sensitivity, 88% specificity, an lr+ of 4.1 and an lr-of 0.5). previous studies that attempted to predict mortality in sepsis by the presence of an elevated serum crp were inconclusive. a study showed that an elevated serum crp level was associated with a 30-day mortality rate, 38 while other studies showed otherwise. [39] [40] [41] these inconsistencies might be caused by the different cutoff values used. in the study by koozi et al., the cutoff value for an elevated serum crp was ⩾1000 mg/l, 38 while in the study by ryoo et al., the cutoff point of ⩾140 mg/l was used. 41 liu et al. proposed a cutoff value of ⩾41.8 mg/l to predict severe covid-19. 42 in our analysis, the cutoff values of serum crp varied widely, with the lowest and highest values being >3 mg/l and >100 mg/l, respectively. these findings reflected the paramount need for pursuing the optimal serum crp cutoff value for covid-19 prognostication. the time period for serum crp measurement was critical in light of the timely manner of serum crp increment, which culminates 72 h after the initial insults. 37, 41 despite its value in predicting a poor outcome in covid-19, it should be noted that various factors could affect serum crp levels, including age, gender, smoking status, weight, lipid levels, blood pressure, and liver injury. 37 these factors should be taken into account while interpreting the serum crp level. in addition, recent evidence has shown that serum crp level could also be used in monitoring the progression and improvement of patients with covid-19. 43 a peptide precursor of the hormone calcitonin, pct, has been widely investigated as a promising biomarker for the initial investigation of a bacterial infection. 44 an elevated serum pct is often found in patients with sepsis and septic shock. 39 while it is still controversial whether pct can accurately distinguish bacterial or viral pneumonia, 45 it was found that pct-guided therapy in journals.sagepub.com/home/tar 11 acute respiratory infections reduces the antibiotic exposure and side effects, and improves the survival rate. 46 bacterial infections trigger extrathyroidal synthesis of pct, which is actively maintained by elevated values of il-6, il-1β, and tnf-α, while viral infections hinder pct production due to interferon-γ. 47 this explains why serum pct concentrations remain normal in uncomplicated cases of covid-19 and inflated values may indicate bacterial co-infection in severe cases. 48 in this metaanalysis, we found that an elevated serum pct was associated with mortality and severe covid-19.our sroc analysis showed the diagnostic value of serum pct ⩾0.5 mg/l for a composite poor outcome in covid-19 (88% sensitivity, 68% specificity, lr+ 2.7 and lr-0.2).in our study, we also found that an elevated d-dimer was associated with an increased composite poor outcome, especially mortality and severe covid-19. this finding supports the hypothesis that severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection could induce the dysfunction of the hemostatic system, leading to a hypercoagulable state, a condition which we commonly encounter in sepsis. 49, 50 recent evidence of lung pathology dissection has shown occlusion and micro-thrombosis formation in pulmonary small vessels of patients critically ill with covid-19. 51 however, the etiology of elevated serum d-dimer level is multifactorial and the optimal cutoff value of elevated d-dimer in patients with covid-19 remains to be established. it is clear that covid-19-associated coagulopathy warrants distinct emphasis and special treatment. according to the international society of thrombosis and hemostasis (isth) guideline, a markedly elevated serum d-dimer level (which is still poorly defined as a three-to four-fold increase) implies an increased thrombin production. patients with covid-19 with markedly elevated d-dimer levels may require hospitalization, despite the severity of clinical presentation. 52 in the absence of contraindications, a prophylactic dose of an anticoagulant is recommended for all hospitalized patients with covid-19.along with other biomarkers included in this study, we also found that a higher serum ferritin level was independently associated with ards, mortality, and severe covid-19. this may lead to the notion of the presence of secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (shlh) in covid-19. 7 shlh is a condition of hyperinflammation characterized by a cytokine storm causing fatal multi-organ failure. 53 this condition is most commonly triggered by viral infections, 54 which might lead to a hypothesis of sars-cov-2 inducing this hyperinflammatory syndrome. despite the fact that some authors suggested using hscore to identify subgroups of patients that may benefit from immunosuppressive therapy, 7 it is still controversial whether or not this specific condition in severe covid-19 needs to be treated as in shlh. a recent systematic review by veronese et al. including 542 patients reported conflicting evidence in 4 studies. 55 the authors concluded that the current evidence did not support the routine use of corticosteroids in covid-19, but some findings suggested corticosteroids may reduce the mortality rate in covid-19 cases aggravated with ards.an elevated serum crp, pct, d-dimer, and ferritin can be used as laboratory biomarkers for a poor outcome in covid-19. the cutoff points of elevated crp (⩾10 mg/l), pct (⩾0.5 ng/ml), and d-dimer (>0.5 mg/l) are suggested based on the current evidence, even though higher cutoff values might reflect a poorer outcome. serum crp may not only be used as a prognostic marker, but also to monitor disease improvement in covid-19. elevated serum pct might be useful in guiding antibiotic therapy for bacterial superinfection, although further studies are warranted. based on our findings on the association between serum d-dimer levels and a poor outcome in covid-19, we support the current isth guideline on the use of a prophylactic anticoagulant in patients with covid-19. 52 we also encourage further studies to create a prognostic model that includes these biomarkers along with other proven poor prognostic factors in covid-19. 6,56,57the limitations of this systematic review and metaanalysis were the possible presence of publication bias, the use of non-peer-reviewed studies, and the nature of retrospective studies. the asymmetrical inverted funnel-plot for serum d-dimer, pct, crp, and ferritin implied the presence of publication bias. we included studies published on preprints servers and which were not yet peer-reviewed. this was due to the emergent pandemic situation of covid-19, during which data from preprints servers might be crucial, despite the drawbacks. most of the studies were from a single country, thus the patients might overlap across reports. all the included studies were mostly retrospective and observational, therefore, the results must be cautiously interpreted.this meta-analysis showed that an elevated serum crp, pct, d-dimer, and serum ferritin were associated with a composite poor outcome in patients with covid-19. coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) pandemic has drastically affected the global health and as of 15th may 2020, resulted in 4,248,389 million confirmed cases and a death toll of 294,046 worldwide [1] .this disease has presented with a heterogeneous clinical course, ranging from asymptomatic carrier state to a lethal outcome with multi-organ failure and with a wide variety of case fatality rates ranging from 0.7 to 67% [2] [3] [4] . although the respiratory tract is the most commonly involved organ system in this disease, other organs and particularly the heart are also affected with a negative impact on outcome [5] . furthermore, pre-existing cardiovascular disease (cvd) can affect severity and mortality of these patients. despite myriads of studies investigating cardiovascular diseases in patients with covid-19, there are still numerous unanswered questions, most importantly a triage risk stratification tool (trst) that allows timely recognition of high-risk patients and well-timed delivery of risk-levelappropriate, patient-tailored, and pathophysiologicaltargeted treatment [6] .the aims of this systematic review and meta-analyses were (1) to calculate pooled frequency of newly developed and pre-existing cvd, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cardiac symptoms as the initial presentations of covid-19, elevation of cardiac and inflammatory biomarkers, acute hepatic, and renal injury; (2) to investigate association of newly developed and pre-existing cvd (including any acquired cardiac disease, encompassing ischemic and non-ischemic cardiomyopathies, or congenital heart disease) hypertension, and elevated cardiac and inflammatory biomarkers with severity of the disease and mortality; (3) to define the clinical spectrum and mechanisms of the newly developed cardiovascular diseases in the pediatric and adult population, the spectrum of newly developed arrhythmias and electrocardiographic changes and the pathologic findings of cardiac autopsies; and (4) to propose a trst for timely detection and appropriate pathophysiologically targeted treatment of high-risk covid-19 patients with associated cvd.we conducted an online search in databases of pubmed and embase on 21st april 2020 to identify relevant studies. the search terms included "covid-19," and "cardiovascular diseases," and other relevant or equivalent terms. we provided our search strategy in supplementary material 1 (s1). to retrieve additional eligible studies, we also traced the reference list of the retrieved papers and relevant reviews.studies were included if (1) they had reported associated cardiovascular diseases in covid-19 patients, (2) assessed levels of cardiac biomarkers in covid-19 patients, and (3) were original peer-reviewed studies (except for one study that we used in our qualitative analysis and was retrieved from medrxiv) [7] . we did not apply any limitation on language or publication date. studies were included in our quantitative analysis if they had a sample size of equal to or larger than ten. the rest of the articles, including case reports, case series, and studies investigating pathological features of the heart tissue, were assessed in the qualitative analysis. we excluded review articles.data selection was in concordance with the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma) guidelines [1] . two authors (sm and ps) independently assessed the eligibility of the retrieved references. in case of disagreement, emr made the final decision.three reviewers (sm, ps, and emr) extracted (1) characteristics of the sample (age, gender, previous cardiovascular comorbidities, diabetes, and hypertension); (2) incidence of cardiovascular diseases; (3) levels of cardiac biomarkers, including troponins, n-terminal-pro b-type natriuretic peptide (nt-pro bnp), myoglobin, creatine kinase (ck), creatine kinase-mb (ck-mb), and lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) and inflammatory biomarkers including d-dimer, c-reactive protein (crp), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr), ferritin, interleukin-6 (il-6), and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (tnf-α); and (4) frequency of acute hepatic injury and acute kidney damage.to critically appraise the included studies, we implemented the newcastle-ottawa scale (nos) [8] . the possible scores of this scale range from 0 to 9. studies with a score of seven to nine, four to six, and zero to three were classified as studies with low, moderate, and high risk of bias, respectively.we used openmeta analyst [9] version 1.15.14 and rev-man version 5.3 [10] . using forest plots, we illustrated the results of the analyses. we used funnel plots to illustrate the publication bias. the odds ratio (or) were calculated to compare frequencies of acute cardiac injury, hypertension, and pre-existing cardiovascular diseases, between the "deceased" and the "recovered" patients and also between patients with "severe" and "non-severe" manifestations. we used standardized mean difference (smd) to compare levels of cardiac troponin, ck, ntpro bnp, myoglobin, ldh, crp, esr, ferritin, il-6, and ldh between the "deceased" and "recovered" patients and levels of crp, ldh, ck, and ck-mb between the "severe" and "non-severe" cases.we used the i 2 index to assess heterogeneity between studies. the i 2 -indices of 0-25%, 26-75%, and 75-100% represented low, moderate, and high degrees of heterogeneity, respectively [11] . we utilized fixed effects models if the results were homogeneous (i < 50% and p > 0.05) and random effect models if these results were heterogeneous (i ≥ 50% or p ≤ 0.05) [12] .to convert median and inter-quartile range (iqr) to mean and standard deviation (sd), we used statistical methods suggested by luo et al. [13] and wan et al. [14] . for one study which did not report the first and third quartiles of its data, we assumed the mean equal to the median and the standard deviation (sd) equal to iqr divided by 2 [6] .our analysis of the comparison of patients with severe to those with non-severe covid-19 included two types of categorization, namely "icu" versus "non-icu" groups and "severe" (defined as respiratory rate ≥ 30 times/min, oxygen saturation at resting state ≤ 93%, partial pressure of arterial oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen ratio < 300) versus "non-severe" (presented as without pneumonia or with mild pneumonia) categories. we also calculated the overall effect of each parameter on both groups (severe or icu group and non-severe or non-icu group) as a whole. in the series of studies with "icu" versus "non-icu" groups, we did not include the study performed by du et al. [15] , since they had clearly stated that all of their patients had an indication for icu admission, but they could not admit them into icu just because of a shortage of resources. regarding study of han et al. in which they had classified their patients into three subgroups as mild, severe, and critical, we merged the severe and critical groups. additionally, we did not include wan et al.'s [16] study in our subgroup analysis comparing acute cardiac injury in patients with severe and non-severe disease because their definition of acute cardiac injury was not precisely defined.in the pooled frequency analysis of patients with higher levels of crp, esr, ferritin, il-6, nt-pro bnp, d-dimer, ldh, cardiac troponins, myoglobin, ck, and ck-mb, we only included the studies which had indicated the number of patients with elevated levels of these biomarkers based on their laboratory cut-off values.we present our findings in two sections: "meta-analyses" and "systematic review" sections meta-analyses study selection figure 1 depicts the detailed process of data selection. three-hundred and sixty-two (362) studies were retrieved in our initial search of pubmed and embase, 315 of which remained after removing duplicates. in title/abstract screening, 257 papers did not meet our inclusion criteria and were excluded. five of the studies entering full-text screening had either wrong study design or study population and were excluded. we also added one pre-print study regarding cardiac pathological findings from medrvix [7] . we included a total of 54 studies in our qualitative synthesis, 35 of which were contained in our meta-analysis [3, .of the 54 selected studies for the review, 19 records were case reports, case series, or pathological reports. among studies included in our meta-analysis, nine did not categorize their samples into subgroups, and the rest had a subgroup classification (tables 1 and 2 in the supplementary materials 2 and 3 (s2 and s3). five studies grouped their patients based on whether they survived or not, three depending on whether they had myocardial injury or high levels of cardiac biomarkers (troponin t or nt-pro bnp), four according to whether patients needed icu admission or not, and eight had divided their patients based on the severity of manifestations. three studies used a combination of these classifications and divided their patients into four or more subgroups. moreover, in three remaining studies, age, the time elapsed from the onset of symptom, or requirement of supplemental oxygen were used to stratify patients.of the 35 studies we evaluated in the risk of bias assessment, 30 studies had a low risk of bias, while five records had a moderate risk of bias. none of the included studies were assessed as a study with a high risk of bias. the table of risk of bias assessment is available in supplementary material 4 (s4). table 1 illustrates the summary of the results of the pooled analysis of the frequency of chest pain/chest tightness and palpitation as one of the initial manifestations, newly developed and pre-existing cardiovascular disease, and elevation of cardiac and inflammatory biomarkers. the forest plots are available in supplementary material 5 (s5).newly developed cardiovascular diseases or related symptoms acute cardiac injury, with an estimated pooled frequency of 25.3% (95% ci 19.5-31.1%), was the most commonly reported cardiac complication of covid-19. although the pooled estimated frequency of arrhythmia was slightly higher than acute cardiac injury (26.1%), it was only reported in four studies, and the 95% confidence interval (ci) was equal to 2.5-51.5%. notably, there was significant heterogeneity in the estimates of newly developed acute cardiac injury and arrhythmia (i 2 = 93%). moreover, two studies with a total number of 367 patients had assessed newly developed heart failure due to covid-19 infection, and the pooled frequency was calculated at 23.7% (ci 19.3-28.0%).among the cardiac manifestations as the initial presentation of covid-19, frequency of chest pain or chest tightness and palpitation were investigated. a total of six studies had reported chest pain or chest tightness in covid-19 patients. our pooled frequency analysis showed that this presentation was observed as an initial manifestation in approximately one-fifth (21.8%, 95% ci 19.3-28%) of patients. additionally, two other studies had reported palpitation as the initial presentation, the estimated pooled frequency of which equaled to 9.1% (95% ci 6.2-12.1%).pre-existing cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and hypertension hypertension was the most common preexisting comorbidity among covid-19 patients with a pooled frequency of 29.2% (95% ci 24.7-33.6%), followed by diabetes with a pooled frequency of 13.5% (95% ci 11.5-15.4%). overall, fewer than one-fifth of patients had pre-existing cardiovascular diseases. the pooled frequency of cardiovascular diseases was estimated at 12.6% (95% ci 10.0-15.2%). additionally, our analysis on the pooled frequency of heart failure using data of five studies, which had reported pre-existing heart failure, showed a pooled frequency of 6.3% (95% ci 2.9-9.8%). there was significant heterogeneity in the estimates of pre-existing cardiovascular diseases and hypertension (i 2 ≥ 95%). figure 2 illustrates the pooled frequency of elevation of cardiac and inflammatory biomarkers. among the biomarkers we investigated, esr and crp were the most commonly elevated biomarkers. the estimated pooled frequencies of patients with elevated esr and crp were 71.8% (95% ci 59.0-84.6%) and 75.4% (95% ci 66-84%). similarly, higher levels of serum moreover, among cardiac biomarkers, increased levels of nt-pro bnp, d-dimer, and ldh were found in approximately 40% of patients. the estimated pooled frequencies of elevation of nt-pro bnp, d-dimer, and ldh were equal to 46.5% (95% ci 28.9-64.2%), 41.5% (95% ci 31.0-52.1%), and 41.0% (95% ci 28.8-53.2%), respectively. elevation of cardiac troponins was observed in approximately onequarter of patients (25.3%, 95% ci 17.6-33.1%). additionally, we identified and analyzed the findings of five studies that had investigated the number of patients with increased myoglobin levels. the estimated pooled frequency of elevated myoglobin was at near 19.1% (95% ci 11.6-26.6%). lastly, we found ten studies reporting the number of patients with elevated ck levels and two studies reporting the number of patients with elevated ck-mb levels. the estimated pooled frequency of elevation of ck and ck-mb were equaled to 15.9% (95% ci 10.5-21.3%) and 66.2% (95% ci 6.9-125.6%), respectively. of note, chen et al. reported reduction of ck levels in 23% of their patients [18] . as the wide ci range and high heterogeneity score (i 2 = 99%) show, the results of this analysis cannot be very reliable and additional original investigations are required in this regard. notably, there was significant heterogeneity in the estimates of the frequency of increased cardiac and inflammatory biomarkers (86 % ≤ i 2 ≤ 99%). table 1 the summary of the pooled analysis of frequency of chest pain/chest tightness and palpitation as one of the initial manifestations, newly developed and pre-existing cardiovascular disease, and elevation of cardiac and inflammatory biomarkers in patients with covid-19 only two studies had measured the levels of tnf-α. pooled frequency of elevated levels of tnf-α was 58.3% (95% ci 53.8-62.7%) [19, 33] .association of newly developed acute cardiac injury, pre-existing cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, and diabetes with disease severity and survival figure  3 depicts the odds ratio for death and developing severe forms of covid-19 infection according to the presence of newly developed acute cardiac injury, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and pre-existing cardiovascular diseases. the forest plots showing the odds ratio for death according to newly developed acute cardiac injury, pre-existing cardiovascular disease, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus are available in supplementary material 6 (s6).newly developed acute cardiac injury: association with survival and severity the development of acute cardiac injury increased the risk of mortality by near 20 times (or 19.64, 95% ci 10.28-37.53, p < 0.001). patients developing acute cardiac injury had a much higher risk of being admitted to icu (or 13.5, 95% ci 3.61-50.52, p < 0.001). studies included in the analysis of assessing the effect of acute cardiac injury on the risk of being admitted to icu were homogenous (i 2 = 0%). when we added one study comparing the incidence of acute cardiac injury between severe and non-severe patients, we found that development of acute cardiac injury increased the occurrence of more severe presentation of the disease more than six times (or 6.28, 95% ci 4.22-9.8, p < 0.001) (fig. 4) .pre-existing cardiovascular diseases: association with survival and severity pre-existing cardiovascular diseases pose a significant risk of mortality. patients with these conditions were near eight times more likely to have a fatal outcome (or 7.87, 95% ci 2.17-28.57, p = 0.002). studies comparing pre-existing cardiovascular diseases between deceased and survived patients were moderately heterogeneous (i 2 = 54%, p = 0.07). similarly, patients with pre-existing cardiovascular diseases were about four times more likely to be categorized in the icu or severe groups (or 3.9, 95% ci 2.74-5.56, p < 0.001). patients with pre-existing cardiovascular diseases were approximately three times more likely to be admitted to the icu (or 3.33, 95% ci 1.81-6.11, p < 0.001) and four times more likely to develop severe forms of the disease (or 4.18, 95% ci 2.7-6.48, p < 0.001) (fig. 4) .we included eight studies with low heterogeneity (i 2 = 25%) to assess the role of hypertension in increasing the mortality rate and found that patients with hypertension were more than twice more likely to die from covid-19 compared to other patients (or 2.49, 95% ci 2.02-3.07, p < 0.001).likewise, patients with hypertension were about three times more likely to be categorized in the icu or severe groups (or 2.87, 95% ci 1.80-4.57, p < 0.001). patients with hypertension were approximately 3.8 times more likely to be admitted to the icu (or 3.79, 95% ci 2.50-5.74, p < 0.001) and 2.5 times more likely to develop severe forms of covid-19 infection (or 2.54, 95% ci 1.35, 4.80, p < 0.001) (fig. 4) .diabetes: association with survival and severity six studies with low heterogeneity (i 2 = 0%) had reported number of patients with diabetes in deceased and survived groups. we found that patients with diabetes were fig. 4 forest plots showing the odds ratio for severity according to the newly developed acute cardiac injury, pre-existing cardiovascular disease, hypertension and diabetes mellitus slightly more likely to die from covid-19 compared to other patients (or 1.66, 95% ci 1.20-2.29, p < 0.001).similarly, patients with diabetes were near three times more likely to be categorized in the icu or severe groups (or 2.75, 95% ci 1.70-4.46, p < 0.001). they were approximately 3.38 times more likely to be admitted to the icu (95% ci 1.21-9.49, p = 0.02) and 2.29 times more likely to develop severe forms of covid-19 infection (95% ci 1.44, 3.65, p < 0.001) (fig. 4) .elevated levels of cardiac and inflammatory biomarkers level: association with survival the levels of cardiac biomarkers, including cardiac troponin (smd = 2.96, 95% ci 0.47-5.45, p = 0.02), myoglobin (smd = 1.64, 95% ci 1.34-1.93, p < 0.001), ldh (smd = 1.54, 95% ci 0.76-2.32, p < 0.001), nt-pro bnp (smd = 1.13, 95% ci 0.64-1.61, p < 0.001), and ck (smd = 1.13, 95% ci 0.64-1.61, p < 0.001) were significantly higher in the deceased group (fig. 5) .we included elevated levels of troponin i, t, and highsensitivity troponin (either i or t) as cardiac troponins.similarly, the levels of inflammatory markers, including il-6 (smd = 1.37, 95% ci 1.05-1.69, p < 0.001), ferritin (smd = 1.13, 95% ci 0.78-1.49, p < 0.001), crp (smd = 1.04, 95% ci 0.64-1.44, p < 0.001), and esr (smd = 0.38, 95% ci 0.15-0.60, p < 0.001), were significantly higher in the deceased group (fig. 6) . overall, ck levels were higher in patients classified as the icu or severe groups (smd = 0.55, 95% ci 0.27-0.82, p < 0.001). additionally, the smd in icu or not icu subgroup (smd = 0.58, 95% ci 0.28-0.88, p < 0.001) was quite similar to the severe or non-severe subgroup (smd = 0.54, 95% ci 0.09-0.99, p = 0.02).two studies had assessed the difference between ck-mb levels between the severe and non-severe group of the patients. ck-mb levels were higher in the patients with severe forms of covid-19 (smd = 0.36, 95% ci 0.12-0.6, p < 0.001). when we added the only study which had compared the levels of ck-mb between icu and non-icu patients, the total smd was 0.55 (95% ci 0.09-1.01, p = 0.02) (fig. 7) .pooled frequencies of acute cardiac injury, acute hepatic injury, and acute kidney injury given the cardio-hepatic and cardio-renal interactions, we also analyzed the pooled frequency of acute liver injury and acute kidney injury in our selected studies [48] [49] [50] [51] [52] .while acute cardiac injury was reported in 25.3% (95% ci 19.5-31.1%) of patients, acute liver injury was reported in 22.2% (95% ci 13.5-31.0%) and acute kidney injury was stated in 8.8% of studies (95% ci 5.4-12.2%).funnel plots showing publication bias of studies are shown in supplementary material 7 (s7). a diverse range of cardiovascular disease has been reported in patients with covid-19 which encompasses acute myocarditis (including acute lymphocytic myocarditis) [53] , fulminant myocarditis [15, 24, 37, [54] [55] [56] , acute myocardial infarction type 2 [7] , acute myopericarditis [46] , acute pulmonary embolism [57] [58] [59] [60] , cardiac tamponade [46] , cardiogenic shock [61, 62] , cardiomyopathy [63] , heart failure, pericardial effusion, pulmonary hypertension, reverse takotsubo cardiomyopathy [64] , and right ventricular dysfunction [62, 65] .left ventricular failure was more commonly reported in covid-19 patients than right ventricular dysfunction. however, to date, the majority of cases with right ventricular failure were secondary to acute pulmonary embolism [65, 66] . nevertheless, fried and his colleagues reported myopericarditis in a 64-yearold patient who developed biventricular failure and was successfully managed using an intra-aortic balloon pump (iabp) [62] .in the pediatric population, there was a case of mild elevation of troponin i in a 55-day-infant with excellent outcome and discharge from the hospital [67] . however, both kawasaki-like disease and kawasaki shock-like syndrome have been reported with covid-19. jones et al. reported a 6-month-old female infant with the typical symptoms of kawasaki disease that was tested positive for covid-19. her echocardiogram was normal [68] . riphagen and her colleagues reported 8 patients with shock, aged 4 to 14 years, who had initially presented with persistent fever, rash, inflammation of the conjunctiva, peripheral edema, and pain in the extremities. all except one had prominent gastrointestinal symptoms, and all except one weighed above 75th percentile. all had elevated levels of cardiac troponins and developed warm shock. none of them tested positive for covid-19. however, a 14-year-old boy with 95 kg weight and a bmi of 33kg/m 2 , who underwent ecmo and died of cerebral infarction was tested positive postmortem, and another case was positive for covid-19 after discharge. antibody test was positive for covid-19 in all the eight patients. their echocardiographic findings included left ventricular and/or right ventricular dysfunction and increased brightness of walls of the coronary arteries. the authors suggested that covid-19 can produce a "hyper-inflammation syndrome" that involves multiple organs, mimicking kawasaki disease shock syndrome [69] .the exact mechanisms of cardiac injury in patients with covid-19 are not confirmed. however, it is speculated that cardiac injury can occur through one or more of the putative mechanisms [28, 70, 71] : direct invasion by the virus, indirect damage due to the systemic inflammatory syndrome and cytokine storm, dysregulation of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, hypoxia-induced cardiac injury, microvasculature damage of the heart, stress-induced cardiomyopathy, and cardiac damage secondary to multi-organ failure.timing of the appearance of the cardiac complications, early versus late stage, may serve as a hint to the diagnosis of the putative mechanism/s [72, 73] .dynamic changes in ecg are of paramount importance during covid-19 and imply acute cardiac derangement. patients with covid-19 are at risk of arrhythmias and ecg changes due to the disease itself or because of the medications used for its prevention or treatment, such as chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, and azithromycin. these three medications can prolong qt interval and predispose the patient to torsades de pointes [74] . nevertheless, to date, no case of torsades de pointes due to qtc prolongation secondary to consumption of these drugs has been reported in these patients.sinus tachycardia is the most common rhythm disturbance reported in patients with covid-19. moreover, a variety of other rhythm disorders and electrocardiographic alterations have been reported in patients with covid-19 such as supraventricular tachycardia [62, 63] , ventricular tachycardia, first-degree atrioventricular block (avb), temporary second-degree avb, reversible complete heart block, generalized stelevation masquerading st-elevation myocardial infarction (stemi), triangular-type st-elevation myocardial infarction type 2, s1q3t3 pattern mimicking acute pulmonary embolism, non-specific st and t wave changes, diffuse u waves in the presence of a qtc of 0.45 ms, and pulseless electrical activity [63, 75] .by 23rd of april 2020, there are seven studies reporting the cardiac pathological findings [7, 61, 64, [76] [77] [78] [79] . the summary of these studies is tabulated in supplementary table 3 in supplementary material 8 (s8) . two of these have also performed electron microscopic examination [61, 79] . only in one case with fulminant myocarditis and cardiogenic shock, virus was present in the pericytes [61] . no obstruction or thrombosis of epicardial coronary arteries were reported. prominent infiltration of t lymphocytes was present in only one case which presented as reverse takutsubo cardiomyopathy [53] .this study showed that compared to the liver and kidney, the heart was the second most commonly involved organ affected by covid-19 after the lungs. slightly more than one-fourth of the hospitalized patients with covid-19 develop cvd and arrhythmia, which increased the mortality by nearly 20 times and the need for icu admission by 13.5 times. hypertension was present in slightly less than one-third of admitted patients and led to increased mortality and the need for icu admission by approximately 2.5-and 4-folds, respectively. however, this association may be partly due to the fact that the incidence of hypertension increases with aging [80] . it is already known that mortality is higher in older patients with covid-19 [81] . the relationship among inflammation, oxidative stress, and vascular dysfunction, known as vascular health triad, is reported as a common mechanism between aging and hypertension [82] .patients with pre-existing heart failure had 8-fold more death and nearly 3.5-fold more need for the icu admission.in a systematic review and meta-analysis, santoso et al. studied 2389 patients, and by calculating the risk ratio showed that in patients with cardiac injury, mortality and need for icu admission were 7.95 times and 7.94-fold more likely, respectively [83] .not only do cardiovascular complications increase morbidity and mortality, but they also enhance the risk of sepsis and septic shock. this may be explained by the prolonged period of hospitalization and/or use of different invasive devices to support the circulatory failure [56, 61] .even after discharge, patients with a history of myocarditis may develop myocardial scars, which predispose them to cardiac arrhythmia. follow-up investigation by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging is recommended in order to determine the risk of cardiac arrhythmias [84] . another reason for the necessity of follow-up is to ensure that acute myocarditis of covid-19 does not evolve into dilated cardiomyopathy in later life [85] . furthermore, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging can be of great help in the diagnosis of acute myocarditis in hospitalized patients; nevertheless, it was used scarcely [86] .pulmonary embolism was frequently reported and should be considered in any patient with covid-19 who experience sudden deterioration of clinical condition associated with an acute drop in oxygen saturation or those with significantly elevated levels of d-dimer.covid-19-associated coagulopathy (cac), the etiology of which is multifactorial and not yet completely understood, has been reported with a spectrum of manifestations ranging from hypercoagulability (in the vast majority of the reported cases) to less common reports of bleeding, particularly in patients treated with ecmo or anticoagulants [87] . the triad of virchow, including endothelial damage, alterations in blood flow and presence of prothrombotic components in the circulation, appears to have a substantial role in the development of cac [87] .the spectrum of presentation of hypercoagulability states in covid-19 encompasses a wide range that spans from localized microvascular thrombosis in the lungs or pulmonary intravascular coagulopathy (pic) to systemic venous and arterial thrombosis, including aortic thrombosis [88] [89] [90] . development of covid-19-associated coagulopathy is associated with a worse prognosis [91] . hence, prophylactic treatment with low molecular weight heparin is recommended for all hospitalized covid-19 patients, unless there is a contraindication [92, 93] . anticoagulant therapy has been shown to be associated with improved survival [94] .our meta-analyses demonstrated that il-6, which has a critical role in cytokine release syndrome, was elevated in approximately two-thirds of the hospitalized patients. coomes and his colleagues, in a recent systematic review and meta-analysis on the role of il-6 in patients with covid-19, showed that il-6 was 2.9 times higher in patients with complicated covid-19, compared with the non-complicated group. they also found that il-6 levels were 3.24-fold higher in the 33 patients who required icu admission in comparison with 507 patients who did not need to be admitted in the icu [95] . increased il-6 can also explain the speculative cardiac microvascular abnormalities in patients with covid-19 [27] . zhang et al. highlighting the substantial role of il-6, described the pathophysiology of cytokine release syndrome in patients with covid-19 and severe clinical course. they proposed that tocilizumab, a recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody against the receptor of il-6, can serve as a potentially effective treatment for cases presenting as severe covid-19 [96] . given the central role of il-6 in cytokine release syndrome and the safety of tocilizumab in children and adult patients, liu et al. also proposed tocilizumab as a treatment for patients with severe covid-19 [97] .we observed higher levels of cardiac troponin, myoglobin, ldh, nt-probnp, ck, and il-6, in the deceased patients in comparison with the survived. li and his colleagues showed that cardiac troponins and nt-probnp were higher in the deceased patients with covid-19. they also reported that the dynamic rise in the latter biomarkers was only observed in the deceased group [15] . likewise, guo et al. studied 187 patients with covid-19 and observed that dynamic changes or rising levels of nt-probnp and cardiac troponin t were significantly higher in the deceased patients [98] .we found a sharp contrast between frequency, severity, and outcome of cardiac involvement due to covid-19 in pediatric versus adult population [99] .in a systematic review of children with covid-19, ludvigsson et al. did not report even one case of covid-19-induced cardiac injury in the pediatric age range. they cited the study of dong et al. as the largest study on children, the study in which only 3 cases of the 724 confirmed cases had the critical disease, none of them had cardiac injury [100, 101] . shekerdemian et al. reported 48 children with covid-19 who were admitted to icu and 83% of whom had significant underlying comorbidities, including congenital heart disease and cardiomyopathy in three cases. although they reported a fatality rate of 4%, they have not delineated whether the deceased patients were those with prior cardiac disease. furthermore, except the one patient with underlying cardiomyopathy who underwent veno-arterial ecmo for treatment of cardiogenic shock, no further information regarding acute cardiac injury is provided [102] .given the fact that angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) functions as the receptor for the entry of sars-cov-2 into the cell, the answer may be partly hidden in the age-related differences in the renin-angiotensinaldosterone system (raas) [103] . this hypothesis is supported by the evidence that shows the elderly are predisposed to severe forms of the covid-19 [104] [105] [106] . furthermore, musso et al. reported that advancing age adversely affects the raas [107] . similarly, senescence-related changes in the immune function may also be contributing [108] .nevertheless, it seems that although mortality due to direct viral invasion to the heart is not reported in children, the catastrophic effects of hyper-inflammatory response with multi-organ involvement including the heart, the so-called covid-19 pediatric hyperinflammatory shock syndrome, can be life-threatening.in fact, both kawasaki-like disease and kawasaki shocklike syndrome have been reported with covid-19. these findings may also potentially shed light on the role of viruses in the pathogenesis of kawasaki disease.time of presentation of the cardiac disorders (early stage versus late stage) and levels of various cardiac and inflammatory biomarkers can serve as clues to the putative underlying mechanism/s. to detect patients at the highest risk at the earliest, i.e., at triage, a simple and practical plan is necessary to guide the clinician on the minimal essential initial laboratory work-up as a guide for pathophysiologically targeted treatment. two considerations should be taken into account when using this tool. the first is that the laboratory investigations in this tool are in addition to the routine laboratory evaluations such as cbc, esr, crp, and blood glucose. secondly, it should be borne in mind that for consideration of mechanical circulatory support, the conventional indications and contraindications in patients with covid-19, in addition to the precautions for prevention and treatment of infections, should be strictly followed [109] [110] [111] . this study showed that pre-existing and newly developed cardiovascular disease are common in patients with covid-19 and are associated with increased severity and mortality in these patients. the frequency, clinical pattern, severity, and outcome of cardiovascular injury in pediatric patients with covid-19 is not only different from the adult population but also varies in the pediatric age range, ranging from no cardiac damage in the majority of cases to kawasaki shock-like syndrome in the minority. we proposed a triage risk stratification tool in patients with covid-19 and cvd for timely recognition of the high-risk patients and well-timed establishment of the pathophysiologically targeted treatment. this tool needs to be validated in future studies.lastly, covid-19 should be regarded as a disease that can affect multiple organs with multiple mechanisms, each of which may need therapy targeted at the mechanism of injury in order to be effective.there were significant inconsistencies in reporting cardiovascular derangements in patients with covid-19. consistent terminology and definition of cardiac injury were not used in the studies. furthermore, the i 2 index was high in some meta-analyses. certain studies had done intensive evaluation and had presented immense information, whereas there was a dearth of information regarding the patients in others. these limitations indicate the necessity of a standardized terminology to report cardiovascular complications and a standard diagnostic approach to patients with covid-19 worldwide. we did not include cardiac arrest in our analysis because the precise underlying pathophysiology of dying process (end-stage respiratory failure, cardiogenic shock, multiple organ failure, or cardiogenic shock) was not delineated in the majority of studies [112] . we could not include obesity in our study because data in this regard was not provided in the majority of studies. another limitation of this study was that we did not search cochrane, cinahl, web of science, scopus, and google scholar database in our online search [113] . lastly, the limitations due to the possible inherent biases in the non-randomized cohort data apply to this study.supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10. 1186/s43044-020-00075-z. figure 3 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of newly developed heart failure. figure 4 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of chest pain or chest tightness. figure 5 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of palpitation. figure 6 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of hypertension. figure 7 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of pre-existing cardiovascular diseases. figure 8 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of preexisting heart failure. figure 9 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of pre-existing diabetes. figure 10 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of patients with elevated nt-pro bnp levels. figure 11 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of patients with elevated cardiac troponins levels. figure 12 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of patients with elevated creatine kinase-mb levels. figure 13 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of patients with elevated creatine kinase levels. figure 14 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of patients with elevated d-dimer levels. figure 15 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of patients with elevated lactate dehydrogenase levels. figure 16 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of patients with elevated interleukin-6 levels. figure 17 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of patients with elevated c-reactive protein (crp) levels. figure 18 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of patients with elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr) levels. figure  19 . forest plot of the pooled frequency analysis of patients with elevated ferritin levels).additional file 6: forest plots showing odds ratio for death according to newly developed acute cardiac injury, pre-existing cardiovascular disease, hypertension and diabetes mellitus. additional file 7: supplementary material 7 (s7) figure 1 . funnel plot of studies comparing frequency of acute cardiac injury between severe or icu group and non-severe or non-icu group showing publication bias. figure 2 . funnel plot of studies comparing frequency of preexisting cardiovascular diseases between severe or icu group and nonsever or non-icu group showing publication bias. figure 3 . funnel plot of studies comparing frequency of pre-existing cardiovascular disease between severe or icu group and non-severe or non-icu group showing publication bias. 